https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=d8xoy6hfYDw

 Hi, this is Paul. I, before I started making YouTubes, I blogged. And I blogged, sometimes people go to my blog, and you can find a link to it below, I'll put a link there. There's not necessarily a whole lot interesting there. I used to do on my blog a lot of what I currently do with my YouTube channel. I had rough drafts for my sermons, I basically post links of any link I might want to come back to, a sermon illustration, an article I find interesting, just a link I want to randomly keep and get at. My blog is basically a public filing cabinet where I file and try out ideas and do a bunch of things like that. This morning I wrote a piece for my blog. This is my second draft at this sermon, not this sermon, at this video because the first one failed. This morning I wrote a piece on my blog because my denomination is about to descend into the now familiar struggle over what to do with same-sex couples. This is, I know there are people on both sides of this conversation in my audience, some of you roll your eyes and say, why are you still talking about this? This is settled, it's settled in the United States, it's settled. Others of you roll your eyes and say, why are you still talking about this? This is settled. Well, I think actually once things are settled in some ways legally, that's a good time to talk about them because the stakes are lower. If you're currently a gay or lesbian, you have the legal right to marry in the United States, you have quite a few legal protections, and there are churches who would absolutely love to have you, but there are also churches that you would make uncomfortable and you would cause real issues. There's an issue coming up, as I mentioned before, in Neeland Avenue in Grand Rapids, Michigan where they have ordained a woman who is currently married to another woman and she served as a deacon before, and this is going to provoke a struggle in the Christian Reformed Church that may very well end the Christian Reformed Church as I have known it all my life. Just by how these things work themselves out in terms of church polity, that's the rules by which churches organize themselves and conduct business, I could very well imagine that if there's a stalemate at the synodical level that classies decide to bolt. Now, a classist in the Christian Reformed Church is a regional assembly, and whereas at many local churches there's probably differences of opinion with respect to these, you'll find some local churches that are very conservative and so almost nobody in the church would be in favor of either just letting Neeland do what they want or affirming, I don't think the Christian Reformed Church would have enough votes out of synod to go full-fledged, either local option allowing each individual congregation to do what they want or become an affirming denomination. I doubt very much that would happen, but if Neeland and if Classist Grand Rapids East, which is the classist of Neeland Avenue Church, if Classist Grand Rapids East doesn't discipline Neeland and tell them basically to cease and desist, and then synod tells Grand Rapids East to discipline Neeland, and if they don't, then the classist is out, well that would be a devastating thing for the Christian Reformed Church because Classist Grand Rapids East is where Calhoun College is, the denominational building, many denominational officials and college professors whose employment is tied to membership in the Christian Reformed Church, what happens to them and their employment when suddenly they are no longer members of the Christian Reformed Church because of events in Neeland Avenue? It's a big deal. And so in many ways my interest in this is I want the Christian Reformed Church to have a productive conversation about these issues and not just the issues directly surrounding same sex marriage but the far deeper issues that I like to talk about on my channel. Now there was some people will say, you know, does this matter? There's a blog, The Post Calvin, which has like, if you're 31 and under, I don't know why that is, my niece is an editor of this blog. So if you're 31 and under and you're an alumnus of Calvin College, you get a chance to write here. And same sex marriage debate is in many ways tied up with many other debates that have played a big role in the deconstruction movement, in the people becoming, people no longer identifying as Christian or no longer going to church or something like this and just last week there was a very interesting article on Post Calvin by Katie Van Zanen, notice the Dutch last name, you know, Calvin College is still, still half of a graduating class is full of Dutchies, but she gets into this matrix of politics and culture war. I don't remember the details of the conversation. I wish I did. I've turned it over and over in my mind, but it's in a genre folks, but it's in a genre folks raised in Christian communities will recognize the faith and works debate. In my case, it was a conversation about elderly congregants in a rural Midwestern church and about faithlessness. One person said something like, but they know their Bible so well, they're prayer warriors. The other says, the other asks, does it matter? Does it matter that they've memorized the Heideberg catechism? That's an important document in the Christian Reformed Church that they can recite one all 150 Psalms that they spent hours in silence in front of an open Bible every morning. If they're trying to prevent a refugee family from settling in their community right there for many people who are, and this article was beautifully written and I thought so powerfully represented the voice of the deconstructing. And so you have this matrix of religion and politics and people are always looking at the other matrix of religion and politics on the other side, but both sides have it. If they keep telling everyone Barack Obama is a Kenyan Muslim, if they cut a gay grandchild out of their will or if in 2020 they're spreading vicious and nonsensical QAnon theories on Facebook defending the guy who murdered two people who were protesting the police shooting of Jacob Blake. I don't even know who Jacob Blake is. Good thing she has a link. If they agree with the president that we should let democratic cities rot, does their commitment to daily devotions matter then? I'm really angry every single day when I'm on a Zoom call with my parents. It's like I can't help myself from saying ugly and bitter things about the American church, the institutions and all the people I associate with power in these places. I can hear myself as I say these things and there is a part of me in that moment that feels so sad and heartbroken. I am so angry. I am really, really angry. What's striking about this is that this person, now I'm reading a ton into this which may or may not be true, this person is likely a product of an educational system that has been raw and maintained by the Christian Reformed Church at great expense over decades to attempt to produce children in line with their community. What has happened is that these outside forces have in some ways simply overwhelmed the walls. The Christian Reformed Church was practicing the Benedict Doctrine long before Roger came up with the idea. But these issues have sort of swamped and overwhelmed this and so here you obviously have a bright, young, articulate, this woman should probably be a poster child for the product of these Christian Reformed institutions and this is what she's saying. This is a very big deal. There's a part of me that wanted to write a post entitled, For the love of God, don't vote for this asshole. There's a part of me who wanted to reason with some imagined audience of acquaintances about why being against abortion is not good enough reason to vote for an authoritarian fear monger whose policies will only make abortion more common and there is part of me that wanted to tell how appointing a Supreme Court Justice to repeal Roe v. Wade will subject women who experience miscarriage to criminal suspicion which is clearly abhorrent and should be and there's a part of me that wanted to loudly declare how eternally done I am listening to men talk about abortion. I just did. But I was reading. There's a part of me that wanted to carefully outline the Republican Party's decades long and explicit plan to suppress the vote and undermine the legitimacy of our elections. There's a part of me that wanted to write a thousand posts to respond to every possible talking point, every reason someone could go for voting for a serial liar who brags about assaulting women and a thousand follow up posts responding to every critique they could log about the ways in which I said this is unconscionable to support him. There's a part of me that wanted to write a post like this one where I burn it to the ground where I say definitely block me if you support any part of this bullshit even reluctantly because there's no justification you can give that will make it okay. There's a part of me that wants to beg please don't do this. Please don't destroy what's remaining of my faith that I have in you. A Christian writer I follow on Twitter who has been protesting police brutality in Portland where again I do not forget the federal agents have kidnapped protesters and unmarked vans and police have allowed. You get the idea and I'll put the link below and you can read it again and but you get the sense that well this doesn't matter. It surely matters to her and if you've been around long enough you have the sense of deconstruction and I can't tolerate this church anymore but I want a church that I want a church that reflects what I think and everyone does. It's the right and the left that's part of the function of the consumer church but it's also the case that there are other issues that are very much in play. Many of the points that she makes are simply the points that come up again and again from the culture war, abortion, Trump, so on and so forth. I think it's helpful to remember that either a year from now or five years from now Donald Trump will not be president. That's a really helpful thing and it's something that age helps you realize. Now again all of you will have ideas about whether that's a good or bad thing and the damage done by the Republicans or by the Democrats on and on and on but a little bit of perspective is in order. One of the other very common things to come up in the Twitterverse and in the news is the question of high status Christian men and their moral failure and so in thinking about all the things that I think about and thinking about the culture war and the Christian reform churches impending very sad fight over same-sex marriage about oh the political situation about all of these things this morning I blogged and I spent about an hour blogging and writing this thing and then afterwards I thought I'm going to want to talk about this because you know there's you know maybe a few hundred people that follow my blog and I posted it on some of my social media links so at this point at this point let's say I can I can see at this point some you know less than 200 people have read my post which actually isn't bad for a post that I that I do but I wanted to sort of bring all these things together and look at them in order to sort of figure out well what can we learn because okay you know you're going to have a chance if you're an American citizen to vote for or against Donald Trump and that's really what this election is coming down to your if you are a member of a church you're probably going to have a chance to vote for against staying in your denomination or leaving your denomination or affirming or not affirming you're going to have a chance to post whatever you want on Facebook or Twitter you're going to have a friend the chance to talk to your friends yada yada yada all of us have just a little bit of influence and all of us have to decide what to do with our own lives but Ravi Zacharias was a Christian apologist very high status oh great now the link is dead hang on this link I picked up in a in an online forum for for pastors and I thought it was really a fine article it goes into the question of Ravi Zacharias and the allegations of sexual impropriety with respect to him and Julie Royce you can find her on on Twitter she's a she's a journalist who kind of polices high celebrity conservative Christian men and their sexual behavior and follows the news stories on them and of course the Ravi Zacharias debate is a little less clean cut than a lot of debates and so some people will will go through it but I thought this article was really quite good sadly we're here again another prominent male Christian leader abusing his power and squandering their reputation through their sexual behavior the Royce report there's a link there and I'll put the link to this in in the notes below released devastating news last week that Ravi Zacharias the famous apologist who died in May 1920 befriended groomed and then initiated sexting relationship with a married woman Laurie Ann Thompson then when Thompson told Zacharias she was going to tell her husband about the illicit relationship emails showed Zacharias threatened suicide months later after Thompson and Zacharias had signed a non-disclosure agreement confining them to silence Zacharias publicly released a statement to Christianity Today painting Thompson as a predator although these qualified allegations are heartbreaking they've become devastatingly familiar for that reason I want to address two themes from the latest scandal that are important for us to explore particularly for men the first is sexual binge purge cycle in the sexual lives of evangelical men the second is a call for men to do their own work to outgrow problematic and abusive sexual behaviors the presence of all of this therapeutic language is really interesting I named both of these as an evangelical male who has also had to confront these issues within my own life as a mental health therapist with over over a decade of experience and research of over 2 000 men struggling with compulsive sexual behavior the latest scandal provides us with yet another front row seat into the bulimic sexually sexuality structure characteristic of many faith leaders and their followers bulimia occurs when someone indulges in a particular substance or behavior only to purge out through excessive exercising or vomiting sexual bulimia a metaphor of course is an agonizing struggle where someone engulfs themselves in a particular sexual behavior then does everything they can to purge themselves of the sin and shame of what they've been indulging an example of sexual bulimia might be a pastor who is dealing with a number of crises in his church during the week has fallen behind on his sermon and then stays up binging pornography saturday night he wakes up sunday morning praying for god's mercy to be to be new in the morning and pleads with the spirit to help him get through the service then his sermon might go one of three ways number one he will never talk about unwanted sexual behavior for fear he might indict himself denial number two he will preach about the ugliness of sin the horrors of sexual immorality and begin to scapegoat others for their sexual behavior projection three he will begin to preach passionately maybe even cry about the goodness of the gospel for sinners the gospel purge and you can see a binge on pornography or an affair buying sex sexting etc setting this this need to purge out his behavior through his prayer avoidance or preaching while i have no problem with the leader finding passion and tears about the goodness of god it's unhealthy when he does not see how his purge is connected to his binge from the night or the week or the month before remember jimmy swagger a lot of you don't remember jimmy swaggered i'm i'm showing my age but just google jimmy just youtube jimmy swaggered's prayerful confession about the affair he had you don't have to look far for these stories and you can find them pretty much across denominational lines but not just within with pastors you'll find them with politicians but i think this i think this this therapist is correct in noting there are some peculiar structures with christians with respect to this Ravi's sexting binge and apologetic purge in the case of Ravi Sakarias we see a leader who was binging with his sexual and emotional life with a woman 30 years younger than him when she eventually calls him on his behavior he threatens to he threatens her with his suicide it's not an uncommon thing she ends up entering into a nondisclosure agreement and zackariah uses this to tell the public in 2017 that a woman was trying to extort him when she sent him the sext and you can see zackarias is why is a as you can see zackarias is a widely manipulative man there's a little bit of an overreach you know let's talk about his behavior let's you know characterizations that's a pretty big characterization every good apologist knows the art of manipulating from the latin word manis meaning using the hand to influence an outcome perhaps every pastor is manipulative and including myself because if you're a pastor and you're not at all effective you understand how to use pathos in communicating a message then what do we do then how do then what do we see in his public life he's known as the greatest christian apologist of the century one of zackarias's greatest talents was to influence and persuade others tragically he did not seem to address the shadow side of his talent in his sexual life i find this to be a compelling blog post should we call the author wildly manipulative because pretty much any persuasive argument could be charged as being manipulative anyway a call for men to outgrow that's an interesting word overcome perhaps outgrow again a lot of these progressive-ish metaphors lead us to believe that there's an arc of personal growth and that somehow this is natural because the the the toddler grows into a man unbidding we often will tell people to grow up so mature anyway a call to men to outgrow unwanted sexual behaviors the sexual problems we face as men are opportunities to grow i think that's true they also are very are the very behaviors that block women from leadership roles bill hybels and this is where the article starts to fall apart because there have been many high profile pastors who have been very supportive of women in leadership roles one of the one of the points in all fairness to donald trump not my favorite president and i'll get tagged on that but you know we're all entitled to our politics um one of the things that donald trump i remember watching him on the apprentice and for all of donald trump's you know well known and documented behavior with women who have been or weren't his wife he has tended to like to hire women and there have been women in very high power positions around him he did that with his cabinet um donald tripe likes hiring women now i think sometimes he likes hiring good looking women but when it comes to high status men i don't find that unusual i've known a fair number of high status high wealth men and they tend to like to surround themselves with beautiful with beauty let's say and sometimes that beauty comes in the form of a woman and study after study will demonstrate that you know good looking attractive well socialized men and women do better at school do better in the job market they have a degree of privilege that is used you just have to watch tv and look how shockingly beautiful everyone is in is on tv even and sometimes especially in news programming to say you know um this is not something that just christians have to deal with this is something that is pretty common to all of us we have biases and we are always biased towards people who look youthful and attractive and so um this is kind of a you know when i read that line it's sort of well now we're now we're pouring a little bit more into this as such and while i think there is some validity to the idea that sometimes men men who struggle with these things doth protest too much it's not at all uncommon to find the pastor that is out there on a crusade to to keep women out of certain things and keep gays out of certain things are sometimes struggling with their own issues i think the point he makes on that is is absolutely appropriate but to sort of segment this to one side uh no no i think it's much more universal while while some of the men who have their own issues maybe get a little louder about it i don't find this i don't find this kevin spacey shall we name him bill clinton donald trump jfk you know which president in the latter 20th century didn't have an affair uh george bush jimmy carter um and i you know at least not that we know of but you know for the most part it seemed like george bush at least by the time that i got to know him not personally but in the presidency seemed you know he and laura for the most part seemed to kind of have their act together and like their marriage jimmy carter the same way barack obama in many ways was sort of the irony of ironies um beloved by the let's call it the um not really libertarian but the liberationist side of the country embodies a tremendously puritan archetype of a man deeply faithful to his wife which and deeply faithful to his daughters and by all accounts wonderful to them which ironically makes him deeply attracted to a lot of women that you know could potentially set up a scenario in which that whole thing would come crashing down and this is something that as pastors and church leaders not terribly unfamiliar with women are attracted to men who are faithful to their wives and that attraction might lead to a scenario by which they would be unfaithful to their wives thus destroying the image of this high status male's power and status and so that drove me to write my own blog piece and um this article was posted on a crc online forum and i thought it was excellent i did think it was an excellent article as someone commented that the crc safe church office is going to have the author in for some other shindig thing because they loved it so much fair enough i if if uh if j stringer wants to come on my channel and defend some of the elements of his article that i critique love to have you j i don't know if you're on twitter if i might link you into this and we'll see if you want to come on i i think having conversations where there's a degree of disagreement are the most interesting conversations there are especially if we can have them profitably and just reading j stringer's article makes me think that's a possibility anyway back to my post the regularity and predictability of high status church men capital m-e-n behaving badly sexually creates an interesting game in our culture war it's like a sailboat in a windstorm all the aspects of the individual play into the chaotic maelstrom of our collective misery and and that's so true it's why things sort of keep blowing up out of control with all of the wind going back and forth any little thing that can catch the wind is sure to and you're about to get an incident that gets public and becomes fodder for throwing at the other side i think jonathan height so nicely talked about the fact that part of what happens on social media is we just wait and wait for a bit of hypocrisy on the other side to be exposed so that we can take it to social media and and i've certainly been guilty of this myself but it's a it's a bad habit i should break the argument for same-sex marriage for most people revolves around the current imaginary with regard to the natural and again this the questions of the natural are deeply embedded in many of the other things i discuss in my videos with respect to to deism and the natural is sort of has a a position of moral privilege right now because well we oughtn't to buck the natural the natural is good and goes along with it but of course the natural nature is red and tooth and claw and we we sort of have this newfound warmth towards the natural because we've colonized and conquered it so thoroughly that now suddenly when we discover that we're filling our bodies with all sorts of unnatural things and that there are consequences to all these tools that we've used to to manage and put nature on a lease now suddenly we want to go back to nature but only a little bit i don't think anybody wants to go back to plagues and lower life expectancy nature on a leash which movie was that i don't recall great line anyway back to the article i knew i'd do this if i read my article lots of commentary even on my own comments for whatever combination of nature and nurture you want to postulate there's a degree of moral permission around sexual expression and gratification that feels authentic to them with a few notable remaining exceptions so that's part of the i think the overwhelmingly convincing argument for many people about same-sex marriage is that it's they're born that way although born that way is suffering a brutal beating at the hands of later alphabet letters and lgbtqi etc etc because basically the whole gender identity posture is i get a chance to express what i express and california just um uh gavin newson just signed into law that well you can go into the jail of your gender identity as long as um it won't be a threat to you and to others well i think there'll be a fair amount of those cases landing in court because um if you're a smallish male going into prison with maybe some aspects you're concerned of a uh a quick change in gender identity might land you in a very different place i don't know if i'd rather be in a men's prison or a women's prison i'd like to not be in any prison but anyway um so born that way and it's natural and what other choice they have i mean these are compelling points and i don't want to dismiss these points because again i see in friends of mine and people i love that yes um they're married they're gay and i would in many ways rather have them if they're going to live this way and they can't find themselves imagining themselves living any other way to do so within the confines of some kind of agreement or covenant like marriage by which um other longer-term fruits can emerge in the relationship the likes of which heterosexuals have had to navigate for a very long time and so this this puts me sort of right in the middle i see the strong arguments by both sides and i'm often people complain in my series on same-sex marriage that well you're not you're not telling us what you think no i am exactly telling you what i think now what you want to know is how i would vote in such and such a thing but you want to know that hypothetically and i'd say well i'll vote on such and such a thing when i am sitting in the room and have to vote on such and such a thing and what i usually wind up doing is making noises about this issue that annoys both sides but i actually think that's part of what needs to be done as we continue to work through these issues together and not just quickly grab a position and go off into the future but maybe actually use all this gray matter we have and the opportunity to speak with one another to maybe learn something along the way the current lament and agenda is that christianity has since late antiquity forced individuals into binding social situations that take from them the joy of fulfillment that would be theirs if they had been able to pursue their bliss and so read from shame to sin and about how in late antiquity christians sort of won the day and the the popular imaginary well there's a lot of debate as to to what degree this thing really won the day but increasingly it became assumed that same sex behavior was immoral or at least out of step with christianity and you had sanctions and you know people going into the closet etc etc and sort of the contemporary subtraction narrative is especially by atheist skeptics is that oh see what religion does it persecuted gays and fair enough and in many ways i'm a product of the time that i'm living in now and for my gay friends and relatives i'm glad that nobody's hunting them down or keeping them from jobs or imagining that they are necessarily a threat to children all of that seems unfounded and unfair and so i think many christians today even though reluctantly seeing what society had progressed towards have not basically necessarily lamented all of what's changed but the narrative is that christianity is to blame for a lot of this cruel history because well didn't the greeks and the romans they didn't think it was that big of a deal yeah but read tom holland and actually do some reading about what the greeks and the romans were like on many of these things and it's it's hardly the rather low resolution utopia that people imagine that somehow liberation will bring and it's for that reason that we should talk through these issues carefully and think about them carefully and pay attention to this this live action experiment that we're all undergoing and participating in right now the emphasis has been on social stigmas such as homophilia homophobia that has punished or repressed an individual's natural again there's that word again expression and restricted them from pursuing their bliss this has followed a previous wave where historical events even individual choice missteps someone let's say by virtue of the the symbolic the symbolic dramatic liturgical imaginary repressed their sexual inclinations and their same sex attraction and then married someone of the opposite sex only within time to have this revealed to have been a disastrous choice and both people are unhappy and and again i have no personal stories up close of of this kind of thing and it's it's it's just painful and disastrous and so yeah fair enough these stories are compelling but don't talk about rosaria uh butterfield because stories go the other way and that's the thing with stories they often do go the other way so this has followed a previous wave where historical events even individual choice missteps have locked some persons into an unfortunate or unwise pairing only later do they realize that they have missed out on a better arrangement which had which could have been the upgrade compared to one that they now looked upon so we're um on some ways we're sort of looking at broke back mountain and bridges of madison county because for everyone's sad story of someone who had significant same-sex attraction married a woman by virtue of their christian commitment or community standards yada yada yada only to have that relationship and unhappily for both parties there are five to ten or even more situations where someone married someone and later went on to regret at some point who they married and had children and property and a messy divorce and and and and and and so yeah on one hand we can very much pay attention to how this plays out in the same-sex situation but the vast majority of people it played out in the heterosexual situation don't forget we're talking about policing the sex lives of high status christian men and we'll get back to that we're talking about the current lament and agenda why christianity should be undone and overthrown because this is what it's participated in religious people have in many ways taken center stage in such dramas because of the religio from the latin which is binding it classically prompts people to commit themselves to costly arrangements such as marriage often at the prompting of some power again that's a new word not an old word some divine authority or perhaps parental or societal pressure if it's an arranged marriage prompted by some supernatural power who demands sacrifice and in this case the sacrifice of one's freedom to pursue fulfillment happiness joy or whatever narrative one might imagine to produce the bliss we fought we feel ourselves typos together i should fix that typo hang on maybe i'll keep the editing window up there will be more typos our current cultural moral imagination is a combination of gnosticism see there's a typo and i can fix that right away and scientism should probably put a capital s on that one too our current moral our current cultural moral imagination is a combination of gnosticism and scientism the secret sacred self and science science will tell us that high status mammalian males are biologically driven to colonize history with their superior genetic material donald trump donald trump donald trump is a classic high status mammal male and his behavior is very biologically predictable as are many many high status men and again now i'm only naming famous people because they're famous and you'd recognize the name i've known many and much smaller hierarchies to exhibit the status and in fact that's again almost always part of the conversation females watch men compete and select the winners to mate with they don't necessarily have to be good looking donald trump getting up there in years i'll let you ladies decide how attractive donald trump is whether it's his physique or his physicality or his hair or whether it's his status and his personality and his money you can decide for yourself but it doesn't hurt just google brad pitt's string of relationship look at howard hughes look at howard hughes i mean just again and again and again no evolutionary biologist is surprised at the behavior of high status men gangus khan this is normal normal stuff this is normal natural behavior for high status males heterosexual males especially you can watch it in the animal kingdom you can see it clearly throughout history powerful men have had access to beautiful women and the higher the status the more they've got read the book of esther look at king david king solomon christianity has not only been anti-gay in this narrative but anti-high status male we have a new set of victims high status men the apostle paul tells christian men of the roman empire to love their wives and lay down their lives for their wives as christ does for his church that's not in the evolutionary biological playbook for high status males high status males should go out and multiply their seed just read a really interesting biography of darwin fascinating anyway the apostle paul tells christian men in the roman empire to love their wives not a given tells other men not to frequent prostitutes book of first corinthians which is sort of a poor man's polygamy well maybe you can't buy her but you can rent her rent a partner instead of paying the expensive access and legal heirs our culture has enough christianity in it that we applaud the marital arrangements of barack obama over and against donald trump and this is where i've just watched the two political sides with so much irony because here you have the nearly puritanical barack obama leading tribe liberation and and donald trump leaving leading tribe authoritarian as a man's man but this i would suggest is likely on increasing i should read the whole paragraph our culture is it is enough has enough christianity that we applaud the marital arrangements of barack obama over against donald trump but this i would suggest is likely on increase is likely on increasingly thin ice in the unending tug of war between the interests of men and the interests of women men and women want exclusive access to one another we all want what we want ask woody allen men and women want exclusive access to one another because is it is it is in their own interest men don't want other men implanting their seed in their women women don't want competition for the man's resources from the offspring of other women read cinderella why is the this is again so much jordan peterson stuff in this you can find all sorts of jordan peterson stuff in this why is it the evil stepmother why does the stepmother begrudge the children of another woman now again not always some some people i know have had wonderful step parents and that's terrific but uh biological an evolutionary biologist will say well but that it is not a level playing field because well the women want are seeking the the the women are seeking the promotion of their own genetic material and the men are seeking their own the promotion of their own genetic material and so wow there might be other factors and again the the reality of just how many other factors and how powerful they are whether these are biological genetic or societal is a deep part and actually what this blog post is about which we'll get to a little bit in a little bit in some ways the truce is monogamy and if that can't be gained then minimized serial polygamy which is basically what we have in america right now that is the community standard for moral sexual relationships um you know don't cheat well what is cheating cheating is having sex with someone else when you're not telling your partner so pollies would say well it's okay as long as you're all being up up board so you've got consent and basically letting your partner know if you're having sex with other people or even want to have sex with other people or attracted to other people because again these these demands for exclusivity they run deep our technological democratic age rushes in to offer affordable compromises to both sides women get cheap and effective birth control and abortion to afford more choice in terms of attracting and selecting a male that might be the best choice for that male for that provider male who will be ex who will who will be exclusively committed with his resources to her offspring okay so that's the you know very well articulated game that is at play at least one level of the game but with great power comes great responsibility she better be careful with this strategy because it's a waiting game and there are also now societal pressures to seek her own security by waiting getting a career get out there and make some money many women in previous generations have said i banked on the man being faithful to me and he wasn't and now oh and hence you have divorce settlements by where you're where men have to pay alimony again the legal system was again the legal system was trying to compensate for all of the normal things that were going on in the society many want to construct their own path to security by pursuing education and a career and also status again there's lots of layers and lots of levels and here's the thing about human being it's game upon game upon game upon game upon game there's many many many many many many things going on at the same time but we quite naturally manage these affairs and we do it mostly intuitively and subconsciously but that's sort of what's going on beneath the surface and we're going to get into two level theories a little bit many want to construct their own path to security by pursuing education and career so as to not be dependent upon a man for finances but at the expense of their peak fertility and sexual attractiveness just go ahead and check out okay cupid's little video on i think it was the atlantic where they said well everybody's a little bit racist yeah and and men are more than a little bit sexist when it comes to sexual partners um all the men on okey cupid were looking at the 21 year olds and the women for the most part were looking at men at about their own age well why well men and women are for the most part again it's huge variety for the most part looking at different things and looking for different things and again this is no mystery can we just have an adult conversation about it and be honest not that every person succumbs to these forces but these forces do not make the field level these forces work like a current in a in an ocean body where you go out into the water and you're just kind of slowly going down the beach i've told that illustration before many women are not navigating this well and finding themselves in their mid-30s with financial assets but reduced capacity in the attractiveness and in the attracting a man market because all the men they're looking at men that are three to five years older than them and all those men are looking at women who are 10 to 15 years younger than they are and hence having to produce seed to fertilize their own eggs biology or god has unfairly afforded men an advantage when it comes to time men have no comparable biological clock tony randall they too can use tools of contraception to enjoy the milk without having to without having to purchase the cow i could get in trouble for that high status males in the dating market are doing very well in terms of gaining sexual access to a disproportionate number of women in the market by our own admission in this age of two-track narratives where the real reasons are beneath the conscious level women are in some ways auditioning the men as fathers for their offspring while the men are happy to oblige without the risk of being tied down they no longer have the privilege nor the expense of paying child support many can play this game until at some point if they want to settle down and have a family with a woman of their choice but again for the men the men have all the cards in this or at least many of the cards take a look at jerry seinfeld i mean i like watching jerry seinfeld in cars with coffee i don't drink coffee but i like the cars and i like the conversation i like jerry seinfeld and of course jerry seinfeld is a wonderful illustration because of course he our our image of jerry seinfeld is sort of meshed up with with the show seinfeld of course jerry always had some really attractive girlfriend and one wonders you know how much dating and fornicating jerry seinfeld did before he finally settled down and i did a little wikipedia snooping to discover that surprise surprise jerry seinfeld's wife is 15 years younger than he is that should not come as any surprise to an evolutionary biologist jerry seinfeld might be a good example of that playing the field through one's 20s or 30s and if so i'm inclined find a younger woman of childbearing age and then have a child in your 40s and 50s that's the script or if you don't don't just keep having one girlfriend after another i mean for right now generally speaking for men not in church because it's so funny because people will have problems with the church saying something about your live-in boyfriend but if some guy is looks like brad pitt and maybe has a high sexual appetite and is betting every woman in the singles group at some point these women are going to compare notes and they're going to go to the pastor and say you've got to do something about this man well why well you want me to shut up about these people over here you want me to shut up about these people over here but you want me to use my positional and religious authority to curb this behavior this behavior is natural this behavior is god-given this behavior is what we would fully expect from a good-looking intelligent male who has figured out a way to earn money and has a nice car and has a good job and that's why all of you agreed to sleep with him and now you want to play the fornication card in fact women ladies if maybe you played some of these other cards differently things might go in a different way right now sort of the status is well consent and one at a time there's a great piece in the new york times in 2018 he asked permission to touch but not to ghost and it's a it's a it's a haunting piece where you know this young man well on our first date he took an uber to my apartment through the winter storm as the snow fell outside we sat close on my couch while he taught while he talked touching touchingly about poetry it's a high status man who's who knows his game he knows how to woo a woman like this two hours in i was hoping he would kiss me and he did he was a sweet kisser for an hour we sat with his hand cupped behind my ear kissing and talking we had met on tinder i was nearly 30 and he was 24 this is a high status woman she can attract a 24 year old um she's probably very good looking in the 20 you know there's you know look at the psychology in terms of that too it's interesting stuff although people don't like looking at it because again it's all these on these things under the surface that we don't like to admit are happening other things we like to point out are happening in other people but not me not me i'm the exception we admit on tinder i was nearly 30 and he was 24 but our age gap somehow seemed a lot larger than five years that's because he's younger not because he acted especially young it was more that when it came to sex and foreplay he acted so differently from guys my age he's been indoctrinated he's been taught he's had his he's had his university title nine lecture asking for my consent about nearly everything is it okay if we go to the bedroom he said i smiled and let him there he tugged at the hem of my sweater and i said and and said is it okay to take this off i don't want this video to get too risque i nodded blah blah blah blah blah blah i'll put the link in and you can if i forget to put the link in the mention in the comment section or you can just you can just google he asked permission to touch but not to ghost anyway on and on and on and they get hot and heavy and then she starts talking about how she feels afterwards at the end of the night he said see you soon and took an uber back to his apartment through the snow afterwards i sat on my bed thinking about the encounter i knew i had been a little dismissive of all the asking but in fact i had liked it as a form of caretaking i wasn't used to being taken care of in that way sex makes me feel unsafe boy talk to that one with your therapist talk to that one with the evolutionary biologist talk to that one with your pastor you don't go to church come on you don't go to church you go every now and then and it's a certain kind of church i know but but because of the act itself not because of the act itself but because my partner so often disappeared afterwards our partner or our partner or our partner or our partner or our partner or partner or men whether i waited hours or months before the first time it didn't matter how long she kind of you know suddenly this whole game from the 1950s of until the ring paradise by the dashboard light meatloaf will you love me forever do you need me will you never leave me will you make me so happy for the rest of my life will you make me my wife will we will you make me your wife paradise by the dashboard light meatloaf so it's after sex when i feel truly vulnerable yet something else about his asking made me feel uneasy it seemed legalistic and self-protective yeah he's bringing about himself here imported more from the courtroom than from a true sense of caretaking and each time he asked it was if he assumed i lacked the agency to say no on my own yeah there's something to that title nine business about that it is an infantilizing aspect to all of this safe spacing as if he expected me to say no not believing that a woman would have the desires to keep saying yes still i like that he was trying to keep from hurting me unawares he texted that night reassuringly i decided i would call um his asking lovely i decided i would try to learn the next time he was in the bedroom he paused with his hand at the zipper of my dress is this okay he said i'll skip some of the more salacious part given our wholly consensual interaction did it matter who was stronger couldn't we treat each other as two equal human beings each of whom had invited or agreed to intimate acts wasn't that the beautiful thing he was teaching me that he could fully that that he could be fully human to each other checking in honoring yes and no if i could go back in time i would have urged him in that moment to really think about why asking for consent even matters because the answer i think is basic we want people we're intimate with to feel good not bad okay but feel good for how long while he was waiting for his uber to arrive he said he would cook me dinner next time steak with sauteed mushrooms and fig balsamic reduction wow i mostly make scrambled eggs i said he laughed kissed me and said see you soon i did not see him soon i texted him a few times that day followed playfully at first then more pressing he ignored me at first i couldn't believe he didn't answer and then i was devastated did he find somebody else is he uninterested did i say something did my breath smell is he is is he has he gone on to someone he's 24 maybe it's a 23 year old does she have certain color hair is her body have certain aspects yada yada yada this is how we think isn't it my roommates didn't understand why i was so much hurt more hurt than usual oh you've been through this before because he kissed the soft part of my arm he said and then he disappeared it's not the vagina it's not the erogenous zones it's the intimacy it's the relational they looked at me blankly because he asked for my consent over and over so sex felt like a sacred act and then he disappeared a sacred act one roommate said laughingly girl you sure don't treat it like one but i do she argues we perform sacred acts for and with and among strangers all the time give charitably to people we don't know we pray in churches with people we don't know okay but you've got a pretty low resolution of the environment of the sacred back to my piece jerry seinfeld the woman the women he's been with how many women do you imagine jerry seinfeld had sex with before he settled down high status male on tv i'll let you ladies decide how good looking it is he was you quirky funny women love a sense of humor maybe he didn't want to marry maybe he got to have sex with famous figure with a famous figure but don't don't have access to his near billion dollar net worth lower status men increasingly have virtual access to highly attractive women through pornography or prostitution if they have enough money democracy and technology go hand in hand enter the high status conservative christian male remember what this is about this poor victim has all the biological natural compulsion to spread his seed and all the religious pressure not to do so talk about cross pressure this sets up for them a real gotcha their status is dependent upon fulfilling a rather anti-biological sexual script of self-denial denial if they betray that script they lose their status and also the opportunity for fulfilling their biological drive if they keep to the script they lose out on what their bio their biology wants for them how do they compensate well that's where the article comes in how do they compensate spiritual bulimia i think he's dead on right with that you know wow what an observation really helpful but why only high status usually celebrity but hey ministers they might not have this the type the type of um sarin display on the sarangueti mating opportunities of jerry seinfeld or bill hybels or ravie zachariah or uh furdick or joe austin or or or or or or but a local church compassionate man good social skills faithful to his wife in public there's a lot of pitfalls for pastors how do they compensate there needs to be other goods above and beyond what sexual biology is offering there's a lot of things involved in this economy now these trade-offs are of course not unique there are trade-offs all over the place in life monogamy is a system of trade-offs till death do us part is a trade-off where lots of other goods come in and compensate for the sacrifices inherent in the relationship men and women both get exclusive access with which both like children get exclusive access to resources which both like which all parties like which is good for everyone it's monogamy broadly constructed in a society works pretty well and you know just look for a competing a competing situation that outperforms it i don't think you have one but of course our technological supremacy over nature has afforded us longer lives which makes monogamy a little bit difficult um are now we know more than just two or three hundred people that we're with and now a high status person you know you're a rock star um women will want to go to bed with you you get to have sex they get to have a story reasonable exchange right watch out for the stds magic johnson and monogamy has plenty of trade-offs also sacrifices now obviously the dynamic for same-sex attracted people are different and they are right away it is clear that biological reproduction isn't at play in the same way as it is with primarily opposite attracted persons contraception has of course changed this equation and i i really don't think we would be having the conversation about same-sex marriage if contraception hadn't radically changed the sexual economy for heterosexual people i don't think we pay near enough attention to that maybe the roman catholics are i think they've had a leg up in this conversation for a while yes mary yes mary i read your comments you make strong points are you manipulative like a pastor mary i've met such wonderful people on youtube so contraception has of course changed the equation through making heterosexual behavior increasingly fruitless like sterile homosexual behavior it gets enormously complex of course because the desire to procreate is there in same-sex attracted people too but it isn't a natural outcome of their sexual desire and so you have surrogacy and adoption and insemination and and and in order to try to sort of fill out the cards of many of the desires that we have to to parent and to procreate into all of those kinds of things if you follow the logic you can see how let's say the math is different and it is and that's a point that people don't like to bring up in this debate but here's the rub the moral of the economy of the two systems are joined the low resolution takeaway from both the high profile christian moral failures and the common demand to remove religious and societal barriers to natural sexual fulfillments find each other traditional christianity is seen as unnatural and therefore untrue it says that same-sex attracted individuals should not seek what's natural to them and when high status christian men fail to keep to the script someone comes along and says see it doesn't even work for the promoters of their worldview that's a devastating point that's why when jerry fallwell jr comes up in the news in this and has a big crash and bill hybels and rabbi zackariah and and pedophile priests and and and this really hurts christianity and christians run for cover and then christians get we need more rules and we need safer churches and we need stronger laws and stronger walls let's police high status men more carefully especially in the church because they are the examples of why our conservative ethos is superior now remember these things are working in the same economy it says that same-sex attracted individuals should not seek what's natural to them and when high status christian men fail to keep to the script someone comes along and says see it doesn't even work for those who are most successful at promoting it it must be denounced and abandoned not everyone will jump on the anti-religious skeptic bandwagon though many see the tremendous sunk costs in christianity post-christian she doesn't want to not be a christian anymore she just doesn't want to be associated with trump voters that's the bottom line and christianity is the tether she has a vision for christianity and she wants the other half of the population to disappear it's jordan peterson one of the best comments he made in public on the bill marshal what are you going to do with the other half of the country certainly the goods of monogamy can be seen as beneficial over promiscuity and chaos let's use christianity to christianity's tools to influence to tame gay men and to elevate the social status of lesbian women let's use all that god talk to undo what god talked did 1500 years ago the already receding threat of divine punishment can be done away with god via the church affirming same-sex marriage the acceptance tent can be expanded so that all the riches of the church can be available to all win-win high status politicians not too long ago in the democratic primaries played that how does their gay marriage threaten your hetero marriage card quite publicly and on one level they seem to have a point if i'm attracted to the opposite sex i have the freedom to marry a woman who i am who am i to tell them they can't marry someone of the same sex and have it celebrated and validated by the same powerful religious social structure that i enjoy this is clearly inequitable however does this really not tinker with the powerful forces that have been marshalled along the battle fronts with larger populations than those who are significantly and durably same-sex attracted there's always this thing about and again jonathan peugeot was really good with this fringes are fringes for a reason and in sort of a stable system you have fringe and center and and there are equitable arrangements sort of made along the way but when fringe becomes center things get a little crazy what if everyone decides monogamy is a bad idea you know who usually loses out all the people without the privilege it's the people without without coin in the dating market and again one of the common things that we talk about in our local jordan peterson meetup is well the issues of 20 and 30 something men and women and the struggle they're finding to find marriage partners there is a whole lot of culture and social pressure even in the 80s when i was young and definitely when my parents were young to sort of follow these scripts and many people didn't do well but there were sort of ways to get around that and actually many people in my church when their first child was born less than nine months before before they came about or they lived with their boyfriend or girlfriend and now are their spouse others who have had episodes or durable same-sex attraction etc etc this stuff is common and as a pastor you hear about it's not unusual hasn't been at least as long as i've been pastoring there's no question that the very very old economy of sexual pursuit has been deeply blunted by those same powerful christian forces trying to resist what we have come to expect from high status men why should god deny liberation from the natural authentic desires of some but not others that too is inequitable equity always must have a limited purview to do its demanding work think about that the article i began with suggests that the solution to the frustration of the blunted natural biological imperative of the high status christian man is the opposite of the billy graham rule or the mike pence rule billy graham and mike pence basically blunt forced the problem the problem in order to not lose the game it's an inelegant and perhaps unfair solution but is reasonably effective in achieving its goal many low status yet locally high status christian men such as local pastors have been using basic tricks and hacks like this for years talk to pastors i won't dry ride in a car with a woman i won't go out to coffee alone with a woman i won't meet with a woman in my office safe church an office won't have have windows in your offices and have two unrelated people in the nursery and and and all these tricks and hacks in order to keep children safe and all this is good stuff i mean i'm not arguing against it but it's tricks and hacks and these things generally do work be careful which tricks and hacks you denounce to which people because some people are avoiding a cascade of misery by simple little tricks and hacks that keep them away from things they know they're susceptible to safe tricks for a safe church promotes such tricks and hacks all over the place install windows have more than one person there these aren't necessarily that different from what seasoned alcoholics do to keep from getting into situations of temptation and fall the challenge to the article are guys like bill hybels hybels like other high status christian leaders struggled and in some ways failed he was affirming women in ministry and saw to it that women played a prominent role in the operations of willow creek and bill hybels championed this at a day when well you know a lot of it had changed but he still lost status with some churches for making this call in the evangelical marketplace okay i'm often amazed that people fail to give donald trump credit for just how many women he elevates to promotions of leadership in his organization's first chief of the cia um now putting another woman up for the supreme court even before becoming potus you can see it on the apprentice now it's true that he seems to like to name good-looking women but there are still um but there are still they are still women and women have their own interesting relationship with attractiveness as you can see in any grocery store checkout line contrary to the old bias high status men are not necessarily are not necessarily contrary to the old bias should put a comma in there high status men are not necessarily intimidated by powerful women their power might in fact make them more attractive to some men i'm sure it does sexual attractiveness is only one kind of power that women use to attract potential reproductive partners and to compete against other women who have who may be rivals for exclusive access to men's resources in some ways perhaps the article i noted plays along with other male status games which is men allying with women's cause in order to gain status among women in order to you know what now some will read this and say women are not so crass and simple as to be involved in this sort of sexual economy okay if you want to believe that fairy tale men the same way i mean it's all of us here yeah but i think that's yet another part of the economy just as it's going to be harder to deny high status christian men the object of their natural and authentic desires as you undermine the power of the christian system to generally demand resistance to such desires so it also will be increasingly difficult to deny the reality of two level theories and this is where i nod to um to a daniel bonovac video i made a little clip of where there's all sorts of two level theories that are operating in the 20th century in the 21st century that that say things like well what you think is going on in your conscious self is not really going on beneath the surface and that of course gives gives someone like brett weinstein lots of things to talk about as an evolutionary biologist or jordan peterson as a as a psychologist two lever theories are also deeply promoted today all white people are natural born white supremacists whether they know it or not and they need to perpetually own their privilege and daily confess and war against it all cisgender men are natural born misogynist and must confess their patriarchy every day in war against it now if you're not a white man you may feel safe but someone with greater oppression with a greater oppression olympic status is going to come after you with a two level theory and demand that privilege be owned confessions be ritualized and reparations be paid i think we know that by now to be clear i'm not skeptical about the validity of two level theories i think they are real and many of their observations are valid my skepticism comes when they are isolated and weaponized discovering one two level theory is easy and convenient but recognizing just how many of them there are and how dynamic that economy is beneath the surface of all of us is what i wish we would realize christianity of course has its own hierarchy of values mortify some desire so that other goods and desires i'm going to make that goods instead of desires it's a better word can come to the fore make some trade-offs so that other greater gains can be had monogamy now you might say these economies don't intermingle oh padwan really they do maybe when you're a little older you'll see it and you'll see it in yourself and you'll see the ways they failed and i hope you have such wisdom but i'd say that they do and we really don't know how changes in one area impact changes in others which is why sort of in protestant ecclesiology you see this vast experiment going on and so lower the result lower the anger a little bit be a little bit more curious be a little more interesting follow the affirming churches follow the churches that aren't going to affirm watch the dynamics there'll be lots of second level theories at play lots of postulation about what's really going on but almost every time when we say what's really going on we're saying this exclusively and we should be thinking well maybe that's a little higher on the hierarchy than we thought before it's probably a smarter way to approach it you might say that these economies don't intermingle but i say they do and that we really don't know how changes in one area impact changes in another i am skeptical that you can selectively dismantle aspects of a moral economy without consequences in other areas we always as always we ask who pays who benefits we are all participating in this live action experiment that is what history does my point is that you can't expect to marshal forces against high status males if you keep undermining the significant achievements that have curtailed them for centuries you're taking down the walls those walls are being used against bill hybels rabbi zechariah now jerry seinfeld no walls there out of church no walls there we're trying to figure out community standards here we're trying to figure out what what works well for a community long term we're trying to assess what's really going on you say your sexual freedom is what's important and then say don't pursue what you are able to what you are able to by virtue of wealth and biology really really this isn't going to work so there's my blog post edited updated i hope i remember to put all the links below um how long has this gone on i don't know maybe an hour we'll see let me know what you think in the comment section