https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=LpnW6LpA_Fs

 Cool. Yeah. So this is, this is a real pleasure because I've been watching you for a long time and watching a lot of your videos. So yeah, this is awesome. Um, so a little bit about yourself. Yeah, sure. So I'm 23 years old. Um, I graduated from Notre Dame last year and I go to university of Chicago. I'm getting my masters. I got a political science major, um, at Notre Dame and now I'm, I'm getting a liberal arts major at university of Chicago. So yeah, and I'm still living at home, so I'm still need to get out of my father's house, but I'm still trying to figure out what I want to do with my life. But in the meantime, I've been entertaining myself to Jordan Peterson videos and your videos and just trying to keep myself intellectually stimulated. So, well it's no crime to live in your father's house. I mean, you're in school. It's not like you're just sitting in your room, not doing anything. So, right. Yeah. Big difference there. Right. Right. Okay. All right. So I was just listening to Jordan Peterson's video. Do you want to hit like record or are you? I'm already recording. We're ready to go. Okay, great. Okay. All right. So I was listening to Jordan Peterson's video on, um, Rubin report where he's talking with Ben Shapiro and he's talking about like the hierarchy and the spirit of masculinity. And the way he's describing it, it's kind of confusing to me cause he's talking about how men organize themselves in these hierarchies and the men at the top of the hierarchy have the reproductive advantage. But like in the modern world, I feel like there's like everyone's reproducing that like people, people aren't being left out of, of the reproductive game or whatever. So is the spirit of masculinity like not as strong in the modern world? That's a good question. I wouldn't say everyone is reproducing. I think part of as Peterson called it enforced monogamy is that many more men get the opportunity to, to reproduce, to, and you see this, I mean, sort of the, the American dream is that every man and every woman would get the chance to find a spouse, to settle down, to have a home, to have a career, to have a family. I mean, part of what's amazing about the American system is that this has been very successful to such a degree that if, if someone, at least in previous generations, if someone doesn't marry, if someone doesn't establish a stable pair bond, if someone doesn't, isn't able to get their own home and, and have a family, we look at that and we say, you know, Oh, I don't know. So it, and that speaks, however, you want to, you know, however you want to think about it, that speaks to the success of the paradigm that one of the things that has happened in our culture over a very long amount of time is the achievement of most people getting a chance to reproduce. Now, is that less masculine? I don't know. I don't think so, but it's a really good question. Yeah. Yeah. And I think, but I think it is a, you know, it's an amazing, it's an amazing thing. And our culture hasn't been the only culture that's been able to enjoy this and experience this. This is, this has been the goal of everyone to enjoy their home under their own fruit tree. You know, this is, this is something that I think people have dreamed about for a long time. So I don't know what, I don't know what that, I don't know how to answer your question, but it's a good question. Thanks. Yeah. Like, cause I can understand how in like ancient civilizations, how maybe only the men at the top would have like women to reproduce with and the rest are slaves or whatever. But like today, I feel like everyone can reproduce if they want to, like there's enough. Although you'd be surprised. I mean, you might be surrounded by, I mean, if you're going to university and you're going to graduate school, most of the people that are surrounding you have been able to manage themselves to the degree that establishing a career and a family is not something difficult. And that speaks both to the context, but also to the capacity of those people. Because I know many people who they'll, they'll, they, they can't, it's not something that they'll be capable of managing. And isn't, isn't it the case now that people who are more, pursuing like higher end careers are less likely to have more kids. So, so that's like goes totally against what Jordan Peterson is saying because he's saying the men at the top are going to be reproducing the most. Yeah. Oh yeah. But, but don't forget that we're looking at this in very tiny timeframes. So if you look at the, the Uber man or the Uber woman that has climbed to the top of their career and they, they haven't had a child or they've had one child and you might say, Oh, but look, they're at the top of the hierarchy and they've only had one child. Ah, but it's hard to know three generations from now who the real winners will be. Because maybe it's the person that had a crappy career, but managed to support 10 children and all of those 10 children did well. So a lot of the difficulty we have is, is figuring out frame of reference. And so that gets into the question of, well, who will inherit the earth? And, and that, that question then gets complicated, as I've said in some of my other videos, because is who's, who's, who's been more successful Genghis Khan or Jesus? Well, Genghis Khan, you know, how many million people have bare the genes of Genghis Khan? Jesus colonized people via ideas. Well, that's a hard question to answer. Yeah. Yeah. I watched that video you did on Genghis Khan and Jesus. That was very interesting. Um, okay. So I want to switch gears a little bit. So I want to talk about prayer. Okay. So you mentioned in a previous video how like obviously as a pastor, you are called upon or you're asked to like pray for a lot of sick people. And you mentioned that a lot of these people end up dying. Sure. And when you pray for them and like, my question is, I, I'm, I guess I'm not convinced that of the effectiveness of prayer when you're, when you're praying for these sick people, are you praying that they heal? Like I assume that's what you're praying for, right? Or just their salvation. I usually pray for, I usually pray for people's healing if they're sick. Okay. And well, many times they are, well here's, you have a selection bias in this too. If, if someone gets a cold or someone gets the flu, they won't usually call me and ask for prayer. Right. By the time people call me and ask for prayer, they've got cancer, they've got heart disease, they're, they're on their death bed. So in all fairness, there's a sample there. Now we come to this and we say, well, shouldn't, shouldn't the prayers, well, it's called the book of James. Shouldn't the prayers of the righteous man avail much? Well, maybe I'm not righteous enough. This is a, this is a long, Philippiansi wrote a book on prayer. Philippiansi was an evangelical author who was quite popular in the eighties and nineties, wrote an interesting book on prayer. He wrestled a lot with these issues. And in the church, this is complicated. In some Pentecostal traditions, they will assert there's a guy named Bill Johnson. He's the pastor of Bethel church up in Redding, highly Pentecostal church. He teaches that when we accept the idea that someone will not be healed after we pray for them, we are basically not expressing sufficient faith. And that's the reason people aren't cured. Throughout the history of the Christian tradition, people have prayed for people who have died. Christianity has always, has always asserted that a prayer is a request in terms of we are, we are expressing our desire to God. God is free to grant it or to not grant it. Someone like Tim Keller will say that God grants us prayer, grants us the answer we would, we would want if we knew everything God knows. That's a pretty high standard. So basically to pray for someone is not to control the outcome, but rather to bring to God our concern. And as Jesus encourages us, God is available. God is open to our influence, but free to decide. So if the goal of prayer is achieving a specific outcome, that's not a bad goal. If one of my children comes to me and makes a request, I consider the fact that they want it. I, but I also consider whether in my opinion, this would be good for them. And so I will respond to their request based on this whole matrix of situations. And Christianity has, has asserted that. But in, in all fairness, many atheists and skeptics have said, well, Christianity is disproven by your performance in prayer. And I can understand that answer. Yeah. Cause the way I would look at is, okay, you've got some people like Sam Harris saying prayer does nothing or like you can't change the outcome of something based on prayer. And you got other people who are saying, no prayer does work. Okay, let's set up an experiment. Let's have a hundred people. We pray for them. They're on their deathbed, but you couldn't all get them in the same state. Well, Google those people have been running those studies for a long time. And ironically, it keeps getting debated whether or not the studies worked. Some people will assert, some people will assert, yeah, prayer changes things. Other people will say there's no evidence for it, but you can, there's been a lot of surveys like that and go ahead and check that out. It's, it's very interesting stuff. Okay. Yeah. Cause I don't know, like if you're on the Christian side, I feel like you should be like wanting science to get involved because you believe in the effect, the, that prayer is effective. So you should be bringing up, bring on the science. Let's do an experiment, you know? And I feel like a lot of religious people would like be reluctant to, if I went to my pastor, I went to a Catholic school and I like asked them, I want to do an experiment with the people on the petition list. I feel like there'd be a reluctancy there, but I mean, that's just my speculation. I, People have been doing those studies for a long time and it's, it's an interesting little field of study. Yeah. Here's, here's one of the funny things about it though, that to a degree when you even start the study. So someone sent to me, actually it was Topher who have done a couple of conversations. Topher sent to me a podcast where it was just a secular podcast. They got into the question of demonic exorcisms as to, you know, what can we do with that? And it was, it was a secular podcast. It was a very interesting podcast on exorcism and pretty much brought out all the usual stuff that gets brought out that with exorcisms, there are often things that we cannot explain via our materialist framework. There's, there's knowledge that the person who is suspected of being demon possessed is exhibiting and showing that this is knowledge that this person should not in any way have access to. And so then, then you have the question, well, how can, what is the, what is the worldview that we use to frame that data? So what's interesting in a case like that is that, then someone will say, well, but why don't you do such and such? Well, here's the, here's the difficulty in terms of doing experiments like this on let's for, let's say supernatural beings like God, demons, so on and so forth. If they are as smart as they are supposed to be by the people making the profession, a demon knowing what you're doing is a demon. A demon knowing what you're doing will continue to manipulate the outcome according to what that desired outcome is, according to the demon. So it's, it's not the case, you know, it's like running in the difference between running an experiment on your dog and running an experiment on the college students. If we're dealing with beings that are way smarter than we are and have better access to perspectives on worldviews that we're testing, you already can't run the test. It's like, you know, your parents running a test on you and you very quickly will figure out if your parents are running a test on you because you know your parents really well and you will probably imagine the outcome they're looking for and you will probably mess with them. And so we have the same problem when we decide to set up these tests where, well, we're going to put God in a box right away in terms of the frame of the test. You turn God into a mechanism and the thing you're trying to test already asserts that God is not a mechanism. So that's part of the issue with those kinds of tests too. Okay. And that's probably the wisdom behind you should not put the Lord God to you to the test, right? That's right. Well, it's a, it's in some ways a, if you would test your parents, you know, let's say you, let's say you had a sister, you and your sister got together, say, we're going to test mom and dad and you do it as an expression of the fact that you don't trust them. Once the jig is up and they figured out what you're doing, you know, it's like trading places. There's old movie with, with Eddie Murphy and Dan Aykroyd. And so these two old geezers are trying to see nature versus nurture says they set up this whole experiment and they mess with Dan Aykroyd's life and they say, if you had a cross brother, Yeah, protection that's all bad, when you mess with them okay, No, no, nobody got picked. They're always on good terms and they do great things. Meps, when you mess with crazy, I don't know, even if that's not springtime, that's Adam Duchesne, that's not the best example of making 260. Mm-hmm. Yeah, the tests are problematic, but it also creates this kind of like unprovable claim. So like when Catholics are claiming that the consecrated host is the body of Jesus, okay, I have a solution, let's test it. But it's like, oh wait, we can't test it because like what you're saying, God's smarter than all of us. I mean, he knows he's being tested. So it's just a tricky thing. Yeah. Yeah. And okay, so you do a little trick on the priest, and you sneak out the host after it's been consecrated, and you get it to a lab, and you find wheat and water and whatever. And you say, aha, the church is lying. Well, but of course, God would know you're sneaking it out. And when you find, I mean, if you haven't had any children yet, I assume, once you have children, you'll pretty quickly learn that children start to test you. And the thing is, they're like a two or a three-year-old, and you're like in your 20s and 30s, and you're watching them test you, and then you can really have fun. I mean, I've always have tempted to do this with parishioners. I remember one woman, her son was going to make profession of faith, and she was very nervous. What are you going to preach on? What are you going to preach on when my son makes profession of faith? Because all my family is in. I said, I think I'm going to do a sermon on masturbation that Sunday. I was like, oh, pastor, please, no. I was just holding her leg. Yeah. Okay. Let's see. Next, I want to talk about, oh, the stages of grief. So I had this idea not too long ago that the stages of grief were implicitly religious because people get angry, obviously, when someone dies, and there's good reason to be angry. But if all you believe is that there's nature out there and there's nothing controlling, nothing causing your grandma to die, then what are you really angry at? The example I give is, if you stub your toe on a chair, it's not rational to be mad at the chair because the chair's not there. So you automatically go to, who put this chair here? So it only makes sense if there's a mover at the beginning. So if an atheist is experiencing the stages of grief, my question would be, who are you angry at? Who are you attempting to bargain with? That's exactly right. Well, and I think if you get into, say, Jordan Peterson's conversation with Sam Harris, Peterson asserts that the fact that we do get angry at the chair, this is evidence of a very long time of formation that has even gotten formed into our, this a priori filter that we used to access the world with. So no, you're exactly right. We have so much religion built into us that this is why Jordan Peterson looks at Sam Harris and says, you know, atheist, really? Nah, you're way more religious than you want to admit to yourself. And of course, Jordan, Sam Harris finds that offensive, but that's why Peterson makes it. And you're exactly right. And I think the stages of grief, now what's been interesting in terms of psychology is that there's this acronym, weird, Western, individualistic, egalitarian. Basically, so they did all these psychological experiments often on university students in American and Western universities. Okay. And they, the science of psychology then said, well, this is then universal for people. Well, then they started running some of these tests in Africa and Latin America and Asia, and they begin to say, oh, well, maybe these were within a cultural frame. And so, you know, in some ways, the question of testing people is not that different from the question of testing God in that we, it's again, the monarchical vision where I can't look at human beings objectively because I am a human being. I don't have a, I don't have an objective stand from which to view the rest of the world because I'm already inside the system. So I think your observation is very correct. There's a lot of religion implicit in these stages of grief. And someone might say, well, what if someone is a very atheist person? Well, they've had so many generations by which religion has been built into them at levels, they are not fully appreciating. And that's why Peterson says to Sam Harris, you're naive. You're acting religious. And that's been my experience too, because I've noticed that if I have a big event coming up, like the next day that the day before I'll be on my best behavior and I'll be just being nice to my sisters or being nice to my parents. And I'll be acting as if there's someone over, overhead watching me. And so, yeah, it's just so interesting when, when I started listening to Jordan Peterson, that all this stuff kind of clicked and I started understanding why I was acting the way I was. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's interesting stuff. Yeah. Okay. How much time do we have? Oh, the guy after I talked to him already. So we can, we can go another 20 minutes or so. Okay, cool. Let's see. I want to talk about the Joker a little bit. The character, the Joker, because I'm a big fan of the Joker. I actually, I do rap. I'm a rap battler and I go places and I rap battle people and I really love the Joker. Yeah. When I rap battle people. Yeah. Too bad. Freddie's not here. Yeah. Cause he likes rap, right? Freddie loves rap. Yeah. Yeah. So I've just loved the Joker and I think that the Joker kind of represents pure evil. Would you say so? Which Joker? So is there a canonical Joker? Is the Christopher Nolan Joker from or do you have, is it more of the comics? So what's your, what's your canonical Joker? I'm thinking Heath Ledger. Okay. Okay. From, from Christopher Nolan's, his second in Christopher Nolan's Batman trilogy. Okay. Yeah. That was, I, that was, I've watched that movie a number of times. My, my kids really enjoy that movie. That, that was a, that's an amazing movie and an incredible representation of evil. One of the best that, that I've seen in film. Yeah. And I was thinking about Jordan Pearson's description of evil when he talks about Hitler a lot and how, how he made the, or Hitler had the Jews do all these meaningless tasks where they drag a sack down a football field and come back. And it wouldn't serve the war purpose at all. It would just be purely to torture. And I see that as pure evil when you're doing something, not to get something out of it, but just to cause pain. Yeah. And this is what Heath Ledger does in, in Batman, because, because remember the scene where the Joker's got the mountain of money that he, that he obtained from all his crimes and he throws the match on it. And he says, we're not doing it for that. We're doing it to send a message. And I thought that that made sense because I thought of you cannot serve two masters in the Bible. I thought you cannot serve the act of throwing the match on the, on the money was the Joker saying, I'm not serving money. I'm serving a greater evil. Yes. Yes. And, and I think, isn't it in that movie where Alfred says to Bruce Wayne, some people just want to watch the world burn. Yeah. That, that is the demonic because it is there, there's, there's, there's nothing he, no, I think you're exactly right. And that, that's why that character, people watch it. And again, our, our, in our conscious mind, we might not exactly know it, but the rest of our mind is like, yeah, that's it. That's it. That's something that's some really scary stuff. Oh, that's right. Yeah. And so many people love the Joker character and good people will like the Joker character. I guess it just like, it just like pokes at something inside of us, that evil side of us maybe that. Well, I think we've got, I think we also have a sense of excellence. So just because you appreciate the character, the representation, the acting, the writing, the filmmaking, sometimes that gets expressed in adoration. It doesn't necessarily mean that you're adoring evil, but to see the excellence of it. But, but here's the irony that actually, when you see the excellence of it, you are still undermining evil because what's at heart about that representation is he's not even going to be stylistically pure. It's the destruction of everything. Some people just want to see the world burn. And so, no, I think people's fascination with that character isn't necessarily a bad thing because the fascination with the character might be fascination with the excellence of the filmmaking and it's excellent filmmaking. Yeah, because we all have an idea of what evil looks like. And when the Joker says his lines and it just, it maps onto what we think evil is perfectly. And we can't articulate it. We say, well, what's evil? Well, bad. Well, and so, and so when you see an artistic representation of it, like in the movie, you say, wow, that's, that's art. That's what good art is. So it doesn't necessarily mean you're evil. It just means he, he is representing evil better than I can articulate. Okay. Let's see. Have you heard about, I mean, I'm sure you, my mom tries to get me to believe these, these miracles of Christianity about like the bodies of saints that haven't totally deteriorated. Is that something worth looking into? Is that maybe we spend time watching movies. You know, there's the Shroud of Turin of course is one of the most famous ones. And over the years I've, I've been, I've on and off read little things, you know, like a national geographic or sites on the internet. I, when it comes to miracles, I take a, I generally take a, I don't, I don't cast more judgment than I need to upon it. Because usually if the judgments we are casting say more about usually the tribal commitments we possess. So let's say I'm going to play my Protestant card. Oh, all those, all those relics and things. That's all, that's all a bunch of hooey. Well, I don't know that I, you know, and so why should I just kind of mouth off? I do it, you know, do it anyway, but why should I just kind of mouth off out of my ignorance? The world is a very strange place and we walk, I think that the, the, the besetting sin of our culture, or at least of, of materialist post enlightenment culture is that we walk around thinking we know everything and there's whole swaths of us that are, that we live within and depend on every day that we don't know much about at all. Dreams, I mean, all of us dream, we have dreams every night, sleep, you know, relationships. We're surrounded by layers of stuff that we deal with every day and generally work semi-productively with. We can't explain. So here's, here's something that for centuries, oh, there was a really interesting story about these, what was it again? It was in Turkey and they were people shut, I don't remember, I can't remember offhand, but the back of my head, there are weird stories of things that happen that we can't explain. Why be a jerk and, you know, why not just listen? And I get some of that from C.S. Lewis when in the, the lie in the witch in the wardrobe, when the children are concerned about Lucy and they say Lucy says she's been through a wardrobe and been to Narnia and the professor says, well, do you know Lucy to be a liar? And I said, no, Lucy's always dealt with us. And he's like, well, don't doubt your sister, assume that the world is bigger than you can know. So it's a weird, you know, the world is just way, way too complicated for us to really know everything that's going on. So I'd say don't rain on you. I shouldn't say that because my sister sometimes will pull things like that at me and I'll just rain on her parade, but I shouldn't. And like my first instinct when my mom tells me about this is like, this would be the biggest thing on the news if it was true. Like, there's no way that there's bodies that haven't deteriorated and they're all of saints and no one knows about it except the Catholic Church. Like, it just seems weird, but it's something I can look into without making a call on it. Every few years they let the Shroud of Turin be studied and so on and so forth. And then actually the Catholic Church has been, I think, quite reasonable and even handed about some of that stuff. And part of the reason is they've been burned before. The part of the Protestant Reformation was a bunch of people saying hooey to a whole bunch of stuff and the Protestant Reformation forced the Roman Catholic Church to clean up its act on a lot of different scales. So yeah, I'd be curious about it. But here's the thing. Let's say you go to a place and they have the body of a saint and the body is not decomposed, so on and so forth. Okay, so you say, wow, that's a miracle. Okay, now what? Right. Does it really make a difference in your life? Do you really believe more? See, so often we imagine that our belief is based on information data. No, that's not how we work. So a flat out, I use this example all the time, Andy Crouch, former editor of Christianity Today, Christian journalist, writes really great books, has early on in his writing career wrote this story that he called A Testimony in Reverse. You can Google it and find it. And where he is praying, he had never been a Pentecostal, he'd been praying to the Lord to reveal yourself. He wanted the answer to a question, like if you should stay in this town with this girl or leave and go pursue something else. And so he prayed and prayed and prayed, oh Lord, show me your will. And he wanted the answer. Yes. And he and first time in his life, he hears an audible no. And he's like, oh, and right there you have the question, well, do you really want God to tell you what to do? I mean, God tells us love your enemies. Well, why don't we? Well, because there are enemies and it's really hard and we don't want to because it could be cost to something. So we don't do it. It's not a matter of information. So. Yeah, that's a good point. Can we briefly talk about predestination? Sure. I have a hard time reconciling the idea of predestination with an all loving God as I'm sure you've dealt with this kind of question. Like how can an all loving God just choose certain people to save? And maybe you can direct me to a book or something if it's too. It's hard to answer quickly. I'm going to use I'm going to use the answer Tim Keller usually uses and that the best place to talk about when you when you frame it that way, you're basically alluding to Calvin's double predestination. And Calvin basically goes there because he says if if the Bible leads us to believe that God has chosen people, individuals from the foundation of the earth, which seems to be what is being said in Ephesians and a number of other places in the New Testament, it's rational to imagine that God has condemned some from the beginning of the earth. That is a logical inference that Calvin just basically says is a logical inference. 17th century Protestant people had a big fight over this. I think we have to finally again, just as with the miracle say that reality is stranger than we know. And so you have these two statements from God. One is that he's he's chosen his people from the foundation of the earth. The other is that God wills that all would come to come to salvation. Part of the difficulty of doing biblical theology is that the Bible has a lot of answers that certainly look like contradictions. And so how can you say both? And so on one hand, you kind of have to say, well, I'm going to say both, even if I don't know how it would all work. The question of election is a is a very interesting one. I think it's a very interesting one. I think it's very interesting one. And in terms that especially in Old Testament, election is very communal. God chooses Israel. That's kind of the foundational element of election. And well, with God chooses Israel, then does it mean that God didn't choose Egypt? Well, yeah. But does that mean that Egyptians have no hope? No, because God chooses Israel, and then Jesus Christ is the anointed. And it's interesting, because the elect are always chosen to suffer, and the elect are chosen to suffer on behalf of those who haven't been called. So it's it's often framed that God is sitting in the back with a cosmic lottery, choosing who he's going to harm. Well, I don't know that we know that. And that's not a fair representation of God. Now, that does does that mean that, well, God isn't choosing? No, I think it's clear that he does. Does it mean that God wants people to be damned? No, it's clear that he doesn't. So well, how can that work together? I don't know. That's what my answer is. I don't know. And I can't. And some say, Well, I don't believe that God chooses. Well, then what are you going to do with all these passages in the New Testament that are given for our comfort that says God holds us more than we hold him? I think that's the heart of it. So and it's also true that these these questions, Calvin didn't really come up with these questions. Much of what Calvin writes about had been that wasn't a new addition to church doctrine by Calvin. He was basically really asserting a lot of Augustinian tradition that the Roman Catholic Church had embraced for centuries. So the way it gets presented, I don't think is terribly helpful for people. Yeah, like I can totally buy the idea that God chooses like that seems like evident, but I just I don't like the idea that there's some people living right now. And I could be one who just have no hope of salvation. And that would be true. If I was true, right? Yeah. Well, and I heard I've heard a story, it's probably apocryphal that that some some young man comes to Augustine and says, you know, I'm, you know, how do I, I'm afraid I'm not elect. And Augustine says, go to a church and get elect. You know. So but yeah, if you say use the Tolkien Frodo analogy, I use often, was Sauron condemned from the foundations of Tolkien's earth for his destruction? Well, that's a hard question. Because well, does Sauron not have any hope? Well, was the hopelessness of Sauron Tolkien's fault or something foundational to Sauron's character? My father would get asked this question, and he would always answer, you know, they get asked the question about the unforgivable sin that all pastor, I think I've committed the unforgivable sin, I get that sometimes to my father's answer would be, if you if you're worried about it, you probably are not guilty of it. And so because the the type of the type of being you would be, which would be reprobate, would by its nature be beyond be beyond redemption, we say, well, God can't save some things. Well, that's events gets into the mystery of choice. CS Lewis famously says the hell the door to hell is locked from the inside. Yep, I was just reading the great divorce great book. That book is so interesting, because I love how he talks, like the protagonist will talk to the people in hell, and you'll find out why they're in hell, it's because the one guy doesn't want to kill the serpent on his shoulder. And it just, it's so interesting, because I don't know, because it just shows like how attached we are to our sins. And it, it explains why people might choose hell. Yeah. And so, so then our many in theology wants to say, well, God foreknew their choice. And historically, I think the church has always said, God's choices always come first, because and you could hear that with so let's imagine Tolkien writing Lord of the Rings. There's something about Sauron that is that is its perdition by nature of how it is. And is it when Frodo makes a decision? Is it Tolkien making the decision for Frodo? Or is it Tolkien? Now, this is obviously lesser because it's a human being writing the story, or is it Tolkien saying, I have to make I have to make all the decisions that Frodo makes are Frodo like. And if Tolkien has Frodo make an unfrodo like decision, the mystery of the story is broken, its magic is broken. Because and then we're watching it and we're saying, No, that's wrong, because Frodo wouldn't make that decision. There's a Frodo-ness that's at play. And so this idea that God is sitting back and saying, you, yes, you know, you, yes, you know, that's not in keeping with the entire story. Just like if Frodo did an unfrodo like thing, we probably wouldn't be talking about Frodo or Tolkien or anything, because it would simply be lesser art. That makes sense. Yeah. These are hard questions. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Well, are we basically at our limit right now? Let me take a look. Okay. I gotta see who's next. No, we got a few more minutes. Okay. Let's see here. We talked about predestination a little bit. I guess, can you like, describe your grievances with the Catholic Church? Like, believe that it's the actual body, obviously, when it comes consecrated? Well, you know, I took, I said some probably uncharitable things in a, in one of my videos and a bunch of Roman Catholics wrote back and said, you should, you should look at the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of the body of Now, there's a Roman Catholic person could say, okay, but you've been protesting, why don't you stop protesting and join the Catholic Church? I had a friend in college who was a philosophy student and I remember him joining the Catholic Church because he said, I no longer find sufficient grounds for protest. I don't know that I'm holding an individual vigil, an individual vigil of protest against the Roman Catholic Church, but I'm a part of my community that continues to have conversation with it. But there's other aspects of my community that are in fact in dialogue with the church. But these things are century long things with that that communions do together. So I, Peter Kreeft was a, he grew up in an RCA church in northern New Jersey, went to the same school system I did, Eastern Christian, went to Calvin College, studied philosophy and then went to the Roman Catholic Church and did his whole ministry there. I'm not planning on going Roman Catholic at this point. I'd love to see Jesus' prayer answered that his children would be one, but there's a lot of layers to this oneness. Is it institutional? I continue to have questions about locating the authority of Christ in the institution as such. And I continue to be more comfortable as a Protestant locating the authority of Christ in the scripture as such. Calvin's take on the body and blood of Christ that we partake in the Lord's Supper, I think he was trying to, I don't find a lot of Roman Catholics believing what I was taught transubstantiation meant. So then my question is, well, what is it? So I listened to Bishop Barron's video about it and I thought, that sounds a lot like Calvin. So maybe we're not too far off from each other in this. But still the, I still have issues with locating the authority of Christ in this institution as such. And so the Orthodox are doing the same thing, but they've got two different institutions. And so a friend of mine recently said, you know, if the Orthodox and the Roman Catholics make up, I'm probably joining that thing. But they've been apart for a thousand years. God's timing is different. So I'll continue to minister in the Christian Reformed Church. it seems to be most compatible with what I believe as an individual and they're my people. So I've submit to their beliefs and that's where I'm at home. Yeah, and like, I don't even know where I fall right now because I was raised Catholic. But thinking about the transubstantiation thing, like, when I went to college and I didn't want to describe myself as a Catholic anymore, I felt like I never actually believed that it became the body of Christ. Like I felt like I would have just told you I believed that because I was told that that was what I was supposed to believe, but it wasn't what I actually believed. So it's like, can you believe something? Like you could form a religion that says like, unicorns exist in the sky, and you could have people say a creed every day, I believe unicorns live in the sky. And then if one day you actually saw a unicorn in the sky, those people might be just as surprised as the people who never said the creed. That's right, that's right. So it's like, what does believing something really mean? Right. And so when we, in our cultural frame, here, at least what I was taught, that the host actually becomes the body and blood of Christ, there's a philosophical component that has not come from the church, but we have come from the culture through this long history that we apply to that teaching. And then we say, yeah, but if I'd sneak it out and take it to a lab, you know, and they find it's spread, well then what, the church is a bunch of liars? Well, the church isn't a bunch of liars. So it's not even all that clear what we think we know about this. And which is why I think, again, Calvin, I was watching a guy who used to be reformed and they converted to Orthodox, you know, he was saying, well, Calvin just said spiritual. And yeah, spiritual is a word that there's a whole lot of fudge room in that. So my pastoral admonition would be, you know, unless you have serious reason to break from the church where you have been raised to continue with the community. And so I think, and you know, the Roman Catholic Church is a tremendously diverse community. I mean, man, oh man. Yeah, and you get a lot of people who are upset about what Bishop Barron said with Ben Shapiro when he was talking about the church. And I think that's a very important point that Bishop Barron said with Ben Shapiro when he was talking about how an atheist can be saved. And I was reading the comments and it's like a lot of people are not happy with this because that's not what, I mean, they point to scripture and they say that like no one gets to my father except through me. So yeah, it is diverse. And there's even disagreements with people high up in the Catholic Church. I mean, like, do you think Bishop Barron got that wrong? Like from, like. I would have to listen to it again. Yeah, I don't wanna like make you say something that you're gonna regret, but like. I mean, like I see why people are saying that he got it wrong because they're pointing to scripture and Bishop Barron was, I don't know what, I forgot what he was alluding to when he said that atheists can go to heaven as long as they follow their conscience. But yeah. See, I probably wouldn't be real quick to offer that in an interview on a platform like that. But you see, so here, so the downside of Calvinism is that we have this concern that God is going to arbitrarily exclude people. That's, oh, that's double predestination. There's a problem. Here's the upside of that doctrine is that God gets to pick his friends. And now the Heideberg catechism comes after that and says, and actually the work that God does is consistent with everything that goes on in their life. And so they actually begin to show fruit of regeneration in their lives. And so, see, I think part of the difficulty that we have with the way we approach this conversation is that we make it a third person judgment on something. Whereas I think the salvation that God is going to do is working within us. Let's take the two thieves on the cross. One thief, you know, you'd look at all the gospels and, oh, they're both mocking at first, okay. Then one thief begins to have a change of heart. Okay, so they're, surely today you'll be with me in paradise. And we kvetch at that by saying, well, oh, so they live an awful, terrible life. And there at the end, you know, games the system and gets in under the wire. Well, how do you know what his life was like? And could be that all of the bad stuff in his life was leading to this moment where he could see something in Jesus that the other person couldn't. In other words, there's so many ways to look at these questions that so often when we direct it in one kind of direction and then make a rash judgment against other people, it's usually not fair. And so that's why I think at heart what Calvinism says is God chooses, not us. And God's, all of God's decisions will be seen finally in full light as completely right and just and fair and true. But from our perspective, we're not able to judge. It's just not what we're capable of doing. I got you. Okay. All right, well, I think that's, I think you've answered all my life questions. At least the ones you wrote down. Right, yeah. Well, thanks for taking time to talk and I'll send this video to you and you can decide what we should do with it. And we'll take it from there. Okay, sounds good. So thank you for, yeah. Thanks for watching. Yeah, no problem. I'll continue to watch and thanks for taking the time to talk with me. Okay, Dominic, you take care, enjoy your studies. Thank you. Bye bye. Bye.