https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=f5oXZ-1GzPM

 Hi, this is Paul. Over the weekend, I finally had a chance to listen to the Barry Weiss Jordan Peterson conversation, and I thought it was, again, one of, this could be a high point in the second wave. I think the Jordan Peterson second wave could be very different from the first wave. And this conversation touched on, I think, what's at the heart of both of them, and it's a beating religious heart. In many ways, and I'm going to, I've wrestled a lot with how to address this video, because there's so much in it. But in order to address something like this, you really have to sort of begin at the core, at the peak of the hierarchy, at the religious statements by both of them, and after that, begin to take apart the subsidiary pieces. Because what lies beneath this is, I think, as now post-modernity continues to focus, as modernity continues to recede, as the drowsiness of secularism, which is in some ways sort of a diluted version, diluted, not diluted, not diluted, diluted, a diluted version of Christianity is also receding with modernity. What we see in Jordan Peterson and Barry Weiss are two deeply religious people. Now, what do I mean by religious? Again, I've talked before about religion as worldview and religion as it is often viewed through the secular lens, through the secular frame. You can hear this from the New Atheists. Religion has something to do with supernatural beings, or God construed as a super thing in a meta-divine realm. And what Jordan and Barry wrestle with here is the decline of that civilization, and they both want to fight for it. But in many ways, and Barry Weiss, I think, partly because of her lifestyle choices, embodies some of the contradictions of this moment. There's no going back. And there's almost a sense with some people like, no, we've reached it right now, let's not go any further. Of course, many who are more progressive say, no, we need to go further and further and further. But there's not a tremendous amount of clarity about where that further leads to. And we've talked a lot on this channel about telos, ends, goals, some of this. So both Jordan and Barry are, in many ways, on the same side, voicing some of the same ideas. But let's jump in, because Jordan tells about a dream here, which I think in many ways just really encapsulates a lot of this. So I'm going to begin it at the end of this video. And as sometimes happens, I'll talk about the end, it'll be, okay, I'm done with it, and then I won't treat it. But the section about institutional racism is dealing with, and that's a long section of this video, and it's woven within her story. This entire video is seeking Jordan, asking her, why did you leave the New York Times? And just at the end, what are you doing now with Substack? It's the whole video. But of course, they go in Jordan Peterson fashion all through other various places. And I think this conversation is a good one in order to, I think for some who have sort of been in the the fog of secularity, instead of sort of the bright air of the Christianity that, in which secularity makes its fog. And I think about the prologue to the Gospel of John, you have as in the prologue to the Gospel of John, as you have in 1 John especially, the joining parts of the New Testament are some of the most black and white, good and bad, antichrist, Christ versus antichrist, on and off, binary antithesis, laid in elements of the New Testament. Secularism is sort of a fog. It's not darkness, but there's sort of a bright fog that permits a lot of what we have benefited from and suffered from in our culture. What we have benefited from and suffered from in our culture. And now the fog is burning off. And so things are getting black and white, binary, good and bad, polarized again. But neither of these individuals want that. Jordan has continued to show a reticence to embracing Christianity as such. And fair enough, I'm a Protestant, and in some ways the fog of secularism is a product of this enormous conflict that was the Protestant Reformation, and we're still sorting it out. But Barry Weiss, of course, early in the conversation, she says, I've studied extensively the history of the Jews. She's Jewish. She's also a married lesbian. And she says she's basically derived her, I'll say she's derived her navigational ability from that history. Now again, in secular parlance, you can say, you can talk about morality and history sort of out there, but obviously what she studied is a deeply religious subject, and her gyroscope has been calibrated by that religious history all the way up until the present. So all of those ideas are really at play in this conversation, and it could bear scrutiny to sort of tease them out and work them forward. But I wanted to put that on the map before we would go through elements of this conversation, because if you see that, the other elements of the conversation make more sense. And there's some issues, especially with their systemic racism section, where I want to talk about three concepts that I've been working with. I've been talking about data and narrative, but I want to talk about icons as well in terms of that, the relationship of that. And I think those three ideas are a good way into this question of systemic racism. How should we as a society deal with it? What's going on with our language and political games with respect to these things? Again, the conversation was outstanding, but this, the haunting question of secularity, which is being asked again and again, which is can you actually have a society without a religious underpinning? Society without a religious underpinning. And a lot of people are a little foggy on, and maybe we all are, the fog of secularity. What do we mean by religious there? Because what comes through with Jordan and Barry Weiss and Sam Harris and just about everyone else in Western society is the assumed, a good bit of the inherited assumed morality of Jesus. And that is played out in this realm. And again, Tom Holland's dominion, that's simply assumed and it's unrecognized. And if it's assumed and unrecognized, it sort of has an existence in the cloud, as it were. It's around us. We pick it up from each other. We like it. We want to maintain it, but we don't exactly know how. Because secularity is sort of in some ways a bright fog. It's not darkness. It's not light. It's a bright fog. So let's jump in here at the end and then I'll go to the end and then I'll see what I do. Tell me about, tell me the end of the story. So now you're on Substack. Oh God, there's so much that's happened. We've drawn out a resignation over two hours, but I hope we fit other things that are of interest into it. So now I'm on Substack. I think a lot of the, a lot of heterodox journalists who don't fit in with a tribe are also on Substack and I think it's extreme. Now that comment there that don't fit in with a tribe, everybody needs a tribe. You know, we often talk about tribalism in negative terms. There's a positive access to aspect to tribalism in positive terms and, and because everybody needs a tribe because you can't do it alone. And she's going to talk about how that functions in terms of journalism. One of the interesting pieces, which again, I want to go back through at one, one of the things that, that haunts this talk is the fall of what these two see as the golden age, the twilight of the golden age. And because she's going to give an impassioned, I think a very correct appeal for institutions. And there's a segment a little bit earlier where she says some things and one of you sent me an email and said, she's talking estuary and she is. But there has to be an instantiation and it can't be simply individuals. And in my last videos where I talked about Peterson and the ones with, with David Fuller and Jonathan Roussen, Peterson and individuals, yeah, the weakness of his individualism comes into play here. And so here you have Barry Weiss basically, Substack has sort of become a refugee for people who no longer fit into the, the institutions that they used to call home, but have been purified out of them. Okay. There have been heresy trials and struggle, struggle sessions. And these people have, have been squeezed out. And so she very much wants to see new institutions, but for now it's Substack because one must eat. Extremely interesting. The Fox journalists who interest into it. So now I'm on Substack, like, you know, like I think a lot of the, a lot of heterodox journalists who don't fit in with a tribe are also on Substack. And I think it's extremely interesting. The thing that I think is a challenge. It's like an IDW of journalists. Yeah. I mean, the thing that I think is, is challenging, right. Is it's good to see Peterson's sense of humor back. If you're like a dentist or an accountant or a lawyer, and I meet a lot of these people, they say, I don't trust the New York Times anymore. What do I read? Well, it's a really dissatisfying answer because I'm like, well, you need to subscribe to these 10 Substacks and listen to these five podcasts and follow these 30 people on Twitter. No, like that's not going to work. Okay. Right there. Human beings, tribes, institutions, we need them. I was just thinking about, of course, the Southern Baptist Convention is going on now and with all the press that that's digging up. Institutions are funny things. And what we tend to do is recreate looser institutions when they feel them too constrained. But there's always this, you know, one of the things that I thought about this is of course, Jonathan Verve, John Verveckis opponent processing. There's always this, you know, one of the things that I thought about this is, John Verveckis opponent processing. There's always these dynamics of opponent processing. There's not too much, not too little trying to find the right mix. And so now with, with at least her conceptualization of the goodness of the New York Times being blown apart by the events that she describes throughout this video, she's looking for a new creation. She's looking for a something around which a community can coalesce. Now, one of the videos that I haven't yet treated, but was an outstanding video was Jonathan Peugeot and Rafe Kelly. It's on Rafe Kelly's channel, because I thought they, they really, Rafe Kelly is a terrific conversation partner. Those of you who follow my channel carefully know that because Rafe has sort of embodies, I mean, so Rafe's father, what's his name? Sunbeam. So that gives you a sense of Rafe grew up in sort of a hippie commune, not fundamentalist Christianity somewhere, like some of you are not Roman Catholic and not purely secular, but sort of a hippie commune. And then, you know, took the deep dive into Sam Harris and new atheism and then was sort of, you know, shaken out of that by Jordan Peterson. And so now he's very much in the thick of Vanderkley and Peugeot and Vervecky and what we're trying to figure out here. But Peugeot very clearly, what's part of what's good about that conversation is Rafe is good at getting down to some essentials and really helps Jonathan, I think, speak very well. In order for a community to coalesce, there needs to be something above it that is sufficiently clear so that the people around it can coalesce and sort of Voltron up. All right. And so now we're going to be looking for another Verveckian term, relevance realization. Okay. What exactly is the thing at the heart of this lost world that Barry Weiss and Jordan Peterson are lamenting? Now, again, both Barry Weiss and Jordan Peterson have in their getting kicked out of and in their pushing back against the previous regime, the previous liberal regime, have garnered a whole bunch of conservatives in their wake and conservatives who are appreciative because the enemy of the enemy is your friend. But neither Barry Weiss nor Jordan Peterson are in many ways conservative, but they're conservative now because what they want to do is to preserve this liberal establishment. But that question about liberalism has been going on for a long time. And so you've got elements all along the way. Now we should preserve it here. We should preserve it here. We should preserve it here. And so of course, gay married Barry Weiss wants to preserve it after Oberfeld, the Supreme Court decision. She talks a little bit about that. So you've got all of these trailing conservatives along the way and there are temperamental reasons for that. There are personality reasons for that. And of course, you've got the Jordan many times in the video scopes out her personality type and says, well, you're low in politeness and high in your low and agreeableness, you're low in politeness, but you're high in conscientiousness and you're high in compassion. And so that makes up who you are. And she'll probably if she takes Jordan's personality test, we'll see. But they're sort of working on this. And of course, in time, politically, socio-culturally, as certain clumps of conservatives gain momentum, it'll put brakes on the people who are at the progressive end of things pushing in a certain way. And that's part of what we're seeing. We're seeing critical mass develop. But now what's coming from her is going to be an impassioned zealot's plea, which is fascinating because again, you can only really coalesce the group if. If you don't have something to circle around Jonathan Haidt, if you don't have something to coalesce around, if you don't have something to look up above it and draw you in, you will continue to be a reactive community and you will continue to be in that sense. All of the dynamics will be parasitic. The only identity you will have will be anti-woke. And woke is of course the identity of anti-capitalist or anti-past order or anti-structural or something like that. So you don't want to have a reactive identity. So you're going to need to articulate that thing that you circle around. Now it's important to note that she is not a priest. She's a journalist. And journalists have a particular part to play, but in many ways, towards the end of this, you hear her with a missionary cry. So I am extremely interested in what I've been referring to. Like how do I make a common address for that sensibility? Okay. She's looking for the thing around which her community can coalesce because they're going to need to institutionalize. They're going to need to institutionalize. They're going to need to instantiate in a corporation, in a church. Again, back to, maybe I should just play it. I've got it on my clips channel, which I almost turned everything in this video into a clip. I still am a little torn on what to do with my clips channel, because if I just take clips, YouTube doesn't like that just clip taking anymore. But then I'm making little videos. And of course, once I start talking, little videos become big videos. So I'm still figuring out what to do with my clips channel anyway. So I played this recently, but it bears hearing again, because we might imagine Alastair McGrath sort of sitting back like you did to Brett Weinstein and say, it's almost as if you want to start a new religion. Wanted to start maybe with Tara's point about sort of the durability of this kind of, I'll conflate your two points and say the durability of imminent individualist religion in American life. Right. And the fact. And now this isn't imminentist individual religion. This is, this was a religion that the New York Times used to be a platform to maintain. And I've talked quite a bit in my videos about platforms and about how in many ways the church, the church platform has been deeply disrupted. And that disruption has been going on since the time of the Protestant Reformation. In many ways, the Protestant Reformation was a deep disruption of the church platform. But yet this, this church, this church as this church behavior, this congregationalizing and institutionalizing, I mean, this of course is deep within the Protestant ethos because Protestants then form churches. The fact that you have plenty of, you know, divination and God within spirituality going back to the 18th century. It seems to me that if you look at sort of the historical pattern in American life, you have sort of either surges of that kind of spirituality or particular religious geniuses who manifest it. And then the movements and institutions that they build have historically then been sort of pulled back towards a kind of normative Christian structure or framework to, to use, to use Steve's account. Right. So, you know. Now think again, I brought up Billy Graham for the last three years talking about Jordan Peterson. Billy Graham didn't found a church. Billy Graham surfed on the waves of churches. Christianity today became in a sense, the New York Times of evangelicalism. He had a practice of crusades and in some ways he used churches and churches used him. It was a symbiotic relationship when he came to town. And of course, there are many aspects within Christianity that afforded such a thing. But Billy Graham didn't found a church. We don't have the first church of Billy Graham or Billy Grahamism or Grahamism or any of those things. And that I think shows a fundamental shift in platforms. To take, to take the examples of the two biggest 19th century examples maybe are Christian science, which comes out of new thought in certain ways and Mormonism, which gets its start in the sort of, in the kind of divination, happy world of upstate New York in the early 19th century. And both of those, if you look at them from a sort of how Christian are they perspective at the outset, you can make a case that they're both pretty stark departures. Maybe not getting all the way to something we call paganism or post Christianity, but clearly really stark departures. It's a very, very strong, very in Mormonism's case, you mentioned polyamory as a feature of the contemporary political landscape. Early Mormonism goes all the way to polygamy. And then over the course of the next hundred years, you get to a point where by the time of the 1950s and 1960s, both Christian science and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, while they're still regarded as heretical or dangerous or cultic by some other Christian denominations are I think reasonably seen as connected to a kind of, you know, a kind of Christian tradition. So Christianity has within it this certain auto-correcting feature. And again, this is where Jordan Peterson talking about ideology versus religion is helpful because these ancient religions have deep resources that we are not aware of that sort of, you know, doubt that's point is that they're sort of pulled, you know, Christian science, Seventh-day Adventists, you know, 50 years ago were, you know, were much more of a sect increasingly Seventh-day Adventists are just sort of another evangelical church that meets on a funny day of the week. Okay. Mormons, you know, conversations with Christian leaders, Christian reformed philosopher, Richard Mao, Jehovah's Witnesses. There's this, you know, sometimes Jehovah's Witnesses would come to my door. And if I had a little time and I was feeling a little trollish would sort of just sit down and act like a normal guy and then start asking a few peculiar questions about their personal ideas around issues such as the Trinity. Now I wouldn't say the word Trinity because that would, I would be exposed for what I was doing, but ask some more questions about, you know, the resurrection and Jesus and the life of the age to come and 144,000 and, you know, because I knew these things and in some ways I was a little better prepared than the foot troops that they deployed to the door. And, you know, I did this in my own way, not to try to flip them or expose them or belittle them, but I want to know how much the foot soldier of the Jehovah's Witness is actually up on the finer distinctions of their religious system. But then again, there's plenty of sloppiness. I mean, I've spoken before about the Gnosticism in American evangelicalism. I think dispensationalism has taken many churches in a poor direction. So, but again, back to the institutions, of course, Jordan Green, is it Green Hall or Green or Hall, Jordan Hall, you know, talks about Blue Church and in many ways New York Times is the platform of the Blue Church. And at one point Barry Weiss talks about the fact that there's this purifying element to it and she decries, she decries the fact that the New York Times in many ways sort of analogous to Fox News or Donald Trump or, you know, AOC. You know, what's happening is that everyone has to appeal to their base. And the easiest way to appeal to your base is to use fear, to antagonize, to draw bright lines, to polarize. And so part of what Barry Weiss is lamenting is really the lost consistent haze of bright secularity. In American life, and there's clearly an aspiration, at least among parts of the leadership of those, of those, what become those churches to move in that direction. And what's that hasn't, it seems to me one thing that's been different since the 60s and 70s, right, is that that hasn't happened to the same degree, right. So we've gone through the sort of Mary Ann Williamson presidential campaign, which unfortunately has not won enough support to merit the fascination that I've applied to it. But I feel like a 19th century version of Mary Ann Williamson would have started a church, right. 19th century version of Mary Williamson would have started a church. What does Barry Weiss want to start? Blue Church 1.0 instead of present New York Times being Blue Church 2.0. So she's not tinkering with platform, but this is sort of what we're after here. That independent minded spirit that, you know, is not like independent minded spirit. Is there really any such thing? Alan Jacobs wrote a book about thinking. And we always admonish people to think for themselves. That's sort of the proselytizers cry, because what I'd really like for you to do is to think like me. But now she pushes back and rightly so there's a great segment in this where both she and Peterson agree that in many ways what the what the individual with authority, and now there's another rebel wisdom video that I watched that I want to bring in in some ways when I treat that segment of their video. And that's why this is I thought about just sitting down and muscling my way through this entire video to do a commentary on the whole thing. But there's so many other pieces I want to bring in because this video touches on so many of the issues that are currently at play. Do we ever really think for ourselves? But now the good mentor, let's say, and I thought Weiss and Peterson were dead on right in this, the good mentor encourages even the heterodox thoughts of the mentee, because the good mentor understands that this is a part of the developmental process. And I've talked quite a bit in my videos about how deconstruction isn't always a bad thing. There's differentiation in terms of childhood development. It's a necessary stage of, you know, if you want to find true zealots, look at sixth grade, fifth and sixth graders, they're usually just true zealots. And as Joey from the Discord server and from the local meetup notes that in some ways, it's sort of this. So many of the present revolutionaries in the social sphere are actually deeply conservative because all they're doing is is mimicking boomer boomer rebellion. It's like, is that conservative? If Steve Jobs stands on stage and says, no dogma. And then you say, I accept no dogma. To what degree are you just bought into the dogmatism of Steve Jobs? And we're sort of in those inversions right now. And of course, Peugeot talks about those in good ways that we're in these strange loops right now. And, you know, Akira the Don had this great line of how much more naked can Madonna get, you know, at some point the hot girl is the one who has clothes on. And the real revolutionary, the real radical figures out how to stay married and faithful to their spouse and not get divorced and live out till death do us part. That's the real radical. You say, well, wait a minute, that's a traditionalist. Well, it's that circular inversion we have going here. So Barry Weiss is she's looking for the essence around which she can coalesce the sacred community. That's what she's looking for. And, you know, my conversation with Cale Zeldin and Brett Sockel where they were talking about how, you know, when John Paul II became pope and then Benedict after a whole bunch of them thought, you know, in some ways, this is the end of history. Our church will always stay with our present regime in it. And the same letter that I read on one of my previous videos, Aaron Sorkin in Vanity Fair writing a letter to his daughter, I'm sorry, Trump was elected. I promise this will never happen again because it's just going to be just continual progress out into the eschaton. It's the end of history, except for this bump that was Trump and Brexit. Really? Read much history? And so in some ways, Barry Weiss and Jordan Peterson want to let's take a step back and freeze it right here. Is that really what Barry Weiss wants to do? Is that really what Jordan wants to do? But they're saying, no, it's we've taken a turn and we've gone so we've got to go back to the fork. And, you know, we always have that desire. You know, Orthodox, you know, it's before you started doing Christianity and Latin that messed everything up and Augustine or it's before, you know, Martin Luther and Zwingli and Jan Hus. If all of those had never been, then, you know, the Middle Ages would have continued. And it's like, well, I'm certainly not saying progress, progress, you know, everything that comes next is progress by no means. There's corruption and decay. There's always those things too. But how can we know the good? And so in some ways, Jordan Peterson and Barry Weiss are saying, we've known the good and we're losing it. And fair enough. And, you know, as part of what Jonathan Roussen said to David Fuller, I mean, part of the beauty of Peterson's message has been, hey, look, the really good things that we enjoy now are fragile. And we're going down a dangerous path. You know, it's that way that Jordan Peterson and Rod Dreher have a lot in common. And Barry Weiss here is sounding the alarm. She's becoming a religious zealot here. But you then have to say, well, what exactly is the religion? Can you be a little more clear on that? Because secularity is sort of an intentional fog. It's a bright fog. And it's a useful fog. But it really is sort of a fog. And maybe human beings sort of need fog because maybe we, because our ways are dark, says the prologue to the Gospel of John. Like centrist in the sense of like just finding the middle path, but is able to see truth on, but is able to separate, let's say, identity from ideas. Okay, so there's clearly that idea right there. Okay. Identity from ideas. But, you know, you don't have to poke too much at either of those because identity has ideas deep inside of them already. And so that's good. And again, no, we're not going to get, my demands aren't going to be for absolute purity or clarity here because I can't do it either. Now, obviously, as a confessing Christian, I have perhaps some more foundations I can point to. But, and again, as maybe right now, that's a good thing. You know, we're always sort of dead reckoning, rough drafting, trying to, you know, find our way forward. And that's, it's that to be human. But is that going to be enough? And is centrist in the sense of like just finding the middle path, but is able to see truth on, but is able to see truth on, but is able See, she don't want to go there. She understands the problems and, you know, hey, I'm not trying to be a troll here or anything like that. It's really hard. I mean, I've got hundreds of hours of video of me doing this stuff because it's really hard, but let's understand exactly what's happening here in this video because they're, they're wrestling with the religious question. They really are able to separate, let's say identity from ideas and is able to say, yeah, that person maybe sucks on this thing, but they're really right about that. So what is it, what is it down in there where we recognize the right and the wrong? And again, both of them know, and they're exactly right. The reason, the reason you can't just have, oh, the answer is Barry Weiss, Substack, or Barry Weiss as a prophet, or, or the church of Barry Weiss, just like the church of, of Williamson. No, we're not going to do that. And she herself is saying, no, I need a community around me because, and as just, you know, we need to be able to test, we need to find each other. We need to be able to test these ideas. And Peterson is right in that, in talking at them out loud and processing that and all of this are, all of these are the necessary things we must do. Absolutely. And again, you know, I've studied what she says, I've studied Jewish history. Okay. That's sort of looking at the beam. CS Lewis's meditations from a, from a, from a tool shed. She's looking through a beam, but it's a little foggy. That's what I'm interested in building. And so the way that started off for me, and I'm proud of it is, you know, commissioning op-eds and columns and reported pieces from voices that, you know, don't have the platform that I think that they should. Okay. But that, that I think that they should, I mean, there's that, there's that little thing inside that, that we don't know what to call. Of course, religious people are always paying attention to that little thing. But now if you're sort of in the, the bright fog of secularism, it's my little internal compass. It's my little gyroscope. It's my muse. It's my, it's what, what is it? And trying to elevate them to my readers, but it's going to be, you know, my podcast, podcast network. And ultimately I hope like a whole ecosystem of journalism and storytelling. That's what I'm interested in building. And so. Storytelling. Why? No, again, narrative and storytelling is sort of the foundation of, it's about certainly the foundation of the Judeo-Christian worldview. I have tens of thousands of subscribers and that's been fantastic and I'm incredibly grateful to it, but for me, this is just the beginning. And I, I really, Ambition. Really, really like in the end of the day, the reason that I left the New York Times, Jordan is that, you know, yes, cause I was being bullied. Yes. Cause I couldn't do my job, both true things, but ultimately it's because I really believe that the fight for. Here it comes. Liberalism. And I don't mean that in the partisan sense, but. What words can I use to explain the desire of my heart, the center of my life, the thing I'm going to live for, the thing I'm willing to hill, I'm willing to die on. I mean, the kind of values we've been describing during this conversation that like, that is more important than any amount of popularity, that any amount of accolades on Twitter, then than anything else. Bingo. Now we've got a religion. Well, not really. We don't really have a religion. We have a missionary. We have a, we have a heart that's beating a vision for something. And she's, she's willing to die on that Hill and we have a zealot. We have, are we going to put up a church? How are we going to go about this? No, we're going to, we're going to have podcasts and we're going to have print and we're going to have text online and we're going to have, Oh, aren't we just all sort of building a new church, but not a church because is it a church? Isn't it a church? What are we doing? It's deeply religious. Than anything else. And so I had to leave the, the institution in order to fight for, for liberalism. And that I see as like the, like the mission of my life, I guess you could say. Yeah, the catastrophe of our times. Yeah. But I mean, especially for someone who's older like me, you know, I mean, I had a dream a while back. I, I wandered into the backyard of a cabin that I was staying at and there was a dying lion by a fire pit at the boundary of this, of this cabin's property and my aunt who, who, who's an actual dying lion, literal internet. Oh, modernity. Oh, modernity. We must do this to stories. Shouldn't we? This is in a dream. Oh, in a dream, in a dream. Yeah. Sorry. Yeah. Oh, okay. We're not doing religion. However, just, you're just storytelling. So, so my aunt called to me to warn me about the presence of this lion and I looked at it and it was in rough shape. It was mangy and ill camped and not good, but still, you know, a lion and a lion and powerful. And then I wandered around to the left side of the house and interestingly enough, and there was a whole number of them, tigers, lions, all these predatory beasts, all in terrible shape and all hungry and willing to attack. And I had to speak in order to keep them at bay. And I woke up and I thought, well, Jesus, that's pretty bloody obvious. I know what that dream means. I mean, there's all these dying lions, the New York Times. You don't need to be a psychologist to interpret that dream. That dream interprets itself. Well, also because he spoke it here in this context. The legacy media is the institutions. I'm not happy to see their demise. No, it's really awful. I mean, they were stellar. And to hear someone like John Meade Park talk about Columbia in that way. It's so awful. And to see what happened with you at the New York Times. It's the end of an age. Now, anybody who reads Oh, Mary's song and the gospel of Luke, this is the way of the world. This is the age of decay. All these things fall. And so then you look for the thing that endures even after the Babylonians destroy the temple and the next temple doesn't measure up. And then the Romans destroy that one. And the church is always sort of on the precipice, but it's the thing that you can't kill. Well, isn't that the definition of a God? It's like, you know, one to one hand, the story as well, you know, you pursued your creative spirit and you established yourself independently and isn't that wonderful, but that loss that you described of the institution that has the capacity to apprentice and train, that's cataclysmic. I will say that I spent months, I could kind of cry thinking about it mourning that. Like it is catastrophic, but there are things in history that have been more catastrophic. And that's the kind of perspective that I'm trying to keep because that's a good perspective. If I spent all day looking at the wreckage and more than just looking at the wreckage, trying desperately to try and like shore up something that is so clearly rotten, I would spend my life in grief. And I just believe so strongly that, not believe, I see. We really do it using religious words now. That people believe so strongly that, not believe, I see that people have had to build things in way, way, way more trying and difficult circumstances than this. And so if they could build things from true wreckage, believe me, we can rebuild new institutions. We can. And that's what I'm going to do. And I think that- Is she still a journalist? Is the truth, I mean, that's when we get into the conversation, the whole thing, but you know, again, part of the problem about doing a video here at the end of it is it's kind of like, all right, I treated that video onto the next one because there's so many good videos to talk about. There's Glenn Lowry talking to Cornell West, the secretary, the bulletin secretary of my church is a member of two churches. And so she's also a member of the Church of Cornell West's mother. And she just passed away. And so I get all that Cornell West from Sacramento. So I've got all those ties in there and Glenn Lowry talking about his faith and Jonathan Peugeot and Rafe Kelly. And I mean, on and on and on, there's so many good things, but this is religion. I mean, it's going to start a church? No. Going to start a platform? Yeah. Why? Well, do these platforms, well, what exactly will be at the center of this new platform that you want to create? That's what everyone that comes to me, you know, complaining about what's going on in their kid's school or what's going on in their company. Sometimes people that are running the company is coming. Now pay attention. Like I have this often and I probably wouldn't have noticed this if I didn't have this. So I've got my lens right here. I've got my camera right here. I've got my computer screen right here where I'm watching them. And then I've got the little, sometimes when I try to talk to you, well, I've got the little camera viewfinder flipped up here on my Sony. It kind of flips up. And I notice often if I, on the very rare occasions that I actually looked again at one of these videos, see now I know I'm looking straight at you. Now I'm looking at the viewfinder, which has flipped up and now I'm looking at the screen. And of course we human beings are very sensitive about what we look at and when we look at them. Now pay attention in this part of the video when she looks right into the lens and when she's looking right at either Jordan or herself on the zoom or the Skype call, because this is when she's starting to preach. Coming to me, everyone that comes to me. Of course, there's up to the, you're thinking, there's all the eye movement stuff. Just pay attention when she looks straight at the camera, when she really wants to get the message to you, because she and Peterson talk in this video too about, and when you do a conversation like this, it's in public, it's not exactly what you'd say in private and that's exactly appropriate. And we see that in my channel too, but just pay attention here. You know, complaining about what's going on in their kids school or what's going on in their company. Sometimes people that are running the company is coming to me complaining about what's happening in their own company that they have control over. Like enough, enough. Like straight into the camera. Enough, enough. Just get excited watching religions get birthed. No more complaining quietly. No more anonymous emails. Like the time is now to out yourself as someone that is opposed to this. Out yourself. That is alarmed about it. And then spend all of your energy and money and time banding together with people to build new things. She's a preacher. That's what she's doing. I wish there was another option because that sounds exhausting. I realized, but I just don't think there's another option. And this is in some ways where you get to the bright fog of secularism because as a pastor in churches, this is what we do as preachers. And it's on the line right now. The time is now. Billy Graham, the music swells. The moment of decision is now come to the front and she's saying basically, you know, y'all living your life out there in the, in the fog. It's time to get clear and to come here and to stand up and to, and hey, you know, hey, I, I agree with what she's saying. I think people should. I think this moment is a moment of cowardice among many people. There are real reasons that again, they talk about this in this video and Jordan speaks about this very well. There's real reasons why people don't want to stand up and say what they think. So do it, stand up and say what you think, but pay attention. What is this altar that you're calling me to now again in this fog, generally speaking, I'm pretty much in agreement with these guys. You know, when I was in, I grew up right outside of New York city and, you know, we had this little newspaper in Patterson, but I would regularly get and read the New York Times. I was a news junkie as a kid. We had, I didn't have the best grades in my high school class, but then we had this, had this little, I don't know where it came from. There's this quiz and it came around and it was basically a current events quiz. And I smoked the class. I smoked the, my entire, it's not a big graduating class, only about a hundred kids, but I smoked them all. Why? I was a news junkie. All I did was listen to the news. Other people are listening to music. I listen to news. I listened to winds, you know, 10 10 a.m. If you've got 20 minutes, we'll give you the world. I listened to that over and over and over and over and over again. I knew the news. I read the New York Times. This is, this is the, this, these are the people I grew up with. And so there's a huge amount of commonality between me and them. Absolutely. But I am also a preacher and I know religion when I see it. And I understand an altar call when I hear it. And this is one three years ago, if you had asked me, I would have suggested something different. I really believe that a lot of these institutions can be saved. And by the way, some of them, and to the extent to which there are ones that can be saved and shored up, they should be because it's really, really, really, really, really hard to build new things. Really hard. It's so easy to tear things down. Watch your eyes through these portions. But that's the conclusion that I've come to. And I think the more people that can, yes, like, let's grieve the, let's grieve the 20th century institutions that are crumbling. Let's understand that they are something that they might have the same name, but they're no longer what they used to be. And then let's get to work building the things that we know we need to build that are necessary for upholding the civilization that we talked about earlier. That's what I think the task is. And now you expect music and everybody to stand up and sing a song together. What are you going to sing? Because, you know, when I talk to conservatives about this stuff, there's a fair amount of bitterness out there because they would say, hey, you know what? Okay. So all this woke stuff came about in like 2013. This was one, one very sharp member of our local meetup said about Brett Weinstein, about a number of these people. You trained your own murderers. And that's, I think, something that sort of, see IDW, I don't really think about Ben Shapiro in the IDW. He's just a conservative. When I think about IDW, I think about these refugees and substack. And then I include myself in there. Again, grew up reading the New York Times, Dave Rubin, Brett and Eric Weinstein. These are Jordan Peterson. These are people that traditionally were on the left, probably moderate left, who now as the left kept moving out, they're just sort of like, whoa, wait a minute. I always considered myself a progressive and a liberal. And now suddenly I'm getting yelled at as a conservative. And that's because everybody way to the left of me is like, you over there beyond the pale. It's like, well, it's only beyond the pale because you walked so far that way. There's a lot of people in America that feel that. And that's part of the reason at one place in this video, she talks about those who are optimistic. And that's sort of where I'm at. I think there's a lot of cowardice and her appeal that people should stand up and speak their mind. I think that's very true. And I think that is needed to sort of bring a degree of rationality. Dare I use that word into this conversation? Yet the deep conservatives have a point. And the sort of IDW people who are, you know, now the new conservatives should listen to that point and say, hmm, is there, is there in that liberalism a sufficient foundation to reestablish new institutions or was the blue church always sort of the thinning edge of the bright fog of secularity? I think that's a really important question to come to terms with. And it's a terrifying question. In other words, there's no going back. I mean, Barry Weiss could say right after we approved gay marriage, there's the line. And I'm not interested in undoing the legality of gay marriage in America, even though I've got some ideas about it that she might not like. But that's because the thing is, if you're going to found a religion, you have to found it on something you can't just otherwise it gets decadent. Otherwise it gets otherwise. You're just, you're just the latest iteration. You're the new, you're the new fund, you know, you're the, you're the new increasingly fundamentalist. You know, you keep, if all you want to do is reestablish what has been lost and let's say, say 2013 was the end of history, you're not going to survive then either, especially without a church, a community, because religious people actually know how to maintain a community against other communities. And all of these that are pretty much just political figures without really the practices and the communities of real religion, they're not going to make it. And they talk about that in here as well. I mean, there's a, there's a brief moment where Jordan Peterson says, well, you know, it's basically the really religious people that they might be the only ones to survive this stuff. Yeah, I think that's right. Thank you very much for talking with me today. Thank you, Jordan. There's, there's the doxology, right? So yeah, yeah. Will I treat this video more? We'll see. That stuff on systemic racism, I want to get into this stuff on religion. I want to get into, but, but what I just laid out right here, I think is the core of this conversation that, that these two share, these two share an ideology, but they don't have all of the elements beneath that religions have and strive from. And so in a, in a culture war like this, they lose. And I think this is part of the reason many in the thinning fog of secularity head towards the sun. And they're losing some fogginess. Now, again, I got to be careful with this metaphor because I don't know how much any of us can stand direct sunlight because our deeds are evil. Prologue of the gospel of John. I'm a Calvinist, you know, I believe we've, when Jesus says, though you are evil, you still know how to give good gifts to your children. Calvinists at the beginning of that say, because you are evil. It's like, yeah, we are. It's true. We need to be remade. We need to be remade from the top down. We need to be remade. And so that's why I'm a preacher of a religion that is a religion. And but yeah, that's the core of this. And I guess I wanted to get that out first before I deconstruct any other piece of this. So maybe that's it for this video.