https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Knio1vbzryc

 Good morning, Internet. It is Friday, 11 a.m. California time. This is Rick and I in the Living Stones World Ministry Center. And we are streaming. We are in the PVK Q&A recorded voice room. And the bridges of meaning faithful are assembling. I don't have a backlog of questions this week, so I don't know what we'll do. We might jump into impromptu live stream. If for the second hour, if we burn through the questions, because I already saw some questions I'm not going to answer. So, yeah, good morning and welcome. I'm happy to be here, Rick. I'm happy that Rick's here. If you look very carefully on the live stream on YouTube, you'll see that he put the Discord behind the questions and there's smoke. So Rick is the one who gives you all of those good things. If it were me, well, you can see on the impromptu live streams what you get if it were just me. It'd be boring. But Rick, yeah, see there, he moved it. So now you can see it. And pretty cool, pretty cool. All right. But enough of the pleasantries. I guess we'll do the Q&A and then we'll maybe get into some live conversation about, we'll see if Nate shows up at some point so we can talk about why he thinks I'm being mean to Sam Harris and why others think I'm not being mean enough. But that's why you have public figures. So you can sort of talk about people without, I mean, without too much. That itself is a very interesting, interesting reality. Let's jump in. Christian Golden from Pine Bush, New York, has the first question this week. As a pastor slash shepherd, you, one, guard your flock from spiritual ideological parasites brought in by six, so to speak, newcomers. Yeah, that's a good point. While two, extending, facilitating the love of Christ to those same newcomers. How do you go about achieving one without sacrificing, neglecting the other? Well, we're all carrying parasites. And the whole trick about deworming is to kill the parasite without excessively harming the host. And so I like the way that you frame this question. It's pretty cool. And so a lot of this is the basic work of the church. So especially in Protestantism, that involves preaching and teaching. It involves pastoral care conversation. It involves body life. And it's usually in the process of all of these that and when I say body life, I mean. Small group Bible studies, I mean, volunteer projects, I mean, coffee after church, all of the kind of stuff that church people get into when they do things together. And generally speaking, what arises out of those situations is conflict. Conflict inevitably rises in any community. And it's in the setting of conflict that you can actually begin to address the parasites that we all carry. And that's sort of what pastoral care and theology and church life is all about, addressing, addressing those parasites, hopefully not only leading to the greater health of the body entire, but also the greater health, spiritual health, even physical health of the individuals within the body. And so it's it's all about sort of patient listening, talking, nudging. You very quickly begin to realize that. Some things in us don't aren't resolved in one conversation. It takes time and. People live in the midst of lots of different ideas. We are. It's ironic that in the secular age of the Internet. People are as bombarded with spiritual parasites like never before. It's almost like a denial of service attack on the on the servers of our minds. And so in a church, you you just you get into the body life and you listen to people talk and hopefully people engage. And the more they engage, the more you actually there's lots of different metaphors that you could use for this. But the more you begin to bind together and to love one another and to work through all of those kinds of issues. So. They go about achieving one without neglecting that they both happen at the same time. It's it's they're both part of the continual process of, as the apostle Paul says, the renewal of our minds. So that's that's kind of normal, normal church life. Father Big Mac, Eric, how do you understand the difference between a minister and a priest? Are there any priests in the CRC ministers? Some. That's a really good question. And the fact that I say it enough. Should. Mean that I'm better prepared for this question than I am. Ministers, OK, I'll go back to the Heideberg Catechism. We are we are there are three offices that Christ serves and we serve. Prophet, priest and king and ministers serve. Those offices, there is a priestly aspect to my ministerial duty. There is a kingly aspect and there is a prophetic aspect. Now, I wouldn't say that these are. I'd leave it to you to decide whether Roman Catholics. Have those same offices within the title of priest. Part of part of why I think. The reformers, because obviously the transition from priest to. Minister is a function of the Protestant Reformation. There's definitely a secular rising aspect of this. There's definitely sort of a demythologizing aspect to the name difference. In some ways. Ministers are the fact that my title is a minister of the word. I think is a little smaller than priest. Priest is very much an intermediary, which is why you often call priests father, because in some ways the priest stands in. Now, if you look at the. The theology behind ordination in the Christian reform church. There certainly is that priestly aspect, but the church has decided to not forefront that priestly aspect. There's also in reformational theology and anxiety about. Language of temples and priests that very much are sort of from the old world. There's a big anxiety in the reformation about the. Mass as a. As a sacrifice, so again in a Protestant, generally speaking, even though people still use this language in Protestant churches, plenty. People will regularly look at the front of a Protestant church and talk about the altar. But if you look at altar, temple, priest, all of that language is obviously a. Recapitulation of the kind of machinery that Protestants like to emphasize was accomplished in Christ. And so Protestantism definitely psychologizes. And in a lot of ways. There's a there's definitely a Gnostic tendency to Protestantism. And so it tends to psychologize all of that. And so the movement away from priest to minister is all part of that. I suspect there's also some some statism. In the minister language, for example, if you go up to Canada. They have MPs, their ministers of parliament. We don't call in the United States our elected officials ministers. So these different words conjure up different worlds. And so when it gets when you get into something like women in office, which is where I often point to this difference. There's very much something different between a priest and a priestess. And the classic world. And so when C.S. Lewis wrote his essay on priestesses, which is even in the 1940s, they were discussing the ordination of women as Anglican priests. And, you know, Anglicanism is always sort of this midway point in some ways between. Catholicism and Protestantism, I probably just got in trouble with Anselman. So. I'm trying to pull up my. Come on. Copy to clipboard, no, I don't want to copy to clipboard, I want to see it. View on YouTube. There we go. So I can see the chat room. So when I get in trouble with Anselman, he'll. I'll know it. So those are some of the things. But, you know, you know, Eric, this actually this actually might be a cool. You and I have never really done a conversation. Maybe we should do on one of these days. And this would be a good topic. Now, again, there's so much. People will sometimes call me father. Even Christian reform people will talk about the altar as the front of the church. Oh, thank you, Anna. Thank you very much for the super chat. Giving giving Rick his exercise. So there's tons there and I have I haven't really explored it. So I don't know, Father Eric, if if you've got any thoughts, I see that you're in the chat room. So. Yeah, I was really interested. So when I was studying Thomas Aquinas on ordination, I was surprised to learn that his first identity of a priest was as a mediator and that sacrifice was a part of mediation. And I had always I'd heard, you know, that the identity of the priest was to offer sacrifice kind of prior to that reliable sources. And there's a potential for a really interesting conversation there. Yeah, the you know, if you look at the Heideberg Catechism, and especially if you look at some of the drama around certain questions and answers, usually that involve the Roman Catholic mass, there's been a pretty there's been a pretty active conversation between Reformationists and the Catholic Church. Pretty active conversation between Reformed and Catholic theologians with the question as to to what degree did Protestants straw man, the Roman straw man, the Roman Catholics with respect to the sacrificial nature of the mass. And the Christian Forum Church in recent years, much to the chagrin of some of the Hispanics who grew up in Latin America have has really backed off and said, you know, when we talk to Roman Catholic theologians, you know, they're not violating the spirit of what you find in the Book of Hebrews, that the the Roman Catholic mass is yet another sacrifice when in the Christian Reformed Church, you know, the the symbolic connections between the Lord's Supper, as it's usually called in the Christian Reformed Church, and, you know, obviously the Passover and the sacrifice that's referred to in Exodus as the Passover. I mean, all of those lines run together. And the dominant atonement theory in the Christian Reformed Church has tended to be penal substitutionary atonement that you can find in the Heideberg Catechism. It's clearly a sacrificial symbology. So there's just been a lot of repairing bridges between the Catholics and certain segments of the Reformed community, which I celebrate. But I think the selection of these words is not incidental. And I do think that the turning away from priest and the turning towards minister has everything to do with the anxiety of Protestants about idolatry. And that gets into a lot of the issues we talk about in this little corner of the Internet in terms of symbolism. And I was probably unwisely getting into a little bit of back and forth in a particular listserv. And someone basically mentioned, you know, the current moral panic about Christian nationalism, which I look at and say, yeah, it's usually Christian imperialists. This gets into the next question. It's usually Christian imperialists that complain against about Christian nationalists. But the Protestant move has been to in some ways. Cover and even sublimate all the symbolism. Which and so, you know, in some ways, bringing crosses and specifically Christian symbolism out into the Capitol Mall. To wage political battles is in some ways very non-Protestant. You know, I look at the Nigerian Anglicans that worship at our facility here and, you know, they've got the vestments and the pageantry and the crosses and, you know, they're all they're down for the symbols. So there's a lot going on here. So, yeah, that's something that that probably have to think more about. And, you know, it gets into Max of Meaning's question. Is Uncle Sam a Christian? Yeah. I don't know. I don't know how to divorce American history from. He's not only a Christian, he's a Protestant. The. This is part of what's behind the current. Turbulence in American culture is that. Even though Catholics have done extraordinarily well in North America, they usually do so by in some ways, sort of taking on. Aspects of, of the Protestant world and how the Orthodox are going to come into this mix. It's, it's, it's really deep and interesting stuff. So when the Biden administration, quickly removes the American military from Afghanistan and the American left has their own moment of moral panic over what will happen to women's issues in Afghanistan. Well, that's just, that's just the manifestation of American Protestantism, American Christian imperialism. I mean, and, and so then when I find certain. Christians who in very much, very many ways have a great deal of in common with me, just burning up the pixels, talking about dread Christian nationalism. It's like, well, what game are you playing? Well, we're going to, we're going to make sure our Christianity is totally covered up. And America has been playing that game forever. So yeah, uncle Sam is not only a Christian, he's a Protestant. Anybody else want to weigh in on that? Yeah. I think that's a great question. I think that's a great question. I think that's a great question. And he's a Protestant. Anybody else want to weigh in on that? I mean, was it, was it Jonathan height who, who couched the difference between the political sides as, as, as globalist versus nationalists, right? Or, I mean, the, the same parallel, you know, between urban and rural and, you know, that's, you can, you can cut the cheese or you can slice it up, you know, in a number of different ways. But, but I, I, I do think there's, there is the sense in which, um, you know, the people who are, who are so concerned about nationalism are in some sense globalists and not necessarily in a good way, but, but they, they pretend like there's as a, uh, you know, of course, right. You know, there's this is good and right. Yeah. You know, all the nationalists are horrible. Yeah. And I kind of want to, I don't know if I'm going to respond to this person on this list serve, but partly because I don't know how much of a back and forth I want to get into. I'm not sure. I'm not sure it's worth my time, but this, this is, this is within my own denomination and within my own sub tribe of my own denomination. And I, you know, I've, I'm such an, I'm so IDW ish in this sphere. Because, you know, I'm like Russell brand, you know, I'm a right winger now. And I know many of you will say, no, you're not anywhere near right wing enough. And, you know, I'm, I take no offense at that, but okay. You're afraid of Christian nationalism. Please tell me what game you're playing. Well, we're just doing what's right. Oh, okay. There's no religion in that. And, and these are, these are people that were brought up on the same, in the same tradition I was with Christian presuppositionalism and all of life is religious and every square inch, all of this Kyperianism and then Christian nationalists and it's like, you're just Christian, you're just Christian imperialists. That's what, that's who you are. That's what, that's who you are. But to say, if I were to tell them that they're imperialist, it'd be, you know, I'm not an imperialist. Well, what game are you playing when you want to export your, your values to Africa and Asia and all of the places that, that are resisting all of the different ways that you set up the world. You, you, you clearly think your way of life is better. And you're, you still have sort of the, you know, it's, it's the newer version of the white man's burden and you're going to bring enlightenment to the world. And if you need troops to sort of enforce it or protect it, you're willing to do so at the bloodshed of your enemies. That's empire. And Christianity is, I mean, the Christian conversation with respect to empire is, is deeply nuanced because on one hand, Jesus embraces the term son of man, which from Daniel seven is clearly an imperial term, but Jesus at the same time does not embrace the power of the sword. So I, I, when I, I, I watch, I watch these, I watch this intramural debate and American evangelicalism and I just kind of shake my head and I'm not sure exactly if I want to get into it or not, or how much I want to say, but I just get, I just get disgusted by it because I, I, I'd be less disgusted. I'm disgusted with my own tribe and I think they should do better, but I think we just get lazy and caught up in the enthusiasm and we stop thinking and we stop caring and we stop loving. So yeah, uncle Sam is a Protestant. Is the purpose of memories for hope? I often hear people say that memory is so we don't repeat the past, but could be more so for a future day to, to forgive the past. And what about good memories of lost loved ones? Memories we can actually want to resist revisit. They almost feel like grief and maybe they are, but I can't help, but hope that good memories are a small taste of a future dream beyond. What are your thoughts on this? Well, the memories serve lots of different functions and they're not simply in sort of a modernist frame photographs of the past. In fact, when I look at people who talk about trauma and study it, the, the memories that are photographs seem to be traumatic unhealthy ones and living memory seems to be supple and flexible in a healthy way. Miroslav Wolf wrote a very interesting book, exclusion and embrace in which he gets into the question of whether in Christian eschatology, the redeemed can enjoy salvation if they have knowledge of the damned. Now, again, I know, well, if there are no dam, then yada, yada, yada. The question about heaven and hell has everything to do with, is there loss? And maybe if you're a universalist delay in, in the final redeeming work of God through Christ. Listen to Peugeot's conversation with Nathan Jacobs yesterday. Fascinating. Wish I had gone two or three times as long. Nathan's Nathan's an interesting, interesting guys. He's tremendously knowledgeable. He's well versed. You know, I, I appreciate him partly because he got his PhD at my, at the theological seminary of my denomination. So he's obviously familiar with my subculture and with the language of my tradition, even though he went to orthodox. So I always, I always benefit from listening to him. Memory is. Memory is how we live through time. If you, I work now with a number of seniors. A number of seniors and homeless people who have lost the capacity for memory. And it's a real disability. Now, one of the things that you immediately see is there are lots of different kinds of memories. The people that I see struggling with memory, they haven't forgotten who I am, at least not yet. They still can function in many ways, but they don't seem to be able to. Create new memories. They remember what happened years ago, but they don't remember what happened days ago or hours ago. So, so memory clearly has a function of helping us live through time. Part of what's interesting about memory is that it is more like narrative. That the past, the past can be changed. And again, one of my favorite examples of that comes from the book of Genesis, where Joseph says to his brothers, you meant it for evil, but God meant it for good. In a way, Joseph had redeemed those painful memories. The, the providence and sovereignty of God. People, memory, you know, I love, it's very interesting when Jordan Peterson talks about the fact that when we look around what we're in society, we're in some ways looking at our cartoon visions of our memories. It's very interesting if you pay close attention to what you're seeing and perceiving, how much you regularly miss. We see what we anticipate seeing, and it's only when something grabs our attention that we can see what we're seeing. When something grabs our attention, that we see something else. A lot of people in terms of how they are able to relate to one another, do so on the basis of memory. Who you are to me has everything to do with my perception of our history of interaction, or perhaps the reputation that was given to me before you and I had any person to person interaction. So certainly memory is, is to help us navigate through time and through change. And that then is, gives it the possibility of being a tool of redemption and of healing. I find that in conflict, so I've, this morning I was reading CS Lewis's collective sayings of George McDonald. There's some powerful stuff in there. My goodness. And one of the early ones, he said some really powerful things about forgiveness. So often when I look at people who have deeply tragic relationships with one another, a huge amount of that is an inability to forgive. That's especially true in marital relations and familial relations. So much is lost in this world because we can't forgive. And so I think good memories of the past are a good memory. I think good memories. And then I would also point to, it was interesting that Peugeot, in Peugeot's conversation with Nathan Jacobs, he brought up Clay Rutledge and I think Clay Rutledge has done a lot of important work in this space and Clay Rutledge's conversation with Jordan Peterson about nostalgia was quite formative for me. Because nostalgia often gets a bad rap. And I think Rutledge helped redeem it by showing how absolutely essential it is for building community, for constructing a shared story. And even though it was, it was Rick, Rick, Rick introduces me to all kinds of things. He was showing me Dan Dan, the fireman this morning and motorcycle safety. Rick confessed to me that he spends more time on Dan Dan, the fireman's Discord server than the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. So I don't know if, I don't know if Rick needs Bridges of Meaning discipline. I don't know. But he, Rick was, Rick introduces a lot of South Park to me. So the member berries. And I think it's just, they're just devilish, devilishly clever. Those people over at South Park. I'll have this with cousins, let's say. I'll get together with some of my cousins and we just sit there and we rehearse old stories and I'm sure we're shaping the stories as we tell them. You cannot, all storytelling is shaping. But part of what we're doing when we're eating our member berries together is it's sort of like group dinner, group dinner, group dinner, group dinner, group dinner. And part of what we're doing when we're eating our members berries together is it's sort of like grooming or just strengthening our bonds. And, you know, with the death of my father and the death of my sister over the last decade, when I get together with family, a lot of memories sharing, laughing, that just strengthens the bonds and even, even things that were frustrating in the moment are somehow redeemed with laughter and a looking back at ourselves with a degree of grace and humor. So I think memory serves all that and a whole lot more. And any, any comments from the, uh, from the voice chat? I fear I put them to sleep. Chad, the alcoholic. Well, I would, it was funny you say that. I would say that memory is like dream and like memory is dreaming about things that we know about dreaming is dreaming about things that we don't know about. And if we live in a place of memories, we're almost like living in this place of dream walking. But I think, yeah, those two things are connected. It's, it's margin. So I guess another thing that I thought of was, uh, I believe in, uh, Augustine's psychological model of the Trinity. Um, the faculty of memory represents the father, right? The source of identity, which is pretty powerful. Yeah, that's good. I like that. I was going to add that, um, memory it's connected, like the other connected word is remembering, right? Where you, you rejoin things together. You hold things together, which is very tied, like you were saying to the source of identity, like we, we remember one another, the father remembers us. We hold one another within an identity and we are held within identity by the remembrance of other people. And so I think that locating yourself within the congregation of others and doing that for one another is, it's huge. Yes. I agree. Excellent. See, this is why, this is why I do this here. I, I, um, I gained so much from talking to you guys and it's much better to have a conversation than just to, you have plenty, you have plenty of hours of me talking at you. You, you all have so many good ideas. You just make, you just, you just make me better. You really do. So, and if you can't see your father, if you're unable to, I'd suggest a fourth step and if you'd like to know more about that, hit me up. Thanks, Chad. All right. Question from Chad, the alcoholic. When you see what's happened with legacy media, mishandling their responsibilities over the last several years, social media, crowdfunding outlets and culture at large, wildly losing their way. What do you think of, how do we move past this insanity as a culture community society? Part of the rise of social media has been exposing mass media for its blindsides. And that I think the blind sides of mass media can be seen as a for its blindsides. And that I think the blind sides of mass media tended to come, tended to be exposed later on down the line. And now it's happening more quickly. And what this does is, is really shake the sense of mass community that mass media afforded. So we should, we should probably be a little bit more patient, a little bit more forgiving of each other. We should speak clearly and boldly, but act slowly. I don't know to what degree things will settle. So much of, of what has changed in our world is because we have grown in power through technology so quickly and that's accelerating. So yeah, you know, all of the, all the people out there that have said our power has grown faster than our wisdom. I think they're right. And so I think we should, I think the only way out of this is to, is to work really hard to love one another as best we can. And that doesn't mean not speaking the truth as we see it. It does mean that when people speak their truth about us, we should be able to speak the truth about ourselves. And that's what we should be doing. It does mean that when people speak their truth about us, we should probably not get too triggered, not too defensive and hopefully engage in a little bit more conversation and signal to people that you might say something mean or nasty or disagree with me and that's okay. I'm not going to take offense. I'm not going to, I'm not going to lose my stuff. Your, your words don't scare me. Let's settle down and talk about these things. And so I think that's the only way through this and we have to work on that. Paul, I'm going to have to disagree. Okay. While I love all the Christian charity, what I think is part of the problem right now is that people are abusing our Christian charity and forgiveness and, you know, love and frankly, I mean, yes, there is a place for that, but if somebody's not going to accept an apology, I wouldn't give them one. And if they're the type of person who doesn't accept apologies, then I wouldn't accept their apologies easily. And we keep on giving people. So I, I get very frustrated with what I see being people who are actually using your charity and kindness against you. Against me personally, including you. But I mean, for example, the whole Sam Harris thing, no, I'm sorry. Sam Harris is supposedly a public intellectual and a public intellectual saying stupid things is not a public intellectual. He's a public font of idiocy. Well, and I, you know, I don't have a problem with, you know, with, with stating what we believe with respect to these things, I'd just be, would be against locking Sam Harris up. I wouldn't lock him up, but he needs to be told you're not an intellectual, you're just dumb. I think there are plenty of messages out there for him of that nature. They don't accomplish much. So, and, and I think we all work on this way by deciding. I mean, I, part of me wants to keep working on some of this Harris Peterson conversation because there's some elements in there that I found interesting. Other parts of me say, don't pay any attention to Harris at all, because I don't know that he's worth it. So we've all got those kinds of questions. But I'm, you know, I, I've, I try to state clearly what I see in Sam Harris and Nate disagrees with me and I have no problem with Nate pushing back on things. And that's, I mean, Jacob, you push back on me all the time. I love it. And I, I'm going to continue to be gracious to you. I'm going to continue to be gracious to you and you're, you're exceedingly gracious to me. So I think this is the dance that we want to promote. So, yeah, and figuring out this dance is really hard. And because, you know, another video, there's always 10 videos for every one I wind up doing and whether I do the right one, I don't know. But, you know, I know some other people don't care much for David Fuller, but I think a lot of the, David Fuller and I are sort of in the same space in that we're both, we both have histories with institutions that were very much a product of mass culture. And now we're both having a degree of success and visibility in this alternative media space and figuring out the, the ethics of this alternative space is quite a bit more difficult. I was, so I, one of the podcasts that I listen to fairly regularly, and I have for a very long time now, is The Verge. The Verge is the air of what's my next. And before that, it was the Engadget podcast. I mean, my listening to the podcast goes all the way back to Josh Topolsky and, and Neelay Patel and, and Paul Miller back when those three were doing it. And so recently on The Verge, The Verge is owned by Vox Media. Their take on Sam Harris is about as shallow and simplistic and predictable as any out there and, you know, they're, or it's not Sam Harris, but Joe Rogan. And right after one of their screeds about how horrible it is that Spotify allows Joe Rogan to say what he says, they had an ad which basically exemplified new media where the lines between myself as an individual and the lines between myself as a brand or even a quasi institution in the social media space are completely blurred and their blurring is celebrated. I, there are times when, I mean, and my channel is small. I mean, 20,000 subs of which, you know, a video 1500 to 2500 views. This is, this is chump change in terms of new media. But my relationships are in some ways weird and I'm, I'm some, I'm in some ways overwhelmed by these new tools. If, if we took, let's, you know, get rid of writing. I mean, let's, okay, let's think about human beings and human beings before human beings before the agricultural revolution, let's say. I've got to manage, relate, I've got to manage a dozen or so relationships, maybe a couple of hundred, but maybe not more than that. And we're scaling this up in incredible ways. It's really hard. And so now, you know, at least David Fuller rightly struggles with, well, what, what are Joe Rogan's responsibilities when millions of people listening to him and Joe Rogan isn't doing anything more than Joe Rogan says he's always done, which is I like getting interesting people in and having a conversation and re record it and I share it. That's that, that's an amazing thing, but what does it mean? And then what's the line between an institution and an individual? All of these questions are out there and we haven't even really resolved the questions of the printing press and perhaps not even questions of the written word. So, you know, another one of the videos I want to do is later on in that conversation with Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris goes on his screed about basically verbal or written ideas of inspiration or revelation. And part of the reason that I want to address it is that I think it's interesting. The reason I want to address it is because I get messages from people sending me other videos of very similar issues. And there's a lot to think about in those issues beyond, oh, God can't talk through a book. Well, I don't know. Christianity says God talks through not just Christianity, the solvist, the heavens declare the glories of God day after day, they pour forth speech. God is communicating to us through the empirical world. So, you know, I just, I just want to have us to whatever degree I can, I want to afford people wisdom and knowledge and help us to have a better conversation. And that, and the only way I know how to do that is to do as I practice. Don't be afraid of people saying things you disagree with. Listen to them. Maybe you'll learn something. I mean, again, it's, it's a little, Peterson's been saying the same thing. Listen to them as if they have something to teach you and then learn it. And if it pisses you off, pop off on Twitter, you know, probably nothing will happen to that. But if you've got a million or 2 million or 3 million followers, that's different than if you've got a few thousand followers or a few hundred followers or a couple of dozen followers. And anyone who has that kind of power has to think about that too. So this is the world we're living in. And we were, we're going to fumble our way into it. So let's, let's be kind to each other, but let's also be clear, figuring out the dance between those two things is, I think it's important. Andromeda, you always talk about how your church is dying and how you cope with, with that so cheerfully. Isn't death of one's church a bad thing? What do you plan to do next? If you think it will happen within your lifetime. So Dominicana, por cierto, hola. Oh, nice. How lovely it's it's so. I just did a, this week I recorded an episode with Justin Briarly, unbelievable with a leader of an ethical society in St. Louis. And it's a fun, it's a fun episode. I'm, I'm looking forward to it coming out. The leader of the ethical society. He said, Oh, he's a, he's a fun guy. I, I've got to have him on my channel at some point. I had so much fun talking to him. Justin Briarly has the best network. He really does. He's got great people that he pumps into. But the guy from the ethical society, it's, I can't wait till that comes out because this, this network of ethical societies was actually started by the son of a prominent Jewish rabbi in Europe who wanted his son to become a rabbi, you know, following in his footsteps. And his son went to study in Germany. And this is in the 19th century. And when Jacob was here in Sacramento, Jacob took me out for a lovely steak. And Jacob taught me a ton about the history of modern Judaism. And it was fascinating. Um, and so then when this guy was talking about this son of a rabbi who began basically starting atheistic synagogues slash churches all over the world in the 19th century, and this tradition has lived on and this guy coming out of the UK, uh, was going to Harvard and got into that. And then has become sort of the pastor slash leader slash rabbi of this little group in St. Louis, which is the most thriving of all of their network, but their network is dying and he says, you know, with all of, with everybody leaving religion, you would think that our ranks would be flush and they're not. And so, but I have, and we talked about this. I have, I love living stones. I love these people here. You know, this morning I got here and, you know, talked to a couple of homeless peeps and Rick came in and, you know, at some point Marshall and Cynthia will probably come in to drop off the bulletin and Sunday I'll be here with all of my friends over 80 this past week, the coffee break ladies were in and you know, we've got one of our, one of our coffee break ladies is a sort of stereotypical American evangelical religious, right? Republican. And she's in this group with a lot of these black women who've never voted for Republican in their lives and more white women who are kind of all over the map. And so, you know, they don't agree on, on vaccinations or COVID or, or politics or anything, but they get into that room and they study the Bible and they love each other and they fight and they argue and every now and then I have to go in there and tell a whole bunch of women the age of my mother to stop behaving like children. You know, we're a family here, but the family is, the family is dying and it's not unusual. Churches like this usually last about 60 years. That's been the track record right now. And what, what will I do after it? I'm not anxious. I've, I'll, I'll probably continue working in this space, but I want to keep some local ministry going too. I think it's healthy for me because if, if all of my interactions with the if all of my interaction is online, I I'm not really dealing with you. And so, you know, when, when Jacob shows up for a couple of Sundays and I get to eat a steak dinner with him, you know, the fun I get to have with Rick, I very much want to do some conferences here. So, you know, we talked about sort of kind of an unconference, a blue collar conference of, of people putting things together, maybe at some point or I fully intend to get to meet more of you face to face and to sit down in a room with you and to share a meal with you and, and to, even though we live all over the U S or the U S and Canada or Australia or the UK or the Netherlands or Germany or all over the world, I, there's nothing like life together. And the tell us of these little interactions is, I think the life of the age to come where, where our community is not divided by death and time. So there have been, there are ways, you know, even the institution of living stones might not die in the next five years. You know, there, there are certain things can happen. It could be that in a little church, if you get five new families, you have new life, but the living stones of 2022 is not like the living stones of the But the living stones of 2022 is not like the living stones of 2000, which was three years after I got here, families come and families go. And, you know, I talked about the fact that my children, when they, this is a strange thing with children. My children have been lots of different people to me over the years. They were babies. They were toddlers. They were preschoolers. They were homeschooled grade schoolers. They were public high school, high school kids. They were college kids. And now increasingly they're, they're young adults figuring out significant others and, you know, trying to figure out how to make their way in this world. They've been all these different people. My wife and I have been different people. I pulled up something today and saw something of mine 20 years ago. And I think, wow, I've changed. And not just physically. So a reality of the age of decay is that things change and things die. And there's a, there's a loss in death, but there's also a loss in growing up. I have a friend who has a son with Down syndrome and his son is now in his late twenties. And in some ways with Down syndrome, his son is frozen in time. And my friend, you know, on one hand, you know, will joke with me and say, I feel, I feel bad for those people who don't have a Downy kid. Why? Because they enjoy Edward's perpetual youth in some ways, but there's also a sadness in it as well that unlike my friend's other children who have grown up and have their own families, et cetera, et cetera, Edward never will. Life is full of this and in some ways it's rich and in other ways it's crushingly full of loss. So I had, I had breakfast with Preston Sprinkle this week. He was up to do a conference in Sacramento and he contacted me and said, Hey, let's, let's hit breakfast. So we, we spent the morning just comparing notes on his weird life and my weird life. And, you know, he always asked the question and well, just how small is your church? It's really small right now. You know, before COVID we, we had, you know, maybe 40, 50 people in on a Sunday morning and now we have maybe 15 to 20 and on a Sunday morning and you know, maybe as COVID recedes, it'll, it'll climb up into the thirties perhaps. It's not a bad thing, but. If, if, you know, something happened and suddenly we had 50, a hundred, 150 people in here on Sunday morning, well, that would change other things. And then if I had a church of hundreds or thousands of people, I couldn't be talking to you right now because I'd be busy helping them and dealing with them. And you wouldn't have me. So we trust God's providence in these things. We trust God's providence in these things. And I hope that the churches, so this church has been around for about 60 years and I have, I've been around for 25 of those 60 years. And it's been different churches during those times, different people were here. Churches are very much living things and no one moment in a church has ever frozen. Even my son's Down syndrome son at the age of 30 will be different than he was at the age of 20, even if the difference between 20 and 30 isn't dramatic as dramatic in him as let's say my oldest, my oldest son today, today's his birthday and he just turned 31. And the occasion of that birthday reminds me of being in the Dominican Republic. In clinical, but a Santa Domingo and my mother-in-law was coming in that day. So some of the other missionaries picked her up at the airport and here my wife and I, both of us in our twenties, never having had a kid before here in this, this new land. I was a seminary intern, didn't know much of the language here in this new land and here in this new land and there being in the birthing room. Wow. And then having that new baby. And then a month in a month in he developed a fever, which wasn't good. And then they, you know, they were worried and so, well, let's do a spinal tap and check out his, make sure it's not meningitis. And my parents were in at that point. And I remember, I, you know, talk about trauma and memories. I remember taking that little one month old baby and giving him to the doctor and doctor says, you don't want to be in the room for this. So my wife and I going out of the room and just hearing here, you know, they say a spinal tap is tremendously painful and just hearing him. I mean, I can't, I can barely say it without tearing up right now. You know, hearing his cry going on to have four more kids after him. That's what this world is like. It's good and bad. The gospel offers us hope. So living stones as it is now will die. Most of the people here are now well into their eighties. Gosh, I've, I've been their pastor for 25 years and they've been my friends. And I've got personal histories with many of them. And as a pastor, there's a degree of intimacy that you have with people because people will tell you their stories and they'll, they'll share their ups and downs. They'll share their fears. They'll share their hopes. And as a congregation, we live through them together. It's a precious, precious thing, but it will come to an end. And because I have no plans on leaving, I will bury these people. Two and a half years into this church, I had a, there was a much larger, better established, higher profile congregation that was pursuing me quite aggressively. And I decided to stay here. And I knew that if I stayed here long term, I would bury my friends. I'm on the young end of this congregation. Rick can attest to that. So I will bury my friends and I will do the best I can and sending them out of this world, framing their lives in a eulogy that will honor them and see them into the next. And it's a tremendous honor to do so. And I, every time I do a funeral for a friend, it's, it's this strange mixture of privilege and grief, but I wouldn't trade it for anything because they're worthy of a good sendoff. So right away, a lot of people are hoping for a more enchanted world where story and reality meet, stories that become participative. Stories that become participative. Don't we already have those? You're exactly right. We do. It's just that story was sort of disres, story has been disrespected. And there are, so I was, I've been watching, my wife and I lately, we've been going through the, the Canon of Survivor on Paramount Plus. And we're currently in season 25. And there's a three-peat guy on there, Jonathan Penner, who's a writer. I have to look him up, see exactly what kind of a writer he is. But, but he's, I really enjoy him in the game because he is a writer. And in this particular season, there's a Lisa, I forget her last name. She's from the Facts of Life, a silly little sitcom from the eighties. And she comes in there as a 49 year old woman who doesn't want people there to know she's, she was famous as a teen actress. And she's got, she's got a lot of baggage or she's not baggage, but she's working through things on the show about fame and people pleasing and her youth and all of those kinds of things. And Penner as a writer, just does a really nice job of on one hand, framing her life, seeing her, listening to her, but also trying to work her through the game so Penner doesn't get voted off the island. And I was watching that last night and just thinking about this power of story writing, what a power it is. So yeah, people, what, what, what are people wanting when they want the world to be more enchanted? I think, I think it very much addresses the meaning crisis and it very much addresses this loss of agency that we feel. And I think this has everything to do with Sam Harris and his worldview, because as I mentioned in the video that I released this morning, and as is mentioned in a, a video that I'll release probably this weekend, this interesting conversation I had with a young man who's starting his own channel. And he again is sort of typical of this space and that he's, he's come to Christianity after Harris and Peterson and Peugeot and myself. And, you know, so much of what he talks about is the nihilism. And I think what we're, what this language is all getting at is, we have agency and we have power and we, and we're not, we want to participate in these stories and we should, and we have to. And with a backdrop of nihilism, it feels like enchantment. So, no, you're exactly right. Exactly right. And I also agree with you that, oh, Rick's back. Katarina Kuhn, $10 read comment. Where's the comment? Oh, there's another one. Oh no, I have to run back. You got to run back, Rick. You're, you're behind here. Okay. I'll, I'll, I'll get to that after I finish this question. In a sense, every, in a sense of conspiracy theory is an enchanted world that what governs this world are not the strict mechanics of cause and effect, as in the whole show, as CS Lewis calls it, or in this locked in materialist world that Sam Harris talks about. But the world is subject to actors and gosh, I got to talk to Manuel about this because I'm more and more convinced that when we look up, we see persons and that's exactly the proper mode. And when we look down, we see processes and that's fair too. So yeah, Katarina Kuhn, Q and I saw the new talk between Jordan Peterson and the journalist, the convo went the psychedelic route as always lately. And Jordan Peterson said basically that the Holy communion didn't really work because it didn't have drugs in it. I think there are millions of Christians out there that disagree. Yeah, I actually, I sat down with Preston Sprinkle and he asked me, he said, you know, so what's, what's coming up on the horizon? And I said, well, Jordan Peterson says the church is going to have to come to terms with psychedelics. And I said, I agree with that. The church is going to have to, because churches have been, we've been unprepared for this conversation. So time to get on the speed. So I gave Preston Sprinkle a couple of book recommendations. We'll see if he, we'll see if he bites. So Renee, loving listening to you, Paul, best wishes from the Netherlands. Well, thank you. Yeah, it's so amazing. Dutch roots. That's another, another thing on the list. Once, once we can sort of set plans for months and years in advance, which COVID has kind of disrupted, you know, I definitely want to get to Europe. My parents, my father never got to Europe. My mother will never go. So I, I very much want to get there. Oscar, do you think we become holy? Whole. Holy and whole aren't exactly the same thing. There are definitely related through shadow integration or shadow expulsion. I always found the puritanical reading of Matthew five 48 to be eerily inhuman and the Calvinist total depravity response equally. So like suggested a marriage of heaven and hell and Lewis a devout I'm definitely learning more to the leaning more to the former. There's no cosmic dualism in Christian metaphysics. So must not the reconciliation of opposites in Christ ultimately be unity and not division. The concept of transfiguration does seem to suggest that nothing is discarded and everything perfected. This, this gets me to the point where I think that the I think suggesting that evil is always only misunderstanding is naive. I think part of the tensions that we have in the world that we have in the world of is naive. I think part of the tensions that you're pointing to have to do with the fact that some things which are evil to us aren't really evil. They're part of. Yeah, there's so much here. Quick way into this is asking the question, who is the angel of death that passes over the Hebrews in Egypt and kills the firstborn. Part of this tension is between the Hebrew scriptures and then the Christian New Testament in terms of the conceptualization of evil. Again, if you start reading the selected works, collected works of of George MacDonald that CS Lewis put together, I'm only 10 or 15 into them. I started going through them. It's like, whoa, I got to slow down each one of these little nuggets bears reading and pausing and meditating rather than just running through them. These are hard questions. And I would say number one, that evil is there is evil that must be fled from. I think when rebel wisdom or Jordan Peterson talk about shadow integration, I don't think that's exactly the same thing. And I think Jordan is right when Jordan and rebel wisdom to a degree, too. But when Jordan talks about integrating the monster, he's almost always misunderstood, but he's pushing back against something that Jacob reacted to. And I think rightly so when we talked about how we deal with one another. And the God of the Bible picks and chooses judges, condemns. I mean, let's look at the story of Aiken and AI in the book of Job. God doesn't send an angel to come down and do therapy with Aiken. The ground opens up and swallows him and his family. Now we tend to read this and are like, that's, that's wrong. Oh, okay. So you believe there is right and wrong and God's on the other side of it. Think about that carefully. And I think that's the point. I think that's the point. I think that's the thing. Think about that carefully. Because if that, if, if you can be more righteous than God, then you are in a world of trouble that you are not fully appreciating. Because the relative reality, strength and power of you with respect to God is not even close. So if that is the case, all is lost. That's a good question. P.K. Josh, should the body be subject to the spirits of this union? Should the man lead the woman? Spirit in this union, should the man lead the woman? It's the, the, the question is so abstract and in the abstraction, it's elevated. And usually in moments like this, these kind of abstractions lead to sort of weirdness. It's like saying, you know, take no offense here because should the man lead the dog? Now, obviously a woman and a dog are in two different, very, very different categories. But if you have a dog and you have a trained dog, let's say for hunting or a bloodhound, the dog should lead the man. Or is the man leading the dog because the dog, the man has trained the dog to hunt down a certain scent. There's all these little tricks of language. So I think in any mature relationship, the two parties should figure out how to dance. This whole business of equality, another one of the videos I want to make about the Sam Harris Jordan Peterson conversation is linking it up to John, John Verveckis talk about levels of being. And I think that's a very important point. I think that's a very important point. John Verveckis talk about levels of being. John lately has been talking a lot about neo-Platonism. Neo-Platonism is very much within a tradition where we talk about levels of being. We know how to say these words and use this language, but I'm not at all sure when we say something like levels of being, we have any understanding of what we're talking about, even though so much of the contemporary egalitarian pushback has within it all kinds of protests about levels of being. And when Sam Harris in a little segment in that conversation talks about knowing the world, Verveckis is very much addressing that aspect because in post-nominalism, all things can be known. Everything is just objects. All knowledge is public knowledge. I don't believe that's true for a moment. There are aspects of life that you could just see it in any marriage. And there are all kinds of sayings about this. Every marriage as a culture is a language that only two people know. Nobody but my wife and I know what it's like to be in our marriage. My kids have an idea. So after my wife and I, my kids have an idea. And the further you go into this thing, my perspective on our marriage is also different from my wife's perspective on our marriage, which is also different from our kids' perspectives on our marriage, which might be also different from a marriage therapist's perspective on our marriage. On and on and on and on and on and on we go. And so we take these little abstractions and we, you know, I see these games played in the church all the time and a lot of it is game playing. So people know better. And if we know better, why do we make silly sentences that are intended to win over our rivals? So that's hard stuff. Little questions have kept coming in. All right, this whole business about Zechariah 4 and the olive trees, go ask Peugeot. If I had time to sit down and study the text, I might try to answer it, but I'm not going to try to answer these questions. I'm not going to try to answer these questions without preparation. And part of, so part of the promise of Peugeot's work in symbolism is a transparency of relationships that can be quickly applied to lots of different instantiations in the world. And Peugeot makes it look easy. I'm not a symbologist. And so I'm not even going to try to answer. Julian. I love Julian's little picture. There's this little bubble and then there's little Julian right in there with his plaid shirt and his suspenders. I love it. I love it. I've been listening to some podcasts on the 1960s and I was struck by the spirit of optimism of those times. I'd love to know which podcast you're listening to, Julian. The sense that a new age is coming, old is passing away and also by some of the similar themes of those cultural moments to what this little corner is about. Yeah, yeah. For example, the focus on ecology, religion and science, spirituality, reconnecting with roots, embodiment. The most obvious overlap is that the critiques of technology, materialism, modernity that this little corner is also focusing on. One difference, one interesting difference seems to be that the 1960s had a more global outlook. Imagine all the people living in peace. Yeah, yeah. I remember the 60s. I was born in 63 so I don't remember it real well but I remember the later 60s. You know, seven-year-old can remember. While the current moment is more localistic, what do you think is the relationship between the current moment and this 1960s? Well, I think you certainly hit on one of it. 1960s was, Julian, if you want to read an interesting book you can read George Marsden's The Twilight of the American Enlightenment which very much talks about this transition from the 1950s to the 1970s. You know, the 60s had, it was very much a romantic pushback against the modernity of the 1950s. And there was a tremendous amount of optimism and in some aspects, rightfully so. I mean, Jim Crow was getting pushed back. Congregations in America, like where I grew up, we were living out the new dream of white and black living together. I mean, that was my youth. That was the gospel I was raised in that white people and black people could live together and worship together and enjoy each other and learn from one another and enjoy the relationships. And it was wonderful. But 60s led to 70s. And in some ways, the 70s were a, you began to see that some of what people rushed into, they did so naively. So when I told Preston Sprinkle that, you know, you should probably get up to speed on psychedelics, find out what's going on in that conversation, he was like, well, didn't, you know, what about the 70s? It's like, yeah, the 70s, the 70s followed the 60s. So part of what's different today is that there's a sobriety that, you know, free love and free drugs made for some really unhappy families, divorce in the 70s, children whose parents were neglectful or irresponsible had a very different opinion of their parents' liberation. So yeah, the 60s gave birth to the 70s. And the 70s gave birth to the 80s. And the 80s were in some ways a return. It's so hard to categorize these ages because in some ways, the 80s were sort of a return to the 50s. In the 80s, there was a fascination with the 50s again. It's so hard. The 80s gave birth to the 90s. You know, watch power. Go ahead. Paul, wasn't there sort of an innocence or naivety in the 60s? Like, innocence by a mean, that there was a lot of abuses and stuff that were going on at that time that weren't necessarily well known. I think through the 70s and definitely moving into the 80s that a lot of this stuff started to come out, like, you know, whether it was our, you know, our, you know, our, you know, our Catholic friends or other, you know, even family type abuse, these secrets, so to speak, started to really come out. And I think there was an innocence in the 60s. I'm also a child of the 60s. And my parents were, you know, my dad was a World War II vet, which by the way, I think had a horrible impact that's probably still being felt, you know, in our generation. So yeah, I saw an innocence and to your point, maybe almost purposefully to do the free love, free everything, everything was a little freer than the 50s. But to your point that had consequences. Yeah, yeah. No, I think that's right. I think that's right. Are we reliving the 60s? I don't know. You don't really relive. Go ahead. I would say no, Paul, only because I think there was still a respect for religious belief. And and maybe I'm just being naive or idealistic. But my sense in the 60s was, yeah, there might have been some pushback. But I still think there was some level of interest, and maybe just in certain, you know, I'm from the States. So, you know, maybe in certain, you know, places, I came from Pennsylvania and then moved to Jersey. But, you know, maybe in the in urban areas, it was already starting to move more towards atheism or, you know, whatever. But my sense was in the 60s, there was still some level of respect for organized religion. And that that seems to have shifted pretty far in the in the 2000s. Yeah, there's there's a YouTuber, David Hoffman, who was has been a filmmaker for a long time. And he's got a lot of videos on his channel, which he protects pretty carefully. Burns really wanted to get get at his archive and integrate that in his projects. But there's a lot of stuff from the 60s that are really very real. And part of what we're dealing with is that a lot of people today, let's say your age, Julian, your picture of the 60s is a pretty selective picture, because the 60s, in some ways, unsurprisingly, we're a lot more like the 50s than the picture of the 60s that is given today is portraying. And so if you go to David Hoffman's, if you go to David Hoffman's channel, you can you can really see some some interesting conversations and a lot a lot of good stuff from the 60s and 70s and 80s. I mean, just look at the the change of the Beatles from the beginning of the 60s to the end of the 60s. In some ways, the 60s don't really start until the 80s. They start until 65 and they go to 75. And in that way, you know, the 50s really sort of go from 45 to 65. And the 60s go from 65 to 75. And the 70s, you know, bleed into the 80s. So there's a ton there. There's a ton there. All right, Joe, then some short questions. Oh, look at that. Joey celebrates you. You're rather tall. You're rather tall, all things considered. Could you dunk while playing basketball? No, I'm tall, but not athletic, not terribly athletic. My sons came my my I have one of my sons is my same height and he could dunk. And but his older brother was a little bit better at basketball. I'm not sure if Jared would like me saying that. But Philip was Philip became quite good at basketball. He practiced a lot. Presuming you pray a lot. What who where do you often where do you often pray a lot is a complex thing. There are some there are some times of formal prayer. There are informal prayer. I pray for my family. I pray for my church. I pray for what I do here on YouTube. I pray for people, especially when asked. I pray the Lord's Prayer a lot. A lot. Lord's Prayer is a good prayer. It sounds silly to say, but if you want to learn to pray, you could do a lot worse than the Lord's Prayer. One of the things that I'll often do is I'll take the Lord's Prayer as a basically as a structure. And I'll pause at each line and sort of fill in the gaps of how do I how do I want to see thy kingdom come and thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Meditate on that and pray on that. And then forgive us this day or give us this day our daily bread. Pray through those anxieties. You know, forgive our debtors as we have forgiven those who have trespassed against us. OK, who who do I need to forgive? What do I need to be forgiven? And so use the structure of the Lord's Prayer to to guide your prayer life. I often just wind up praying for people. There are people just call me and we'll talk for five or 10 minutes and then pastor can can can I have a prayer? Absolutely. That's what I do. And so I people ask for prayer. I pray for them. That's what we should do. Presume. What is the CRC's relationship with Saints? Protestantism sort of wanted to universalize sainthood. And so what Protestants will say is that all Christians are saints. Yeah, that's true. But there are Christians who are exemplary in certain aspects than others. And again, Protestantism is a reaction to the fact that it is a reaction. It's an attempt to reform the church that it was pushing back against. Now, I love listening to to Richard Roland, who has these conversations with Jonathan Peugeot about universal history. I love that series on Peugeot's channel. It's at some of my favorite on Peugeot's channel is listening to Richard Roland. I should should have him in for a conversation because I and I especially love when he points out how in time Protestants wind up reinstantiating all sorts of things that they decried in Catholicism. And this is true, including Saints. Protestants have their Saints. Now, Protestants usually don't do Catholics pray to their Saints. I don't think that's the right language. And again, there's been so much unfair bickering between Protestants and Catholics. You know, it's just so cheap and easy to mischaracterize your rival and then to throw Bible verses at them. And so the you know, this what what's what I've been doing over the last few years has been such a blessing because I've had so much more exposure and conversation with Roman Catholics that it's like, you know, we're, we're getting out a lot of we're, we're getting out a lot of that we're trying to get out a lot of the same stuff, but we're going through different means. That isn't to say that there aren't some substantive differences in some in some cases, but before you know it, Protestants are setting up statues and they're putting up buildings and, and they have their Saints. So I, I look forward to the day that the protest is over. And but, but these things are far larger than any, any individual. So many thanks and God be with you. God be with you. Yeah. CRC CRC has its Saints, Abram Kuyper, Herman Boving, Johanna Wienstra, Stanley Weersma, I can name all these people that are famous in the Christian Reformed Church, Alving Plantinga after he dies. Cause you don't really name a Saint until, and the CRC doesn't have an official list. The lists are all sort of crowdsourced. So yeah. Green Rider Four was Jordan Peterson, the true beating heart of the IDW. You know, Peterson, the true beating heart of the IDW. Yes. IDW seemingly died the moment he went off the grid. Yeah. I have been thinking a lot about the IDW and I'm tempted to shoot David Fuller a note and say, I'd love to do a, I'd love to do a, a post-mortem on the IDW with him because again, there's a lot of, even though obviously myself in the church, David Fuller in a secular space, David Fuller and I are beating on a lot, asking a lot of the same questions and my IDW tends to mean, see, I don't think Ben Shapiro is really IDW. IDW tends to be disaffected people that were sort of on the left wing of their community that basically got pushed out. And so Peterson, I think is, is the star in the center of the IDW. I just was scrolling, you know, I go into YouTube every day, I got to check on my videos, et cetera, but you go into YouTube and the homepage comes up and here's an episode of the portal. What happened to that? Brett and Heather high. And you know, Brett had a spat with Sam Harris. What's that about? Come on people, we can have spats. I mean, me and, me and Nate Heil can, can have a spat. Jacob and I, Jacob can say Paul of Tarsus is all kinds of things that I would disagree with, but we can still be friends. Let's, let's have differences and, and, and let's have a little bit of a conversation. I mean, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, let's have differences and, and, and keep talking and keep talking generously and enjoyably. So, yeah. I wish you'd adopt a more realistic and anti-naive take on everything, Paul. That would probably be a good thing. When are you going to sing an ode from and within all the blind spots, traps and deceptions people are going through. This would be artistically furious. Oh, I love pointing at people's blind spots. The only problem is when I do it, I expose all of my own. Oh, oh, you know, there are times when there are times when I want to delete my entire channel because it's like, Oh, this is, this is embarrassing, but I have to realize that my embarrassment is always postulated on my pride. And that's one of the, I think that's one of the keys to Joe Rogan success is that he doesn't take himself too seriously. Even in the little, you know, in the whole Spotify thing, he releases this video where he basically says in that little video, what he said a hundred times before, which is, you know what? I like talking to people and apparently people like listening to my conversations with people. I'm not a doctor. I'm just out there trying to find the truth. So that kind of spirit of not taking yourself too seriously. Good on you, Joe. Good on you. And it's been funny because as I've had a couple of conversations with some people this week who to my surprise learned that these guys were, have listened to way more Joe Rogan than I have. And these people who are not in any way near IDW space or anything. And I think a lot of it is Joe just connects, I think with a lot of men who, yeah, you know, comedians, MMA, Joe's a guy. Joe's just a guy having conversations. So yeah, adopt a more realistic and at that, may take on everything. I love it. I wish I was that smart. All right. What's it like to stumble into this space? What's, is it like, you know, into this space? What's it like to stumble into this space, this chump change? Do you ever find yourself overwhelmed with awe and gratitude for God bringing us all together? I do. I do. I, I do not, you know, in the sound of music where you've got, um, that song, I must've done something good. That's a song about gratitude, that here you find yourself blessed in ways that you know you don't deserve and you never anticipated, but here you are. And that's how I feel. Um, you know, I look in the, I look in the little, let's see how, what are we, what are we down to in the little chat here? Um, you know, the dozen or so people who are in this room and let's see, there's 76 watching online to one degree or another and you know, little super chats have been given and people are chatting away there in the little room and I turn on the camera and I, I, I was talking again, I was talking to, I was talking to a guy, a guy, he's not a pastor, but he works in the church area and he was, he had been talking to pastors, he talks to a lot of pastors and he was saying, gosh, a lot of pastors are frustrated. They, you know, they might work in a sizable congregation, but they just get burned out and they're tired of putting on a mask and playing a game and they're tired of it. I feel enormously blessed that I just sort of turn on this camera and look at you and tell you what I think and you tell me what you think. That's really cool. And I haven't starved. Nobody's gotten me run out of the Christian forum church on a rail. And if I did, there are other churches that would take me in. So I just feel overwhelmed with gratitude. So let's see, there's an end of questions. So I don't know, can we turn cameras on in this room or not, Rick? I don't want to leave this room because I don't want to, we won't turn on cameras, but we've got another 15 minutes just for any questions you might have or points you want to make. So of the, and this again, I'm, I didn't anticipate any of this, but I couldn't just send out a link out, a zoom link out into YouTube land and say, you know, who knows what would come up, but here in the discord, I've gotten the degree of familiarity with many of you. And so I feel, I feel at home with you. I feel comfortable with you. And so that's why I can just stream this out on my channel. And you know, one of you can turn on your mic and say what you say, and I'm not anxious about it. So we've got 15 minutes. What do we want to talk about? I think part of your charm is actually the authenticity because the fact is a lot of us, we know that people are putting on masks. And I think that's part of the reason why like listening for hours and hours to Rogan or to you helps us be confident that you're not just putting on a mask and showing us something that you're actually being truthful and honest. And that's something we want. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think it's almost what we need sometimes, man. I would love to hear, you'd have a conversation with like four other guys at once that are pastors, these guys that are saying things like, I'm tired of wearing a mask. I'd like to see them pull their mask off, right? And show that'd be great, dude. You know, you know how amazing that would be for, for people who are probably desperate to hear something like that? Like, oh, these people are actually people they're afraid to. Yeah. Yeah. There's reasons for masks though. True. And that's hard. I mean, you, you of all people, nobody wears a mask more here than you. But his mask allows him to be truthful. Yeah. Isn't that funny? That's, that's, that's funny the way that works. Isn't it? Sometimes masks conceal and other times masks reveal. You know, it's, it's funny because I don't have my exact name on my Twitter account, but I have had, you know, there's reasons for that, right? You know, I mean, nothing major, but, but I've had people straight up ignore me and dismiss me because I haven't doxed myself, you know, and it's just like, well, whatever. And that's part of this, this weird world we're living in. There are, there are, there are times and places where a pseudonym is the most important, the most appropriate thing. The other times and places when, you know, having our real name as it were is the most important thing. So yeah. I think all of us wish for a world where pseudonyms were, you know, not useful or necessary for these sorts of conversations. I heard a really cool podcast once on pseudonyms, which the author made the, the podcaster was making the point that names are, are actually always a function of the, they're the names are always a function of the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the purpose of a book is to open to new names. So again, I think pseudonyms are part of the agent within the arena. And you get on that in the book of Revelation where we're given new names. So. And the whole business about naming in the garden. It's a really interesting thing. So it's funny because Rick and I have noticed this too. When we have three or five or eight or 10 people in a room with cameras on, people talk. And when we have us in this room with cameras off, now there's lots to that. I'm not saying it's a bad thing, I'm just saying part of it I'm sure is that some of you are working and you've got your phone or your computer in a room and you're over here doing this and then you come back and we're sort of AM radio. But when you've got the camera on, except for Manuel, who goes all the way back to his apartment and then comes forward to make a point and he's got his Bluetooth headphones on the whole time. So, no Chad, I very much agree with you. I feel, I wonder why I got so lucky. Okay, here's something that's a little off topic. But I was, okay, so we know you know how to write. Have you ever considered writing fiction at all? I don't think I would be any good at fiction. I've just never, I've never tried it. Now, so my friend, he's a very good writer. Warren Mills in Australia, he worked his whole career in the automotive industry. And then when he retired, he decided he wanted to write books. And I look at that and think, wow, that's huge. That would be like me sitting down and saying, I'm gonna write fiction. Boy, I don't know where I'd begin. I can write non-fiction, but I don't know. I just start with the pen, man. That's what my wife told me. That's how I got on the writing, short stories for fun. And that's great about it is they don't even have to be good. It's just so fun. That's good. You are a creative dude, Chad, you really are. You impress me what you, you're an impressive guy. And I don't think you see yourself that way, but you really are. Well, thanks, Paul. Well, I definitely do and don't. I have to be careful because I am very self-centered and have an ego and it will get out of hand very quickly. So I appreciate the kind words, but see, here's the problem with noticing if you're good at something. All of the short stories I've ever written, every time that I was writing them and believe that they weren't good, or they didn't have to be good, they were great. Then the seconds I noticed that they started becoming good, they went right to crap. Yeah, isn't that funny, the way those things work? So here's the thing, if people don't talk, I'll just keep talking. I'll eat up the rest of these nine minutes, people. I'm just kidding, by the way. He will though, he will. So, well, maybe we should close early. But again, the funny thing is once I end transmission, I'm gonna get up out of my chair and stretch. I'm gonna stretch. I'm gonna stretch. I'm gonna stretch. I'm gonna stretch. I'm gonna stretch. I'm gonna stretch. I'm gonna stretch. I'm gonna stretch. I'm gonna stretch. I'm gonna stand in my chair and stretch, and then I'm gonna walk over where Rick is. It's gonna be ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba-ba. And y'all are gonna keep talking, which I think is great, so. All right, well, that's, I guess, how it's gotta be. So there you go, Rick. You can end transmission. Thank you all for listening today. Thank you for the Super Chats. Thank you for being in the chat room, and thank you for our moderators in the chat room, Anselman and Rick wielding their spammers. Spanners, spanners, that's what it is in the UK. They're spanners. And thank you all for joining us here today. And so I expect I'll see you next Friday, 11 p.m., same time.