https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Uahb_-_kjUE

 Hi, this is Paul and some of you will recognize this guy part of the problem with these stage names and YouTube names is I always remember the stage name better than the real name. So guy, we had a I thought it's so funny because sometimes some of the conversations that I think are the most important. They don't necessarily pan out in terms of the algorithm or the analytics, but I really loved our first conversation about cog, sigh and wrestling and all of that. But maybe it may be a reminder you live in Israel. Obviously, there's been a lot of stuff going on there. Yeah. Yeah, I've actually been wanting to have this fallout conversation since October. And actually, I sent you a message on October 6th. But how about we have the fallout conversation soon and then for obvious reasons, plans changed. Yeah, I'm actually I'm also in the process of more formal, like joining this little corner. I already have conversations with with Chad lined up and Grimbriz. Maybe we talked about doing something. Wow, you're getting indeed. Yeah, I've been and as you said, you did predict that you predicted both things, both that probably the video itself is not going to be super popular just in terms of raw numbers, which was which makes sense because it was about professional wrestling. And for most people, that would not seem like a topic that would hold a lot of relevance to the kind of things that that we talk about here and also that I'll get interest from a lot of people within the corner to have conversations. And both of those things panned out and actually didn't for some reason, I didn't realize that the the Bridges of Meaning Discord was just open and I could just join whenever I wanted. And then I did. And as soon as I did, like, oh, you're a guy, the wrestler. Yeah. Status is a real thing, as is attention. They they they're not everything, but they're very real. Yeah. So, yeah, so I've got those lined up. I've only now so I was in reserve duty with everything that's going on. I only now have been able to actually get back to my life properly. And so, yes, I'm going to I'm going to talk to to them and a bunch of other stuff that I've got lined up, which is exciting. You know, even so it's when you look at my analytics, about half of my viewers are from the United States, Canada and the UK are sort of neck and neck in terms of second place. Australia is third and then the Netherlands and Germany. But Israel is is fairly well represented in terms of the hierarchy in the corner, which is fascinating, of course. Yeah. Jacob and Pezzi and Joseph. So not all not everyone actually in Israel. But, you know, you're. The the fact that you are called up in the United States, the country is so massive. And at least since the end of the Vietnam War, when selective service was compulsory, service in the military was was ended. Israel has much more citizen soldiery than the United States, even though the United States is nearly you know, it's sort of like the Pax Romana. You listen to the Pax Romana and people think, oh, Romans weren't fighting. No, Romans were fighting the whole time. Because if you're running an empire, it means you're always having to, you know, suppress something and bomb this. Yeah, that. And so warfare is kind of a perpetual thing in the United States since the end of the Second World War and the rise of its own empire. But in Israel, with a with an event like you guys had suddenly. Well, there's a major disruption in terms of. Regular people in the country. Yeah, absolutely. Everyone practically speaking, every single Israeli was affected in some way, either by knowing people who were. Murdered or being called to serve or in my case, both. And and yeah, many, many people have had to leave their homes. For safety reasons for anyway, that's. Not probably not the topic we should be. I think it's I think it's it's not the topic of this video, but I think it's helpful to mention because in this land of screens, there's a disembodiment. Yeah, that everyone has a level of. But what's interesting is that, yeah, we were talking about talking in October and then, of course, well, life intervenes. Yeah, it was literally on the sixth. I mentioned to you on Twitter that I saw after the fact. Oh, it was actually literally the day before. Yeah. Yeah, there's there's a level, there's definitely a level of. Theoretical analyzing with this conflict in particular that to me, I just I can't stand like going on Twitter now and seeing a lot of half baked, low information opinions from all sides. Like talking about something that really is more complex than. You know. Anyway, anyway. Oh, so what are we what are we going to talk about today? Yeah, I think we're going to talk about. So what are we what are we going to talk about today? So since our conversation, I've thought a lot about and also evolved. OK, so I thought a lot about more about wrestling and how it relates to our current moment, because. You you actually surprised me by how enthused you were during our conversation about this topic and how you also thought it was relevant. But at the same time, it was hard for me, at least to put my finger on exactly how wrestling was relevant. It actually might be a good idea to do a quick recap of exactly what for wrestling is. Your your volume just went down for some reason. I don't know why. That's better. So speak up because. Yeah, Zoom sort of tries to regulate this thing. OK, and then let me know if it happens again. OK. Yeah, so I should probably give a little some recap of what professional wrestling is. By the way, it's been in the news and in the states in the last week or two. I don't know if you've seen with Vince McMahon, who was the former head of WWE. And there was a. A big scandal. And there's a lot, a lot happening right now. Most of it is actually positive. He's not been relevant for a while, which is one of the positives, because a lot of the stigma associated with pro wrestling is is because he was the person running pro wrestling for the better part of two decades solo. And and so his vision of professional wrestling was what professional wrestling became in the in the public side. And ever since he stepped down, there's been a notable increase in quality and more wrestling being what I would say it should have been and could have been. So is there something there in terms of a when you have, let's say, a person running it as a business versus something much more organic manifesting when that, you know, it's sort of like a tyrant being pushed aside now, more of the forces will emerge from below. I don't I don't know. Yes. What you said was very interesting to me. There's in multiple ways that is true. So there is the. The tyrant side was something we'll talk about, actually, like one of the first point. The that you need to find the. The right balance, the right, the optimal grip. Between. The listening to your audience and being able to follow a vision. So that's that's that's what you said there. That's like the the art of leadership are navigating those two poles. Yeah, and I think. OK, so we'll get there in a bit. So first, what wrestling is. It's a form of athletic theater where the actors play athletes for many years. So it's like the my character. So I have a character. It's a stereotypical nerd, which we'll talk about in a second. And the character ages with me in real time. And the character ages with me in real time. So a month for me is a month for the character. And usually a wrestler would play one character throughout their career, maybe two if there is a shift to a new location where their history doesn't matter. But usually it's it's around one or one. Maybe you look around a bit, but once you had a character, you stay with that character. And a match in wrestling. Has a three act narrative structure, so you have the the exposition and then the problem and then the resolution. And so a match is going to be a good guy, wrestler versus a bad guy wrestler. And usually the exposition is going to be why the good guy wrestler deserves to win in. Many it can take on many forms, either because he's a better wrestler or because he is virtuous or because he tries really hard or a bunch of different stuff. And then the bad guy, the second act is the bad guy takes control and has the momentum and controls the match for a large portion of it. And then the resolution is the good guy manages to to get back on top. Now, the ending of the match, either either wrestler could win in that place into the. So you have the narrative of the match and then the meta narrative of the character across time for both characters or more. Sometimes you have more than two wrestlers, but you have the meta narrative of the arc of the characters involved. So the ending of the match plays into that. And usually the best characters, I said, my my character is a stereotypical nerd. Usually a character is going to be the best ones are going to be a self art, typification, like finding an archetype that you can embody and embodying it. And the characters are going to be more represent representational than like realistic. Although nowadays there's there's a shift there, but but historically that's the case. And if you look in Mexico where wrestling as it's called, Lucha Libre there is really like a cultural phenomenon, it's considered part of the heritage. And the characters are usually like the alchemist, the dragon, the body, like those things with the masks and everything. And ideally, the character goes through a narrative throughout its its career. And so we have in wrestling, you have matches and you have what's called segments, which are not non match, non match events, could be an interview, it can be backstage, like hidden camera or something like something that is beyond the match, could be a confrontation between wrestlers. And you have what's called the Booker. So each organization has the Booker, who is the person. And sometimes it's a committee, but usually it's it's a person who is in charge of OK, these are the wrestlers I have in my organization. What stories do I want to tell? Who do I want to feud with? And. And that person is in charge of putting together the narrative. So that's that's the part of the technical how wrestling works. That's the that's what it is. It's very archetypal, it's very. Yeah, it's very archetypal. And you're playing with the fourth wall. I mean, that's one of the interesting things about narrative. There's a ton of playing with the fourth wall. And even when you talked about the segments, which are not matches, so matches are up on a stage in an arena. So then everyone's seat is defined. But now because of cameras and screens, now we can really play with this force fourth wall. Yeah, yeah. And that was the next point I was going to get to is the role of the audience in wrestling, which is really going to be key to what I want to talk about today. So the crowd, if you've ever seen a wrestling show, the crowd participates is absolutely a part of the performance. And during Covid, it was very clear how how much was missing when crowds weren't there. The crowd is very much part of the presentation. And the people who go to wrestling shows, for the most part, what they do is they they play. They they they act as if what's happening before them is non-fictional. I was going to say real and I changed it to non-fictional. For reasons that I'm sure you understand and will be made clear later. And the that is really, really interesting because the wrestlers, both the wrestlers in the ring during the match and also the Booker or the people planning ahead, always take feedback from the crowd and and play with with the crowd like they everyone you like you, you gauge the reactions constantly as a wrestler and as the person putting everything together. And also the the the character. So if I'm a good guy and I'm in a bad position, sometimes I'll call for the audience to to support me and then use that adrenaline rough from getting the support to do something. So they actually literally affect the narrative of the match immediately. And from gauging reactions, the Booker, the Booker, the Booker, again, the person who puts it together. The Booker decides, OK, this guy is really picking up steam. This guy, I have something with this guy. Maybe I should give him a more prominent role like the crowds are getting into. And. That's so that's what happens when it's when it's going well. And interestingly, sometimes the Booker's expectation clashes with the audience and. And you can see the like there's a collective, there's a distributed cognition of the audience like this is not. Working something in the narrative is not working, could be this character is not believable or this character is not believable in this role. But for whatever reason, things just don't work like, you know, when something lands and it doesn't. And the and if the Booker, so we talk about Vince McMahon and his tyranny, Vince McMahon was very stubborn and for years. He tried to get a character, getting something over means making it light in broad strokes or or making it dominant, like a wrestler, putting a wrestler over is letting him win. And he tried to get a specific character that he wanted to be the face of the organization. He tried to get him over in a way that just wasn't didn't work for that wrestler. And there was a. Like. Five year struggle or six year struggle from like 20. Twenty fifteen to twenty nineteen or twenty twenty. Where he kept trying to do the same thing. Putting this particular character in this particular light and and it just didn't work. It didn't land and the audience rebelled. And at some point it became because how does a wrestling audience rebel? Wrestling audience rebels. Some stop watching, but mostly they still go to the shows. They still participate, but they participate badly. So you. As a fan, for example, you'd do. As a fan, for example, you'd do the good guy. And you're not supposed to do that when you know your role, you know, you know, the ritual, you know, the liturgy. See, this is why this is so exciting to me, because when you talk wrestling, I see church. It's so similar. And that's that's really what the main thing I wanted to talk about today was was that. So so you you don't you but you still participate, but you participate badly. So you you either jeer the good guys or you cheer the bad guys or you create chants like this is boring. So you do. If if that happened in church and it would happen a lot. And but it's it's it's really interesting that, you know, you're doing a sports chant, which is what you're supposed to do, but you're you're chanting your disapproval of the the product that's in front of you. It's not just that you're. Yeah. The product that you are participating in, actually. Because that's the product that you're participating in. And you're not just doing a sports chant. You're doing a sports chant. Participating in, actually. Because that becomes part of the show at that point. If I'm watching a match on TV and this happens, that that's what I'm watching on TV and watching a match taking place in a crowd chanting, this is boring or for a crowd not doing what they're supposed to do, what you would expect them to do. And there is a tug of war there. And. At the same time, so you could be too stubborn with this, McMahon was famously very, very stubborn about trying to have his vision take place. At the same time, his successor, who is also is son-in-law. Is much, much better, and he's actually good at. He also doesn't give fans what they want, in a sense, but he does it in a way where they say, oh, yeah, it's a good thing that he didn't listen. Where after the fact. You. You understand, OK, actually. He had a plan there and I should have trusted it. And, you know, he believed that the story that he was going to tell is not what the audience expects, but or thinks at once, but it actually is what it wants. And I think that. Crowd dynamics, I think when you're when you become a slave. To either end, so it could be a slave to your own. I know what's best in a way that is. False or oh, they want this, I better give it to them. I think there's there's a form of idolatry there where there you can either be. Loyal to to the idea that you're trying to represent in the narrative. Or. And again, sometimes there's it's tricky because, you know, you can do that in a bad way as well, or you can placate the audience and culturally in the last decade and a half. This this part of it is relevant because. This this part of it is relevant because. A lot of things that didn't used to be wrestling became wrestling. A lot of places where you so a big thing that. Characterizes wrestling is that immediate audience participation and immediate immediate feedback and. News channels, for example, now that you have Twitter and you have you, you can tell what the loudest voices want want to see or. Or want to hear in a way that if you're not used to dealing with that. Reaction can really affect you. Oh, we need to give them everything they want. And then you get. It's also so it's either in terms of the voice that you can see or the the. The very. Down to the most minute level analytics where you can OK, this article got this many clips this article got more clicks and you can become a slave to that and lose, for example, if you're if you're a news channel, the. The core of what makes what news should be, so there's a form of idolatry there where you. You follow a false idol that is the immediate popularity of the immediate the immediate gratification of getting the most the highest number. In terms of clicks in terms of viewership or in terms of the people saying what so people tell you what they want and then if you immediately listen without thinking about how it plays into the. The larger picture of what it is that you're doing. Things can go right, and I think a lot of. Surface level American culture now. Has that element of it where people who didn't know how to deal with loud voices telling them this is bad or this is good or you should do this. OK, well, our audience is telling us this, so therefore we must do it. So that's that's the first point that was going to to make. Actually, I want to, but I forgot I want to ask you whether you. Since our last conversation had more like could put into more concrete words, what it was about wrestling that that. Well, part of part of. The limitation of my ADHD and how that limitation has structured. What has grown around me, which I use as. Relevance realization. Is. I. You know, so when you're in front of me. I can see it and you do a really good job of laying this out when you were just talking about is just so absolutely relative and you said it well to news, especially to politics again. Remember. Donald Trump and his relationship with wrestling. He is a WWE Hall of Famer. Yes. Yep. Yep. And. And when you talk about these institutions. Wrestling, let's say it this way, the spirit of wrestling has moved into. More institutions around us than ever before. And so now that gets into the fact that the spirit of wrestling isn't just about athletic theater or men in tights. This is this is a spirit that actually you can see in the way that the. Spirit that actually you can see it in the Protestant Reformation, because in some ways what you're describing is. So the product, one way to understand the Protestant Reformation that gets billed as the Protestant Reformation, even though there are many of them, is that Germany around Wittenberg and then in other places happened in the UK. There was a there was a revolt. And the way you laid it out in terms of in terms of the Booker. That because that that stubbornness that McMahon had is what made him so good. This is this is, you know, Verbecky's relevance realization. So the fact that he could push through with things that it seemed the crowd wasn't up on. So then eventually he was right. The crowd caught up with him. But he got so stubborn at times that he lost the crowd. And that's always a tension going on. And and part of what's going on right now, I think in terms of this little corner is that people want to see me as the Booker. But I am not really the Booker. I've got a fair amount of influence, but there are other see. And this is where I think and I wonder if this is what's happening with wrestling. McMahon sort of had a monopoly. And when you have a monopoly, it can afford a sort of tyranny. But when that breaks down, you tend to then get marketplace dynamics, which are different, which actually strengthens the crowd. Because now the Bookers have to be more attentive to the crowd. But but that can have a deleterious effect to actually. And this is where it gets really hard. The quality, because. We the quality, so you go back to Sevilla King and her channel, you know, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, piercing this quality is a very mysterious thing, which is it's partly subjective, people have different senses of the quality, people have their preferences, yada, yada, yada. But at the same time. Sometimes quality becomes its own thing that it's sort of becomes. It transcends the preferences. And that's when people get a sense of, oh, higher quality and even feel starts to feel like divinity because it's transcending. And so I think everything that you said here is just so cogent. And I think so important and accurate. It's in a say in the similar way to the fact that if a preacher sees this and starts talking in religious terms, lots of people miss it in the same way with that. Wrestling is sort of like a church and wrestling. We just had a live stream on this morning where a guy who's made himself a little bit famous in the comments section for being a physicalist, skeptic atheist sort of made a lot of noise. Well, part of part of what's going on here is that type of person is deeply modernistic. And when they look at wrestling, I mean, the new atheist guys, if they had a fit about religion, they'd have a huge fit about wrestling. And I'd see that in the comments from our video. Wrestling, are you serious? You know, because there is a there's an elitist snobbery with respect to it, because it is theater, but it's not Shakespeare or things that have status. It's low. And it's and so people mock wrestling in the same way they mock religion. But they're not seeing something which is enormously powerful. And it's almost always when the elites get to a certain point that they sort of begin to despise and. When let's we can put it in political terms. When the Democratic Party started hating its constituency, when the church starts hating its flock, when the book starts hating the fans. Oh, yeah, there there will be a price to pay for that. And we see that dynamic playing out in multiple areas. And one of the really nice things about wrestling is. The K-Fabe, everybody knows. It's wrestling, but it's these, you know, it's this it's this it's this liminal space, so I think that's why I think. Wrestling is just such an amazing analog that is so telling about so many things that we can barely articulate. And so I think that's the genius of it. And you see that you communicate that well. Thanks. So a couple of things there, first of all, a lot of that touches on a lot of the rest of the stuff I had in mind. Now, there is something to say about wrestling actually was or had a lot of loudliness in it for a while because of this man and his. Preferences. I'll put it that way. But. Now, so that that that was the case, it's not something that they, you know. There was a time where it was very easy to get disgusted by some of the things happening in specifically in WWE as a company. But over the last few years, first of all, now it's it's as soon as wrestling becomes good, it becomes a cultural phenomenon. Happened in the late 90s. And it's happening again. We're actually in a golden age of wrestling right now. And they just signed right before the Vince allegations came out. They just signed a an unprecedented deal with Netflix. For. Yeah. So starting January 25, Raw, which is one of the flagship shows, is going to be on Netflix. And internationally, it's actually going to be Netflix is going to be the home of of wrestling. That shows so many transitions, the transition from cable to streaming. And it's also the fact that it shows a breadth for Netflix that Netflix has been trying to gain. And and it will also, again, as what happened in the 90s, it will tend to mainstream wrestling again, like it was in the 90s and then sort of dropped out of. And when you look at these religious tides, it's a similar thing. Religions go up and down, similar to the way wrestling goes up and down. Yeah, yeah. So that's and at least for wrestling, it has a lot to do with the leadership and the vision, because for the past three years or so, two and a half, wrestling actually has already been going through a boom period. And you can look if you look at the at the ratings, it's consistently the top rated show now. A lot of people gave up on wrestling, have come back in the last two years against sense, Vince stepped down and his son in law took over. And. And. You can see there's a lot of people that you don't know wrestling fans that I know wrestling fans in the popular culture, because like it's some it's it's this thing that you know. And you'd be surprised by how many of them there are and how ubiquitous really wrestling is when you when you know to look for it. Yeah. And as for you said, you were talking about quality, right? About about there's there being it's objective at the same time. It's objective. We'll talk about transjective in a different way a bit later, but. I think it has to do. So, OK, so I've been trying to think for a while what. What makes us how can you tell that a story is good? And I think I have some sort of theory. Can I share my screen? Oh, let me let me give that permission. Gosh. I'm looking at. Come on. OK, go ahead. All right. Well. Actually, let's see if whiteboard works. OK, good. OK, so. Let's say. This is your immediate life, and so I'm going to build a hierarchical structure. Can you see my cursor? Yeah, yeah, I see. OK, yeah. So let's say something happens, let's say your your son got married, you're you're engaged in that, right? You're interested. Yeah. OK, but you're obviously right, because the the degree of separation here is very small. Like, it's very relevant to you in an immediate way. Yeah. OK, now it might be something more distant. Maybe the. His wife's sister or something happened there, and he's still going to be interested, but less so. And then if it's if I tell you. John Levkowitz just had a child. You don't really care about that, right? Don't know who he is. No, right. Exactly. Yeah, I just I just made it up. But what happens if something that's completely foreign to you? How do you get something that's completely foreign to you? But if if something that's completely foreign to you engages, for example, you watch Better Call Saul, right? And you don't know any of these people. They're not even their fictional characters. But there is something there that engages you, right? So what I would posit is that the further away it is. The deeper in terms of your internal mechanisms, you have to go in order for it to be relevant. So, yes, actually being engaged in something that's that's on the surface completely foreign is a sign that is that it is very profound. Yeah. Yeah. OK, so that's that's what I wanted to share. Then, yeah, no, I think that's very true. And and so then the structures. So if you were to tell me that whatever this dude's name was is a pro wrestler, well, that would go that would go into this conversation. But when let's say, OK, so a current example that King Charles has has cancer, has cancer. Oh, OK, well, now we're going deep. And he's not even my king. I mean, the whole American revolution, but Americans still follow him. And then Pope Francis, you know, there's all this drama around the pope. And it's like, I'm Protestant. I'm American. I'm not connected to Charles. I'm not connected to the pope. Oh, but, you know, and so then and then someone comes along and says, I've got proof Martin Luther was gay. And it's oh, you know, now suddenly, though, you're exactly right that where I think that's an excellent observation. Good. So so. So then the next thing is going to be related to McGillchrist, which is. Why, you know, we have a like a corpus of stories that is at the base of our culture, both of our cultures. And why is it a story? So I was thinking of because you have essentially two ways of representing ideas, one is a story, the other is a model and abstraction. So what I just did, for example, was a model with the points and the lines. And what's what's the difference between them? What what are they? So here's my thinking on it right now. And actually, I'm reading McGillchrist's book. I've been listening to him for a while, but I'm reading his book also because it's going to play into my PhD, probably his work. And essentially, stories are the master brain, the right brain way of representing reality, whereas models are left brain. And a good model is going to be actually immune to interpretation. The point of a model is to decontextualize it in such a way that there is nothing there left to misconstrue. A model is aimed to distill a specific idea in a specific way. It's a freezing in time of a concept and taking it outside of any. Yep. Yeah, any grounding. Yep. And it's to, you know, in my language, it's to raise it up. It gets it off off the ground. And so it's it's transcendent. It's universal in some. Well, that's the hope of it. But then there will be. Even if. Yeah. So even if it is, it might be universal, but it's not not everyone is going to to either understand it or be able to. It's not transjective. Right. Right. Where I'm going with this. And stories are a story is. A representation of actually how we perceive the world. And because our cultural stories. Actually, give me give me a second. I'm going to fill up some water because. Oh, OK, I'll pause. I'll fill up my water, too. So. So stories are. Transjective and. Because the stories that we're talking about at the bedrock of our culture. Are profound because of how the stories that are profound manage to survive across time and the evolution of religion. And well, that's something. Because these are profound stories, no matter how distant you find them. You should be able to connect with them on some level based on what I. The model that I just gave, if it's if it's correct. So we have deep even just the physicality, because, you know, this personhood, I mean, all there's there's super deep reasons why even in this model, we can connect with stories. Yep. Tracking. Yeah, so so. So these stories, because they they can touch the. Our our deepest like the deepest recesses of our minds or souls or whatever. It doesn't matter how distant they are to any one individual, there's always something there to to grab on to. And also stories, they're not a distillation, so they have a lot of what could for some reason would just be noise, but they have a lot of distinct parts. And and this allows for much broader relevance, realization, much more encompassing. So for even for me, if I watch a show, I can identify with one part and completely ignore another part, which is like the time of day or or the day of the week. And for some people, maybe that will hold some significance, whereas something I'm interested in wouldn't. So a story has a lot of. Different parts that that can serve as a basis for for. For connection and understanding and. And then then you can have a culture that's based on the same stories, and everyone agrees that it should be based on those same stories. So there is like a story allows for a generalizable hyperspecificity. So everyone, anyone can find their own very specific situation in a good store. OK, it's also important to recognize while we're being meta here that what we are doing is modeling story. Yeah, which is what I just which is earlier. Yeah. Yeah. And and so, you know, I just there was just a there was just a live stream with a somebody who's kind of made a little name for himself at the moment as a skeptic in the corner again. And he it was so interesting because once you begin to once you begin to recognize the elements of this model and you hear people talk, it's like, oh, yeah, I just want clarity. And and you begin to notice that, OK, I I just want this. I I'm looking I'm really frustrated with, let's say, wrestling again. I'm really frustrated with wrestling because it doesn't fit them. It isn't a model. That's right. Wrestling is not a model. You can learn. You can derive some models from it. You can learn about models through it. But the fact that it isn't a model. And so if you become a dogmatist with respect to models, well, there's a certain amount of you can't actually live in models because they're not transjective. Exactly, exactly. And and I would absolutely put stories above models in the hierarchy, if only for the fact so to talk to someone like that. The reason would be that it's much easier to take a story and create a compelling story and create a compelling model from that story. And you can think of literature analysis, then it would be the other way around. Right. You can't just take a model and craft a compelling story around that model. Right. It was funny when, you know, for a while, Peugeot was talking about story and people were like, OK, I'm going to take the model of an archetype. I'm going to craft a story around it. And those always make terrible stories. Yeah, that's that's my experience as well. You can tell when a story is aimed to to transmit a specific model where compared to when it's organic. Yeah, it's why Christian movies are often so terrible, because certain Christianity, you know, especially in Protestantism, well, here's the model. So let's make a story that, you know, perpetuates the model. It's usually a terrible story. Yep. As a quick aside before moving on to the to the next point, actually, if someone is interested in seeing a struggle, a struggle session between wrestling and its audience, there's one actually happening right now as we speak. We talk about so Vince McMahon was the tyranny aspect. Now, WWE was bought by Endeavor, Arie Emanuel, which Arie Gold from Entourage was based. For those of you who watched Entourage that I think should tell you everything you need to know. And it's unclear exactly yet to what extent, but it might be what might be happening is that they're shafting a very compelling two year long story that was supposed to culminate in WrestleMania, which is the biggest event and it's in April, it's in eight weeks. And and there was a change in gears where Dwayne The Rock Johnson just became part of the board and now he perhaps is going to replace the by all accounts the protagonist of the last two years of wrestling. He's going back into wrestling. I thought he left wrestling. He left wrestling and now he's on the board of the company that bought WWE and yeah and he's involved again and it's unclear to what level he is exerting his influence or the bosses are looking at the most immediate bottom line, which is also a form of idolatry. And but but there's a chance it's left it's been left open to interpretation that but there's a chance that they're trying to change the story in a completely unnatural way and you were there's a result of revolt happening right now. The hashtag we want Cody Cody is the Cody Rhodes is the other protagonist has been trending for many days straight in in the United States. Wow. Because of this. I type in hashtag we and Wednesday motivation is the first one and we want Cody. We want Cody is the second. Is the second. Wow. Yeah, that's part of the that's part of the issue of these of these of social media is that you can be on Twitter and know nothing about what in fact may be occupying Twitter because of course it's also targeted and so what's happening this will never come up and what's happening until now now that I've hit on it now Twitter is going to be feeding me wrestling news and it's going to because the main and the match that the rock Dwayne Johnson is going to have to have or potentially you want to have is not even a bad match just doesn't fit the narrative at the present moment and it feels very artificial like it's a match against his cousin in something in a story that's been heavily involving the family because it's a wrestling family so it makes sense and he's also a big star and there's there's room for this story just not right now and and there was already the revolt started as soon as the the inklings and the fans are wrestling fans know no pivot when they see it and and also they know that if they really care about this they're undeniable and they really care about this and and there's a revolt happening right now so you can watch the the last monday night raw to see the beginning of it on tv but you also many news news outlets because wrestling is hot right now news outlets picked the because of that and because it's the rock and there's a lot of stuff the rock and there's a lot of stuff worthy of a story there picked up how the rock came back ww and the fans aren't happy which is not usually the the the the response he gets so that's just as a as an aside over you can you can actually see it happening live all right so the the next point is actually was going to be wrestling as religious ritual so we just talked about narrative and what a compelling narrative is and now we there was a compelling narrative being told over two years and it's suddenly like imagine you're watching a movie and then out of nowhere a new character comes in or a character that was briefly introduced at the beginning and suddenly becomes a protagonist and that's not the person you were invested in and you can see how that would be jarring and not work but when wrestling when wrestling works it really works and it it can be the most engaged my most engaged moments in in in fictional media have been in wrestling absolutely um um now a lot of times it doesn't work because partially because there's a lot of moving parts and you have the booker and you also have the wrestlers and wrestlers can get injured and derail plans um and and there's a lot of bottom-up-ness to wrestling that makes it when it works it works really well but it can also be very messy um but it does when it works it does seem to touch something deep um and and that reveals and it touches on something deep and when you're there in the audience you can if i see a match just the last minute of a match i can tell whether it was a good match or not based on just the the vibe that you get from the audience you can get a certain energy um um and and here's the rub with wrestling where it is absolutely in my mind a religious ritual when you watch fiction you watch the fiction usually or you watch a movie what or you consume fiction you are separate from the fiction and when you're engaged in something it's usually something real like when you're when you're participating so you there's a participatory participatory element in being an audience for sports but that's quote unquote real um but in wrestling you have people actively participating and investing themselves in such a way not just investing like you would in a movie but actually participating taking part in a fiction um in a way that again to a to a modernist would be why why are you doing this but it it's a i think it's it's a secular vehicle that shows how non-literal truth can drive people um when wrestling is true um it absolutely drives people it it it makes you chant it makes you invested uh makes you participate in the performance uh so that's that's one thing and the other is a point about propositional versus participatory knowing because there's a sense in which the the textual stories that our cultures are based upon are are propositional but the rituals are participatory and i think um if you don't think about it uh like if you ask some if you ask a christian which is in service of the other they would probably say that the ritual is in service of embodying the the story in a better way but there's an argument to be made that it's either equally important or the other way around and in wrestling i think the the the it's it's clearly the other way around in in how it operates so the the the narrative the the propositional narrative is absolutely in service of the participatory performance that is the match which involves the audience and all that stuff um and that's the point that's definitely true and and that's i mean when again if you look at in christianity sort of what sort of separates the protestant from the catholic orthodox catholics and the orthodox they have tended to prioritize the ritual and the protestants have tended to organize prioritize the proposition but again these are massive movements and you can find very propositional orthodox and catholics and very ritual participatory protestants and and part of what made that movement so complex was a big part of the protestant reformation was the priesthood of all believers what that meant was now suddenly the priesthood was participatory on a massive scale in protestantism which was supposed to be propositional but now it was massively participatory and so what you see are just all of this all of this subtleness and you can see that even in this to the limited degree that i understand this present um this present audience revolt in wrestling where i mean the rock that's propositional there's a there's a real human being with skin around him and you know cody they're propositional and so and that's that's part of the difficulty here is that people sometimes want to say out with the propositional ah you couldn't you couldn't articulate that sentence or promote that idea without the propositional it's you need nouns and verbs it's just the way it is yeah um you said you definitely you need both because there's also um and wrestling can see there's a in a mocking way there's what's called a heatless banger a banger is like a really good match athletically or technically but it's heatless there's no heat to it there's no underlying narrative holding it together um so you definitely need both yeah um by the way just as a because i'm sure people will say it and i didn't explicitly outright talk about this wrestling fans know that wrestling is a performance it's they know that it's fiction because a lot of the the oh people who watch wrestling and this is the modern thing they must not know that it's fictional and i think this there's a lot to with that that's parallel to religion um oh if if they participate if they're invested in this if they participate in this then they must be fooled by it it hasn't tried to fool anyone for over uh 50 years now but but therefore they must be that's the only explanation yeah and so no so just as a and and and so that's where the enlightenment with religion gets really interesting because and and you've seen this played out recently when jordan peterson was talking about religion as fictional and yeah and at first the new atheist like alex alex o'connor at first was sort of like ah see he said it he said it but the more alex o'connor began to understand what peterson meant by fictional the more alex o'connor had to sort of back away because this was sort of tried in the modernist fundamentalist fight at the beginning of the 20th century in religion and protestantism in america because modernists tried to say oh it's fictional and and so then the fundamentalist said no it's literal and of course that's a terrible word and and what the entire fight has been trying to get one's head around is in fact what do these terms really mean when we're talking about history let's say but but then you have the question of history and and and then you get these fights over um you know did jesus walk on water and and then you begin to get a sense of okay well what what what exactly are we really talking about here in terms of that importance i mean because you know and what's interesting again as you as you put it out initially with respect to wrestling it's that dwayne johnson the rock dwayne johnson the rock has always been both things now he he was he was in he was in the wrestling world for a while then he just kind of drops out and then he's in the hollywood world and he's making movies and he's having a career and he's doing all of this and now he's dipping into the wrestling world and and the fact that your character um you've got two identities because you're in two different realms yes which is so that's um okay so yeah yeah okay yeah no there's a there's a lot here trying to yeah because in wrestling there's a on the one hand it's very clearly fictional people are engaged with it as fiction but on the other at the same time there is um a lot of pulling from real life in terms of what the narrative is based on so for example cody is a second generation wrestler yeah now you start getting the generations into this holy cow yeah and his father his whole narrative is based on the fact that his father um is everything okay yeah i'm just looking because it's cody roads yeah i'm old enough and no even just a little bit of now for us say oh he's a roads he's the son of dusty roads yeah oh boy yeah and dusty roads his experience in wwe was um in a sense humiliating there was there was something there and again vincent man being vindictive and dusty rose was a big star in the nwa which was the the competition and when he came in he was humiliated and and he never won the title the the title the championship in the the main championship in wwe and as a wrestler you know it's it's fictional winning the championship but the same time it's very real yeah um and he there was dusty dusty was actually used to be a booker as well and he coined what's called the dusty finish dusty finish is where you seemingly have one outcome one outcome similarly the good outcome so you do it with a heel which is a bad guy a heel champion so you create a situation wherein it looks like the the good guy won and he's holding the title over his head and he's happy but then the referee like there may be a one referee got dropped and then another came in and the referee's talking that no no actually we're going to have to nullify the outcome because this and this and this happened and there was and that's called a dusty finish because it's both dusty and also because dusty invented it and he had a dusty finish with the wwe championship where he won it but didn't win it and he never actually won the championship and cody's whole cody was in wwe years ago and then he went out and actually started the closest thing to a modern day competition to wld and then he came back uh he was part of the the founding class of that organization but since he came back uh he's been made like anointed okay he's we like what he's been doing over the and the way he interacts with with the fans and we see something here and his story has been um to to win the championship that his dad never won and something that's known is that in the negotiations that was actually one of the one of the issues like he he took the championship from the wall the the the memento the the the championship that his dad never won but like there was a it was on the wall right there was a shrine yeah there was a temple and in in coming back because you know he was he was a key player for the the competition um and for it part of the the reason for coming i'm coming back because i want to win the championship that my dad never did um powerful archetypal story yeah and and that's the story that's been playing out over the last two years and the the hashtag there's like the the tagline would be finish the story and that's finish your dad's story the story that your dad never managed to finish and that's the engaging story that's happening right now and it's very much based on reality uh but at the same time it's a fictional story yes and there's um and so the so we talked about you know the rock and the the agentic relationship in wrestling is extremely interesting the the agent arena relationship because the rock in many ways was actually the same character he was in WWE in his movies uh he he actually tried doing something else and then they told them people want to see the rock when they when they go to your movies um and the rock was surprisingly the same like didn't morph when he when he when he switched arenas um but uh like the the thing with with the Cody Rhodes the character is very much Cody Rhodes the person with specific aspects of it uh turned up and and that's also something that we all do like we were slightly different people in different contexts um and yeah so it's just when you talked about the the switch there like all that came rushing in and I had to to uh put it back in order um well and if you you know this gets really nerdy if you would read a book like um Charles Taylor a secular age I mean charles Charles Taylor talks about different times like the um traditional societies had different times and and so and that get John Verbecky gets at that with the agent arena so you're right that there's there's definitely a connection between Cody Rhodes in the ring and Cody Rhodes in life and and again wrestling because you hold character in a way but you're in two different arenas and you know and clergy understand that too when you're in church you're in a particular arena but there's tension between those arenas because people wonder well are you the same when you're up there speaking preaching the word of god and when you're at home with your family are you the same and that's that same question as to to what degree do these two realms relate to one another and as human beings we're very conscious of that because we at a very deep level even ardent secularists understand different realms and and I I think I think there's also a modern um illusion that you have a personality and then you take that personality and put it into different places but you don't have a personality you have the thing that you bring into different contexts that then you have a transjective way of being yes um and so I know it for myself both for when I'm performing as a wrestler obviously but that that is very much a character that is based on an aspect of it but it's very much a character but also when I was recording so if you remember I um I I have this Hebrew course that oh yeah that's right yeah and and when I'm recording it I'm noticing myself being a different person and it's it's a consistent different person it's a performance it's not a performance of not me but it is a performance it's the arena is definitely different so I have no doubt that you are different in your everyday life than you are in front of the camera and then different yet to when you are preaching right um and but if the difference is too much then suddenly you get you know Jesus was the one who popularized this word hypocrisy yeah and you have two faces we can't have two faces what you need is one face that can do different things yes yeah yeah and it all it all has to be uh ingrained in the same thing and in wrestling if if it isn't then in acting as well um then you can tell and that's what happened originally with if you remember Roman Reigns that was the person that Vince McMahon tried to he tried to make him a character that just wasn't the person Vince McMahon had a vision of what the good guy character should be and he actually he's been trying to do it for it stuck with John Cena who is now also in Hollywood and and doing bigger and bigger things and he's becoming a lot like the rock in terms of how ubiquitous ubiquitous he's going to be uh and how much you're going to see him everywhere so work with him but the character didn't work with Roman Reigns who is now the champion that's the person against whom Cody is trying to finish the story that's the person holding the championship he's been holding it for four four years now um successfully he's a character that actually works and and by the way four years is it's like it's the third or fourth longest reign ever and back all the way back to the 80s or 70s and like Hulk Hogan um and so it's really this reign ending is pivotal it's like this is this has been building up for a long long long time and there's the Cody story converging with from Reigns' story um and before that actually the rock himself he didn't work at first in 9096 uh because Vince tried to give him that same character and it just it didn't it didn't land um and so there's it so there you have to have it has to it has to you can't be duplicitous you you can't be something that's not you right but being different things in different contexts it's you're not one thing right there you there's the thing that you bring to a situation and you can be authentic by bringing that thing and it's going to look differently in different contexts but you're still that one thing um yeah okay so there's one more point i wanted to make it actually i watched your conversation with verveky today that you just had and at the end you mentioned something that that really really fit with with this conversation so uh using vervekyisms um wrestling as a model for self-correcting optimal grip via distributed cognition so i'll explain he mentioned uh schellenberger's evolving religion and a lot of a lot of that was really really relevant so in wrestling what you do is you have people who are wrestlers and they try they have a character and they try to embody and they start small they start from their local scene and then if the if if it works they get noticed and then they go up to like a bigger organization you have organizations of different sizes and eventually it really works you get to wwe and alternatively wwe also uh takes people and teaches them wrestling but if you if you come from the independent the independent wrestling if you come from the independent the independence that's how it looks so there is a bottom-up relevance realization there of both who am i as a wrestler what's my character what what do i bring and then does it land does it uh grip people and then there is a constant feedback loop of you you present a narrative you get feedback and it's an always an ongoing narrative wrestling never stops you present a narrative you get feedback you there's an the interplay there between telling the narrative and getting the feedback and the story is always evolving so a story that worked really really well in the 90s is not going to work necessarily as well today there are aspects of it that might but it has to be presented differently so it's a story that um and this this is in a sense a process of the optimal narrative for the time self-realizing so that that opponent processing between it's not quite opponent processing but it's the it is the tension between there's the narrative that i want to tell and then how it gets um right how it's received right and so vireki i i quoted almost verbatim what he when he mentioned chellenberger's involving religion so yeah he was talking about skepticism uh skepticism breaks up procedural and substantive uh justice which was by the way a great distinction that uh you made there and that allows you to explore imaginal and therefore non-belief centric notions of faith that is a skeptical attitude because because it is an ongoing evolving optimal group relationship to the sacred yep yeah and i think wrestling stumbled upon a model that actually does that so wrestling by virtue of it being a an archetypal narrative at the core um it can get at least very close to the sacred um in in what it what it does so there's and that's sort of what why i want to do this whole thing about what is a narrative and what narrative grips and why we need narrative um as a culture to be like the the unifying thing and for wrestling that narrative is so you have both what characters work okay it's bottom up in the if you ask peterson that's also how religion religion evolved like okay there's stories okay this story works i don't know why but it works and we're gonna right slowly over time that corpus evolves and becomes right um so and so wrestling is a constant process of that happening yeah and i think that could serve as a model perhaps well because i don't think yeah okay no go ahead yeah finish your sentence the the um so my friend is is volunteering in the rariki foundation um he was actually if you remember rick you uh was talking about um the the ai project that uh of of waking from the meaning press that was actually my friend's idea at first like he approached them with that um and a lot of the i i i hope it succeeds the the the the the project that rariki is engaged in um you mentioned you're skeptical i am uh also i have my it depends on exactly what we're what we mean by success because john is increasingly i mean even the conversation i just had with him with respect to the silk road that was the first time i heard him say you don't live on the silk road you live on what the silk road connects which yeah i think he's continuing to nuance his ideas of legacy religions because the truth is there are dead religions that you really can't inhabit because the the traditions have been severed and there are living religions and living religions are always changing so i one of the videos that isn't out yet but i'll i've had so much stuff to push through the channel it's hard to get pacing right because you put out a new video it hurts the previous video but um but religions are always evolving and and that's and the thing about religions is religions are trying to keep their narrative integrity while they're still evolving and and so so when john is talking about optimal grip and fittedness because early on my my second conversation with john i i basically talked to him about pascal's uh spirit of geometry and spirit of finesse which in some ways maps on to mcgill christ the master brain is much more the spirit of finesse narrative it's geometry um you know the the the um emissary brain so what's and and another thing that i see often in the new atheist debates people will say well we believe science instead of religion because it works technically science doesn't actually work what they're really talking about is technology works i believe in science because my cell phone can make a connection and i think i think i'm more a broader way of saying it would be the predictions in a very narrow uh decontextualized way right right but the predictions are always tested in the actual in this rich physical world that has everything in here and religions are constantly being tested that way too especially you know part of what happens in the protest reformation is that there's sort of a breakout of it's exactly the dynamics it's very much the dynamic you're talking about when this is boring that's because the you know we're still looking for optimal grip and one way to read let's say the the old testament what christians call the old testament or the hebrew scriptures look at the story of someone like gideon you know god comes to gideon and uh you're gonna you're gonna you're gonna free israel from the midianites gideon is skeptical rightly so and then so gideon starts going about the process of gathering his huge an army and you almost almost get the sense in the book of judges that when israel is actually together she's going to be unbeatable but she's never together there's always the different tribes and they don't get along they've got their internecine rivalries etc etc so so gideon decides he's gonna get the whole team together and once we got the whole team together we're gonna smash the midianites and god comes in and says too much what do you mean too much there's no such thing that's too much in a war like this no no no no too much so i want you to then he starts paring it down you know those who drink with the cup tans and those who laugh and pairs it down to 300 and then and then all right right away you know but before then you know he had all this lease testing you know gideon's fleece and all of this stuff going on all of this stuff is about optimal grip and it's this back and forth it's very transjective and and the same thing between the booker and the audience and the same thing that you just laid out and especially now you know part of the disaster bookers want a lot of power but what they couldn't stop was dusty roads having an athletic son and probably a good-looking son because dusty road showed competence so his wife was probably very hot which means that his son is both athletic and charismatic good-looking oh now there's a problem and then he's out in another wilderness i mean you can you can just you can just work this thing all over the place and that's again why i can see how wrestling really works and wrestling now people are going to wrestle with the thing i'm about to say now it's revelatory yeah reality is revealed through wrestling and he said well this is this is fiction this is theatrical athleticism yes but it's also revelatory and it's revelatory on lots of different levels just in the same way that literature is revelatory so um you know we're i i'm you know again i'm i'm i'm totally i'm totally tracking with you and i agree with you 100 i agree with you 100 but it's it's that part of what happened with science and part of the reason that the we're seeing the collapse of institutions based on the dogmatism of science was that it was overplayed you know and and and we saw this with covid people are seeing this all over the place with respect to medical technology and as a pastor i see it all the time and that isn't to say that we we we don't we haven't seen amazing leaps forward through medical technology and public health and individual medical practice we have it's near miraculous but it has its limits and um and so you know and part of what was you know i really enjoy my conversations with you is because you're you're i mean you're you're getting a phd in cognitive science and hopefully hopefully yeah i'm still getting uh i'm still in the process but and you're a wrestler and so it's again you have a transjective relationship between these two ath and they're all in you and so all of this i mean you're all of this is salient for you because you're living it out and as you said with respect to the big relationships well the oldest stories in the world the deepest stories in the world are the religious stories i mean just look at look at the book of genesis those stories we continue to pour and analyze and we i mean it's it's hard for many lay people out there to appreciate the amount of scrutiny and battering and dissection and just about every level that the book of genesis has undergone for thousands of years and we still can't get away from the thing and so no i i but but these things these levels go all over the place so when you you know so i didn't know who cody was i didn't know who roman was and then you said he's the son of a wrestler and over on this screen over here i you know did the little search for hashtag we want and cody i didn't again i didn't see the last name because it wasn't salient to me and then you said he's the son of a wrestler so my eyes dart over there is his last name on there roads bang dusty roads it's like oh yeah vix vince mcmahon and the the the wrestling establishment is dealing with something very real which is basically human reproduction and human pair bonding and the fact that dusty roads if i remember him correctly walking down the street we wouldn't look at the guy and say yeah he's a no but you know he rose on that hierarchy he's going to have a very good looking wife there you know and off we go i mean these these things have been playing out forever in politics and religion and all of the things because they're very very deep yep and and there there's a reason i think this story is is tracking as much as it is and you can see in wrestling live what actually grips what stories work what stories don't and and i think there's a lot of there's a lot to be learned from that because you actually you get you get a peek into a very noticeable an easily discernible manifestation of distributed cognition yep within that audience and that audience is a general audience i would argue it's not it's not that there's nothing specific about wrestling audiences that they're different from high and low iq very different nationalities it's a very broad audience and you know when you know we when you asked about my skepticism about john's project and my question is always like what exactly is your project because one of the things that we see in this little corner of the internet is it tends to be people with pretty high iq because i mean if you're going to be navigating these fancy vervekey words john vervekey gets up in front of a general audience eyes glazed over because you're going to have to appropriate all of this language to figure out what he's talking about and and we see we see this with the skeptics because you know as this thing grows in visibility you're going to draw the attention of more and more skeptics and people are going to be skeptical and scoffing and they're saying oh you know these fancy vervekey words are word salad and you know richard dawkins says of jordan peterson people just people just think he's impressive because they don't understand it's like that is a stupid argument i regularly watch really smart people in front of people who don't understand and they're not fascinated by it they're bored by it yeah so and as a christian minister i understand all of these dynamics so but but and what's happening there what's happening there is and i see this a lot and it's a very left brain way of thinking is i can't understand it therefore it is not understandable exactly that that's that's so because there's this little there's this little fallacy that creeps in which is that oh i've learned this new tool this tool of transcendence all of this left brain stuff is very transcendent and so then they get they think that if they exactly like you said if they can't see it it's gibberish oh okay and once you see that enough you just you know that on one hand you just can't talk somebody out of that because yeah the whole facade of the left brain is well if i make arguments then they'll come around oh you have no idea how a human being works if you believe that yeah i think docking's thinking he's anti-dogmatic is is a huge irony specifically him yeah yeah especially him and and so and but that but that spirit is very much out there yeah absolutely what mcgill christa's has been going on about he himself is a is a representation of of something very relevant um so so my skepticism could just be my uh lack of nod because to my great shame i actually haven't finished uh into the meaning crisis yet and i'm sort of still getting into uh that stuff i partly blame my fiance because we've we said we'd do it together and we're doing it but because we have to find time to do it together it's slower than it would be otherwise you're watching away from the meaning crisis with your fiance i'm so lucky right actually one of the videos i've always got 10 videos on my mind that i want to make one of them is another recent little ripple in the corner has been what about the spouses of these strange people yeah i just saw the video and i saw you say and yeah our wife's sort of tolerating i was like no she's she's right there with me there you go lucky are you lucky are you i certainly feel lucky um so so but to the extent that i understand it i think there's something missing there you touched on it and that it's you have an ecology of practices why they feel like for for the average person okay so there's there's these things here and vervecky has the reasons but to me they all sound like model reasons like they all sound there's things that need to happen differently and and and and the whole thing is is modeled beautifully and and and the models helped me greatly in understanding myself and and evolving my outlook but but it there's the there isn't a compelling narrative undergirding it and and perhaps you know you're going to go back to your own narrative but why would you go out into the silk road in the first place yep yep and this is why you go out into the silk road so again the guy that was just on luke's grail country live stream this morning he and this again as a pastor you see the patterns grew up in a household of alcoholics terrible childhood as a dyslexic you see the patterns especially by the way but that's uh but that that would be my what i would argue that that's what i'm probably going to uh yeah so as a dyslexic your your your hyper right brain uh i i sent you a link about that um and that means better my my point that's what i'm going to to uh research it is going and this sort of something again that me and my fiance came up with together because she's dyslexic um and we had the realization okay dyslexia is characterized by an inability to hold um abstract pattern patterns decontextualized patterns but uh there's a trade-off relationship there and if you look at the pattern of the relationship there and if you look at the upsides of of dyslexia um those are all related to being able to recognize patterns irrespective of what you already of your your prediction so right brain is the new yeah left brain is the old yeah and so when you're more open to the new yeah um the your it's easier for so do you know the game set with the cards no so it's a game where you have okay you know where's waldo yeah as yeah so when i uh because we tried testing it out um it was it was actually one of the predictions okay if this is true then you're probably going to be much better at where's waldo than me and she and uh so we we opened the book together and tried to start started looking for the the characters and uh she was three to one so for everyone i found she found three wow um that's interesting because the the patterns and if you look up the game set i i expect that you would be uh surprisingly good at it compared to to an average person because um the the the patterns reveal themselves to you the set is a game of finding patterns finding matching cards um and and when you're not bogged down by decontextualized patterns which is what makes the spelling issues manifest and also forgetting names that's a huge thing because names are not there's nothing about a name that unless you find a specific connection but a name is is a an arbitrary thing that you assign to something a modern name a modern name is not an ancient name yeah yeah so yeah so so that's what i said about finding a context to associate with um and and so you you lose the ability to hold uh decontextualized patterns or not lose but it's harder compared to the average person but what you gain uh is the ability and there's there's a lot if you if you look at um if you read mcgill press is actually it's very obvious that that's probably what's happening uh taking with that the fact that uh dyslexic people are hyper right brain um you're more open to updating your world what i hope would be the case because that allows me to to tie into my research and my original point was how does worldview affect perception that was my like fascination and and so presumably i would again still need to do the the research but that's what i'm going to get into um but presumably you're you're in the less bogged down by your worldview if you're dyslexic you're more open to things revealing themselves as opposed to um um like putting your yeah yeah uh making reality fit your expectation yeah that's why everybody's upset with me because i'm not the calvinist they're looking for usually looking to hate so we're talking about vervekis you know yeah you were yeah you're talking about notice talked about noticing patterns yeah as a pastor yeah i said it's also the dyslexic yeah so noticing patterns well so the so you know rough child and then people people have had really chaotic you know difficult growing up they find religion bang you know because suddenly you find a community if especially if you find a really good community a community of people that have a capacity for love and forgiving and for i mean and if you've had if you haven't had enough of that growing up boy you're going to get drawn to that like crazy but then you know this was i just posted elizabeth old my conversation with elizabeth oldfield today but then there's going to be other questions about this religion and so then there's going to be more testing and then people sometimes then bounce out but you know they've already established a degree of healing and success and everything and then they bounce out and kind of live out there but they what what the what the religion does very well and part of part of why religion has been adaptive you know in terms of evolution is that it's communitarian it holds people together now that's where religions and nationalisms are sort of competitors because they're sort of operating in the same way but um they're they're also different in other ways but many of the dynamics in politics and religion are strikingly similar but people are always having to fit their optimal grip and they will you know one of the things that people don't understand is that everybody has a degree of dissonance within any system or community that they're inhabiting and the question as to whether or not you're going to leave the community that has a lot to do with incentive structures again these are these are massive things because they're very real and so then this low language of optimal grip someone can stay in a bad marriage for a long time if certain things are true other people can't stay in a bad marriage anytime at all because i mean it's these are enormously complex things because we are normally complex creatures and a lot of it of it i think is related to the outside frame so for example in leaving a community there's dissonance between me and the community but if if you're individual focused that's very different than being community focused or community oriented so what has to change we are the community um i think that that's another and that's a cultural thing yeah um well there's so many layers to all of these things in any given individual which is why models at at a certain point you need the models because models are helpful data but if you're a therapist or a pastor or someone who's dealing with individuals you're going to need some models but no individual in front of you is a model they're all so you're good if you can't do the transjective and this in some ways is the difference between a someone who knows a great deal of psychology but can't be a therapist because there's a whole other sets of skills and practices and rituals that you need to employ to actually help an instantiation you know and all all that is is and how how you unravel in a good way like reveal um mcgill chris's main point which is the emissary brain is not bad but it has to be in service of the master brain right because we are people yep and that's of course that the when when the left brain goes too far it forgets what we are which is an astounding thing for a human being but you can only hold that for a while and then your wife leaves you because if you're so much up here you're probably going to have trouble being a father or a spouse or a good employee because the world is just so full of people and and in many ways i i see this playing out politically i i know people who are in politics who are in politics and they're always like they're so frustrated because what they want politics to be is a competition between models and policies and in american presidential elections it's like how on earth could donald trump win that's not so really hard to see is it it is if you're just so completely lopsided in terms of your hemispheres or at least if if you're if you're your only derelevance realization through very specific um metrics right right you've and and there's tremendous power in limiting i mean that's the whole movement of science sciences let's take all of the variables down to one that's extremely powerful but and peterson made this point years ago once you do that well now you know you're monofocal that's the move that's the power but you're now going to have to bring it back out into the rest of the world where there's lots of powers yeah and i think there's also at some point it just becomes bad science so as an example there's a psychiatrist that i i follow uh who's also he's indian and in like his he comes from an indian family and he also trained actually to be a buddhist monk for several years and he's very interesting in that sense um and he often talks about how western um medicine one of the problems is that it it it does its trials in terms of human beings and as like this is a human being and this works on human beings right but there might be an in indian culture like in indian medicine you have sub sub categories or sub types that on on whom different things work differently um and and perhaps there is a chance that it works better i'm not familiar with that literature far from my field of expertise but but at the very least this is not even a question that would be uh posed there's some sort of an assumption that if you flatten the variables um you're not going to lose anything meaningful enough for what you're trying to do and and the like a different uh what is it called uh something fingerprint uh but like a different type of of person is not something that would reveal itself in the way we do medicine now it might you might have like a very astute researcher maybe knows oh i'm noticing a pattern here um and there's factor um and there's factor analysis and stuff like that but it's it works on on on a very low scale you can you can see that when something when you're talking about something that's complex as a human uh a whole way of being as a person um that's not something in a way that is like scientists scientists are going to to not agree with me because i'm not i'm i can't express it well enough exactly what i mean because there are tools like factor analysis that are supposed to do that but there are many ways in which uh if you're not looking for it you're going to miss it uh in those in those places um anyway so we veered off the point of verveki and and uh yeah so so i think john has continued in his project he's continued to continue to work on the fittedness of it and i've been watching his his devout the development of his project with respect to this and so like when he told me you know the silk road is you don't live on the silk road and i say no that's right and the difficulty is that these legacy religions which continue to adapt now we get frustrated because we want something to adapt right now it's like no that's not people don't work that way religions certainly don't work that way but over long when when people when people do work their way they crash and burn right and same with religions and that's why you know um that that's why the older the religion in some ways the more durable it is because it's been tested out there in the real world again and again at the same time there are extinct religions that were very old so um you know you gotta sort of give natural selection it's due that things come and go and you know the enlightenment was a major um you know it was a major thing that it's continuing to reverberate throughout the world and you know in the video that i haven't released yet i talk about you know islam and the enlightenment that's you know because you know you're and and you know this origin story question and i mean just the same reason that genesis has been just so poured over because it's an origin story it's so foundational it's so important and you know and one of the interesting things that i i like to look at in religion is um history of interpretation because you watch that okay here's a text and it's fairly fixed it's fairly fixed but you watch how this text has moved in different times and places how it's moved people and how it's created things and i mean it's just there's endless variables to this none of us can live long enough to to actually make much progress in any of these things yet at the same time we all must choose how shall we live and it's it's it's an amazing thing well we're coming up on two hours and two hours yeah and i've got to land the plane but it is guy it is always fun talking to you um i really love i really love you know how am i going to say this because i don't even know what your project is but the fact that you are a wrestler and someone working on a phd in cogsci i mean that very much fits this corner because at least especially this corner of the corner because at least the audience that tends to be more around around me tends to be you know jonathan peugeot more the ortho stuff verveki more the sciency stuff a little bit post christian stuff but all of the wrestling of religion which tends to be have a huge span of people but then all the wrestling of religion yes well you know look at it jake wrestles with god i mean that even that word itself is a super deep word because it gets at of course playdo was a wrestler and i mean wrestling itself is this all exaptation from wrestling i i i actually that's one of the if we're trying to think of what is it it and at its core it's a struggle of okay and like it's the struggle whatever that is for different people different times but it's always it's it's something that's very deep in our nature it's the the brushing up against reality and you know all the stuff that that entails um yeah so i i i do think it's it's not a it's not a coincidence no it's not a coincidence at all so thank you thank you for your your persistence thank you and you know i i i hope that your relationship continues to develop with your fiance and you can you know enjoy um you can have this level of enjoyment between you of this stuff um i have also noticed that i'm not going to get into that but um and and so yeah and i look forward to your um your conversations with grizz and your conversations with chad and again part of the i mean the the corner is part of what we're wrestling with there's the word again um is the is the arena quality of the corner and what that's affording and again part of the reason why you're super helpful in this is you have you have a degree of competence with the language which is unusual because this is also you know an educational pursuit of yours so yeah all right good talking to you guy yeah we will see you later yeah bye bye