https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=m7JYuJc1TvI

 Five seconds. Welcome to the Bridges of Meaning Discord server. This is Friday morning, California time. Coming to you live from Sacramento, California. As someone pointed out in the comment section, we talk about sacraments from Sacramento. Ooh. Wow. So this is what we do most Friday mornings. We're not going to be doing this next week. We'll have a, oh, next week, no, we'll do this again next week. The week after we have a very special guest. Pattern, pattern, pattern, pattern. So that's coming up. We've got more special guests while I'm on vacation. And they always get more traffic than I do. I'm feeling like the wallflower at the ball. But I like what we do here. And we got a whole bunch of questions backed up this week. So that's going to make Rick and Joey all anxious about falling behind. So I'm going to dive right in because of course I have to spend an hour on the first question. So all the way back to July 2, Ewan asked, this is about the Canadian orange shirts. Last year I saw my university campus a procession of orange shirts with drums, banners, et cetera. Orange shirts are worn at First Nations spiritual rituals carried out in the main square on campus in front of the library. What's of interest to me is that it's also the Dutch color, the house of orange, William of Orange. So I guess the Dutch, there's only so many colors you can use. All right, I've also seen this orange color in my CRC. That's right, because it's Dutch. To indicate the need for reconciliation. Well, that's interesting. I'm hearing typing, Rick. I don't know, do I only hear you Rick or is that on the stream? Rick says he doesn't know, we're in trouble. Okay, is it okay for this language to be adopted by the church? Reconciliation, reconciliation you can find right there in the book of Ephesians. We ought to be reconciled to each other. Now there are some things that should be reconciled and some things that shouldn't. People should be reconciled, ethnic groups should be reconciled. Nations should be reconciled. A lot depends on who, what, where, when, how. I personally get super uncomfortable seeing other spirits marketing in the prayer time of my own church. Yeah, you should discern the spirits. That's first John. To what degree is it even appropriate for me to voice how uncomfortable this is? I think if people are, if we are encouraging people to be open about voicing their discomfort with historical events, why is it inappropriate for you to voice your discomfort? And this is part of how, what make these conversations tricky because on one hand, there's sort of a license and even an obligation. We're gonna make this an uncomfortable conversation. Oh, but the whole safe space meme is, oh, we're not gonna talk about this in class because this makes certain groups uncomfortable. So why is it permissible to make some groups uncomfortable and not other groups uncomfortable? So actually it's, I think it's fair game to highlight that dissonance. And the question of dissonance is, is I think a valid thing. And this is where Rick and I actually, before the show, we were talking about dogma and Lawrence Krauss was talking to Peterson. Oh, dogma, I hate dogma. Dogma's bad. And once you say dogma's bad, you've just evoked a dogma. And so the questions all revolve around, where are the lines? What are the rules? What is true? And so as a pastor, part of what we do in church is to try to make people uncomfortable about some things and to make people comfortable about other things. Well, what things ought people to be comfortable about and what things ought people to not be comfortable about. And that's nearly the definition of morality. Let's say someone comes up to you and says, I'm uncomfortable with the fact that my father is watching TV. Then you might say, well, should your father be watching TV? And that whole question of the, whether or not it's appropriate to be comfortable or appropriate to be uncomfortable has everything to do with the norm about television watching in this illustration. So part of what is happening in our culture is we are having a lot of proxy conversations. And in cases like this, it's fair to just pull away the proxy and say, what are we really talking about? What practices are normative according to our worldview and religion and what practices are contra normative or illegal or illicit or problematic, if we wanna use that word or unhealthy, if we wanna use a therapeutic frame. So I think it's, if you're seeing things in your church that you are uncomfortable with, talk to the elders. That's the protocol in a Christian Reformed Church. Talk to the elders and say, I'm uncomfortable with this for these reasons and state your reasons. Don't do it in an aggressive or defensive way, do it in an open, respectful way, and you'll probably get better attention. And you'll likely help the elders and the council try to manage these things. Because what happens in a culture, is that again, back to combinatorial explosiveness, there are way too many things to keep an eye on. And so it's actually the task of leadership to say, these are the things we're paying attention to now and these are the norms that are at play. And if the leadership is challenged on these things, they ought to defend them. And in a church situation, they ought to defend them with respect to the Bible, especially in a Christian Reformed Church, with respect to the theological tradition of the church, with respect to the cultural narratives and contextual narratives at play. So if you're uncomfortable, talk to your elders. Should I just be quiet and submit to the discernment of my pastor? Well, you might at some point submit to the discernment, but that doesn't mean that you have to be quiet. Again, if you approach the church leadership in a respectful manner, I think your questions are valid. And again, in terms of the color orange, there's limited colors in the color wheel. And when, for example, during the World Cup, my neighbor who was an immigrant from the Netherlands, he would wear orange every day. Oh, well, thank you. We have a Super Chat from ABC123456399. So thank you for the Super Chat. That's getting Rick his exercise. All right, so yes, talk to your pastor and talk to your elder. And if, you know, I'd talk to your elder first, why? Well, you can certainly talk to your pastor. A lot depends on how large your church is and how busy your pastor is. But give the elder some work to do. Because in the Christian Reformed Church, the elders and the council are in charge more than the pastor. And part of the continual, part of the continual slide into church culture of the Christian Reformed Church in North America is more and more making the pastor a little pope, a little local pope, and the pastor should be. The pastor should, the pastor is in submission to the council. The Christian Reformed Church is a conciliar tradition. And so talk to your elders, have the elders discuss it. And that's sometimes, pastors sometimes don't like that because pastors are like all the rest of us. We kind of like doing what we're doing. And so to get called into an elders meeting and say, let's talk about emphasis. It's actually healthier for the overall congregation because the pastor has a specific role in the church. The pastor is not the boss of the church. So, and I'm again speaking within the Christian Reformed Church. Simon Nelson, hi Paul, this might be a silly question. I like silly questions. I'm not sure, but how did Christ actually die for our sins? This is not a silly question. This is a question that the church has been discussing in terms of all of these theories of atonement. Say, if he was stoned to death or say he fell off a donkey and broke his neck and died, or in another way, would it still mean he died for our sins? The manner in which he died, in other words, crucifixion, would it have had a bearing on whether he died for our sins? The narrative around his death is integral for the meaning of the narrative. That's a fairly obvious thing to say. The fact that he died crucified just intensifies so many of the narrative and symbolic elements of that. Stephen, for example, at the beginning of the Book of Luke was stoned. There would be fewer debates about historicity if Jesus was simply stoned, because that was the traditional way in which someone would be put to death within the Jewish community. Now, there are so many layers to this. The first layer is the fact that Jesus was simply stoned. The second layer is the fact that Jesus was simply stoned to this. The Jewish community in Jesus' day was not fully in charge of their community because they were under the Roman occupation. For some reason, and this gets debated if you read theological books, for some reason, the Sanhedrin wanted Jesus crucified. He wanted Jesus to have authority to put someone to death. This gets into the entire quagmire of the relationship between what we moderns conceptualize as history and the narrative in the Bible, and that will take us quite far afield of your actual question. Your question is not silly. The question in terms of him dying for our sins also have to do with the divinity of Christ. And so now we're into Trinitarian modes. One of the places, if you want to read this, is just Google Heidelberg Catechism, and you'll find a copy of it on the Christian Reformed Church website. You'll find a copy of it in other places. It's one of these reformational documents that continues to live on in the life of the church. The Heidelberg Catechism, in fairly simple terms, lays out the argument for what is sometimes today called penal substitutionary atonement, where the reason he died for our sins is he had to be God and he had to be man. Now, the Heidelberg Catechism also picks up on some of what the apostle Paul writes in the Book of Romans about, you know, by one man all died, Adam, by another man all live. And that then sets up what some people call biblical universalism, which is again a whole other conversation. So there is a lot to this. There are also competing atonement theories. Christus Victor is one of them. And so if you would Google theories of atonement, you'll find a list of a number of theories of atonement that the church has discussed and debated. Similar to, let's say, the doctrine of the Trinity, atonement theories are found, one might say, in solution in the New Testament. There are some verses that seem to line up better with the Christus Victor atonement theory. There are other verses that seem to line up better with a substitutionary atonement theory. And these get into Jewish atonement theories and narratives that you can find in the Old Testament. You have the, and the New Testament riffs on this. You have the sacrifice of the lamb at the Exodus and the blood. You have language of typology, that this is type and anti-type. So this is a significant theological question. And I would argue that not only is this theology interesting and important in terms of helping make sense for us, the idea that Jesus died for our sins. And even that covers a world of options, because you could say Jesus died so that we are released from the penalty due to us from God of our sin, or Jesus died so that we, in fact, Jesus through his death would change the culture so that we don't sin in some of the ways that people sinned before. You could make that argument, say, based on a lot of the work that Tom Holland has done with respect to how Jesus changed our moral assumptions. We are not, and you could just look at broader secular society. Christian, Christians have long, and Jews and many other cultures, found that the predation upon women by men for sexual purposes is something against God's glory and design for human community. And so you could look at something, let's say like the Me Too movement, which again, I would say, if you trace that DNA back, it goes all the way back to Christianity and Christ, you could easily say, well, generally speaking, the reason women enjoy so much liberty and so much freedom and so much protection under the law in the West is because of Jesus Christ. And this gets into Tom Holland's theories about what a culture war is, that a culture war is sort of a Christendom civil war. So one might argue that because of Jesus and Christianity, women can walk the streets with a degree of safety from male gaze and male, unwanted male attention because of Jesus Christ and the Apostle Paul. And so in that way too, Jesus died for our sins. So this is an enormous question that one could spend hours upon hours detailing the ways that Jesus died for our sin. In churches, it tends to be highlighted in terms of let's say, hell avoidance or afterlife blessedness as opposed to punishment or participation in the life of Christ, more theosis type language. So your question is a great one. And I'm just basically trying with this answer to lay out the very, very broad field about how we think of the ways that Jesus died for our sins. The book of Hebrews writes about it in some very interesting ways. And so, yeah, the manner in which he died, all of the narrative elements contribute to this very low resolution, but extremely broad statement that Jesus died for our sins. And with respect to the cross, because the cross is made of wood and tied to a tree, it ties to this passage in Deuteronomy cursed to those who die in the tree. In the ancient world, impaling and gallows, if you read, for example, the book of Esther, Haman puts up a gallows. And when you say that, let's say in a place like Northern California, we think of a rope and a noose. In all likelihood, the gallows was an instrument of impaling because in the ancient world, part of the political theater terrorism that the Roman Empire or the Assyrians or the Babylonians or the Persians or anyone would do is you would take the body or the Philistines as they did to Saul, as you can find in the Old Testament, you take the body and you stick it on a pole. And that's a very vivid and dramatic way of making a statement to your enemies that why don't you just surrender now and save us the trouble of killing you because that's where this is going. So, and so the cross actually is, if Jesus died of stoning, I don't know whether Christianity would have captured the Roman Empire in the way that it did because the Romans killed Jesus, technically speaking, that then added resonance to the power of the Christian churches in creating their message and the kind of reputation that the Roman Empire continued to have as Christianity after the collapse of the Roman Empire by, I'm currently going through one of the great courses series on Vikings, which I'm really enjoying because I've been paying attention to English history and all these TV shows on Netflix about Vikings and Saxons and all of these critters. So it's, I'm enjoying learning about the great Northern civilizations and in some degree, the Baltic Sea was the Northern Mediterranean for civilizations that I've been very ignorant of. And I know some of my listeners are from Sweden and Finland and Norway. And so they've often sent me notes and given me little tidbits. So there's a lot there too. But part of what was interesting about, so you have the Roman Empire, Christianity captures the Roman Empire. Christianity then becomes deeply wed to images of the Roman Empire. Of course, Rome becomes the center of the world. One of the recent, the rest is history, they were following the Euro cup of all the teams that the English were playing. And so they had relations between England and Ukraine and then England and Denmark. That was a fascinating episode. And I'm currently in the middle of England and Italy. And of course, Tom Holland jumps in and says, you really wouldn't have England without Rome. And so the fact that Jesus died on a cross was narratively and symbolically integral to all of the European history and medieval history that would continue on in Europe and England. And then eventually to Norway and Sweden and the Orthodox over in Russia and then via the colonial era to all around the world. If Jesus had been stoned instead of crucified on a cross, world history would have been dramatically different. So I know that you asked a rather specific theological question, the scope of which I couldn't begin to address even in the entire two hours. This is an enormous thing that if you just get a little taste of it, like I'm trying to give you right now, can just expand your mind and the frontiers of your imagination with respect to the power of one particular incident to reshape all of subsequent human history. And that's exactly what we have in the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus Christ. It's an enormous thing. So your question was by no means silly. And just for the sake of all the other questions, I should move on. Kaufman, 79, I want to hear more about these issues in modern biblical scholarship, oh boy. You mean the sorta historical positivism and modernism? Yes, strict grammatical historical exegesis even done by evangelicals? Of course, all of the above. So I have a commentary series called the ancient Christian commentary on scriptures. Years ago, IVP sent me a little promotional thing. It was like a subscription thing and they said, this is why I so believe in providence, little things like this in my life. I was here new to Sacramento fairly early and I got this thing from IVP and it was kind of like the old Columbia record thing. Those of you who are old enough to remember the record club where they'd send you a record and then they'd send you the bill because if you didn't send the record back in a certain number of days, you had to pay for it. And lots of people wound up with lots of records because it wasn't so easy to get out of the club. Well, I somehow got into this thing and I wasn't in any way on the wavelengths I am now about history of interpretation. And this entire commentary series is basically a gleaning from church fathers because church fathers didn't really write commentaries. They were engaging their political religious adversaries often and they were writing sermons and preaching and some of those sermons were recorded. And so this commentary series is a going through the entire corpus of church fathers and plucking up basically references to specific passages and indexing them like a commentary. And that's what this commentary series does. And I actually have the whole set and I like this so much. I actually purchased it again now this past week because Logos had a sale on the commentary series. And so if you use Logos Bible stuff and you, the way to buy, to build out your library using Logos is to wait for the sales because the sales are, it's just 50, 70% off sometimes. So you can save a lot of money. And so I actually repurchased this entire commentary series in Logos except the one online doesn't have exactly everything that the text version has. So it's kind of nice to have both. One of the things that you realize is that people have read the Bible in very different ways over the life of the church and before the church, the Jewish tradition of Bible reading and commentary and interpretation and application. Now this in some people will sort of evoke an experience of pluralism, which is disorienting because if, oh gosh, these questions get so big, so fast. See, Joey, this is my problem. This is my problem. People ask hard questions and it just triggers a thousand things in my brain and I can only get them out one at a time. So that's the way it goes. Let's say you grow up in your little evangelical church and you listen to your sermons from your pastor and you listen to just certain radio stations. You grew up in a little bubble. There's a whole world of assumption about biblical interpretation in that tiny little bubble. And so when you read the Bible, you don't, because you're not living in a sense of pluralism, you read the Bible in sort of an innocent way. This is what this passage means. Bang. Then you bump into someone who says that's not what that passage means and then they cite something for you or they give you an argument or they cite an authority and suddenly you realize there's an entire history of interpretation around a passage. Now, suddenly you have to ask yourself, how do I evaluate competing histories of interpretation? Well, in some ways, the Protestant Reformation was a, example of this because part of what sparked the Protestant Reformation was Renaissance humanism where because these city states in Italy were first growing rich by supplying the crusades. And then, you know, if you're a marketer, you want to always deal with the winner. So if the crusaders are doing well, they're servicing the crusades. When the crusaders aren't doing well, they're still trading with the Islamic world. And so they're trading with the ancient Near East and Jerusalem and Egypt, a very dry place where texts don't go bad very quickly. And the Eastern Roman Empire was far richer, more developed, better educated than the Western Empire. The Western Empire was a backwater. And so through Italy, all these ancient texts start coming in and then Renaissance humanism, they had a revival of interest in Latin from the Classical period and Greek from the Classical period. You will find in Europe people taking on names in Greek and ancient names, they're renaming themselves from Classical sources. And so you have Renaissance in art, Renaissance in literature, Erasmus of Rotterdam who died, someone who felt himself very faithful to the Catholic Church, not all Catholics appreciated what Erasmus did. Erasmus wrote a book, you can read about this in the book Fatal Discord. Erasmus, now the printing press is there, so what Erasmus dares to do is take the Latin Vulgate, which was in some ways the authority, the Bible in the Roman Catholic Church and set, at least for the New Testament and the Old Testament, the Hebrew, set a Greek text right next to it and then in another column have a commentary. And what Erasmus dared to do in a number of ways is point out ways that Jerome, decisions Jerome made in translations and when Jerome was putting together the Vulgate, well, what was he doing? His filter was he wanted to put together a really nice complete Bible for the church. And in the process, in tiny little ways, he sort of filled in a few gaps that might not have been in ancient Greek texts with respect to some doctrinal positions. And Erasmus points these out. And then another young Augustinian monk named Martin Luther is reading the books of Erasmus and as his fight with those who wanted to burn him at the stake, similar what happened to Jan Hus, as his fight escalates, he starts using some of the work that Erasmus is doing and now more and more doctors of the church are learning Greek and Hebrew and reading the Vulgate critically and talking about and discussing theologically some of the differences, bang, you've got religious pluralism and you've got a fight. So that of course, the Protestant Reformation just destroys a certain amount of uniformity in Western Europe and certain places in Western Europe. And well, the idea of that Luther was, well, well shoot, if I just read the Greek manuscript and the Hebrew manuscripts and if I use reason and if I pray to the Holy Spirit, God will show me the right answer, unlike the people that are trying to kill him. Well, what happened was more scholars started reading the text and said, you know, Luther, you say this is the right answer, but we sort of read it this way. And so very quickly, Luther is sort of at odds with the Swiss Reformation and he and Zwingli can't get on the same page about the Eucharist. And of course, the Roman Catholics are watching this and saying, aha, see, there, there you go. Once you no longer submit to the authority of the church, you've got chaos. Well, the chaos was out of the bag and the chaos was out of the bag on lots of different levels because, you know, you're also going to have Galileo who is going to be, the church had sort of settled on Aristotle and Galileo comes along and says, I'm not really agreeing with Aristotle. And well, that's making people nervous. And so what happens with respect to Europe is that via the Reformation, via Galileo, via, and this will just continue to accumulate, Newton and on and on and on and on, you've got a ton of pluralism. And then the question is, what is the right answer? Well, grammatical historical interpretation. Let's pay very careful attention to the grammar of the Bible and let's learn Koine Greek and biblical Hebrew. But now we're also going to take a look at the Septuagint because, you know, the scholars who wrote the Septuagint had access to texts that we don't have access to, very old texts and very old versions and very old interpretations. You have Aramaic translations of Hebrew text. You eventually have Arabic translations of old and New Testament texts. And so all of this scholarship continues to develop and especially when we get into the 19th and 20th century towards the end of the colonial period, what happened with British and European colonialists, now that they're dominating and controlling Egypt and Palestine and Turkey and Iran, now that they're controlling all these things, archeologists are going out and they're digging up more texts and they're finding more texts in ancient libraries. And then once we have photographic equipment and the printing press, now you don't even have to say, take a text out of Egypt and bring it to the Museum of London to have it stored. You know, Israel's going to keep the Dead Sea Scrolls and those texts all to themselves, not all to themselves, but they can share them. They publish them, they're edited, they're putting out there. Now we have massive numbers of texts and we ask the question, how can we interpret this book? Well, modernity with its monarchical vision says, well, we are going to look at the answer, but in post-modernity, and now what I'm about to say is going to trigger some of you, I know. Jonathan Peugeot is in a certain way, enormously post-modern. Now he's pushing against Derrida and Foucault and some of this sort of post-modernity. He is post-modern in that he is pre-modern. And part of what we're seeing that I say all the time is modernity is breaking down. And modernity is breaking down because we, for a while, in the wake of the pluralism that Christendom faced in Renaissance humanism, in the Protestant Reformation, Christendom tried to address that pluralism by a marriage of empiricism and rationality. And this is why Lawrence Krauss, Sam Harris, Richard Dawkins, these individuals are, as someone noted in the comments in one of my videos this week, increasingly dinosaurs. Why? Because they continue to imagine that they can get rid of the problem of pluralism using empiricism and using rationality. But the further, what has happened in the last 50 years, in the last 100 years, is just as Jonathan Peugeot says, we are patterns watching patterns. So as cognitive science develops, as artificial intelligence develops, as a lot of the work that Jordan Peterson put out, we begin to realize we're not impartial observers looking at a flat universe of objects. We are biased observers trying to interpret an enormously pluralistic universe. In fact, the pluralism is combinatorial explosive. An enormously plural universe, and your modernistic, monarchical vision will not work. It is overwhelmed by data. And we see this expressed in things such as Google. The question is not, is there information? The question is relevance realization. What information is integral for, well, for what? For what I want, for what I need, for trying to establish the truth. So what happened in the 19th century as modernity continued to develop, you had enormous disruptions that came in the middle and the end of the 19th century that tried to be addressed by, let's say, personalism. And personalism is sort of an outgrowth of pragmatism, which also attempts to address combinatorial explosiveness. So if you read the Metaphysical Club, part of why statistics is developed is because there are too many data points. There's too much data. So we're going to use statistics to try to gain a picture from too much data. So statistics are a meta picture. And so you can get all the way to Jacques Ellul in propaganda, who basically gets to the point of saying, once again, into statistics, you're already sort of in the world of propaganda. And Mark Twain notices that. So we've been on this journey for a while. So in terms of theology in the church, what happens in the 19th century, a la Darwin, and this is laid out very nicely in the Metaphysical Club at Jordan Peterson, a book that Jordan Peterson recommended, where basically in the Metaphysical Club, he argues, he says, what happened with Darwin was not that suddenly Christians for the first time were confronted with process in terms of the developments in creation. Christians had been comfortable with that for a long time. What happened, I would say, in the zeitgeist of the scientific community was that there was a competing plausibility structure that implied to a variety of scientists who had grown up in the middle of Christendom that there is a plausible mechanism by which we can give a creation story that is without purpose or intent. And so when you listen to Lawrence Krauss again and again talk about, oh, there's no purpose in creation, but three sentences later talks about purpose, it's like, as C.S. Lewis pointed this out again and again, this has been something that Christians have continued to point out for a hundred years. And Wilfred Sellers basically lays it out, you cover one eye to do science, but you're never gonna do anything with that science without sneaking a peek through the other eye. And that's what you just keep doing. You just keep cheating this way because you can't talk without using the manifest image. You won't have any community without using the manifest image. The scientific method was an amazing tool with the laboratory, but you got a lab leak going on here and you keep cheating. Okay, so how does this get into evangelical modernist scholarship? So what happens in the 19th century is basically, we begin to recognize that, wow, this is a really powerful tool to get at a degree of truth and to convince ourselves in community that there are levels of certainty. Now we've got all of this fighting between theological traditions, within Protestantism, between Protestants and Catholics, between Trinitarians and Unitarians, with Mormons, with Jehovah's Witnesses, we've got theological combinatorial explosion going on. Well, what if we can sort of have a standard to cut through all of this? Well, what the Protestant Reformation basically said is, let's take the Bible because then, if you look at all of Roman Catholic tradition, wow, that's a ton of stuff. Let's just go back to the witness of the apostles, not the apostolic succession of the apostles, which is sort of like an oral tradition, but let's go to what is written down and let's limit it right there. Let's have a canon. Let's limit the canon right there. Let's try and keep to right here as a conversation. Well, as, oh shoot, is it the video that I have coming out Monday? See, this is why I don't like delaying my videos very much. But then again, none of you can keep, very few of you can actually keep pace with all my videos, so why should I care? I might as well just repeat. Lawrence Krauss talking to Jordan Peterson says, I asked theologians what kind of knowledge has come out in the last 500 years? And Lawrence Krauss says they pause and they say, tell me what you mean by knowledge. And then Lawrence Krauss laughs and dismisses them. Well, what I do in Monday's video is I take some of Vervecky and Peterson and some of Krauss and Peterson and I put them together because the argument that John Vervecky is having with Jordan Peterson, not an argument, the conversation, he's having with Jordan Peterson, he's having with Jordan Peterson is that this Vervecky's four Ps of knowledge is integral to that question that the theologians were asking Lawrence Krauss. Lawrence Krauss just doesn't have any idea about the work that John Vervecky is doing and he would greatly benefit from it if he cared to listen to it. Because what Lawrence Krauss is basically doing is saying, there's one kind of knowledge, propositional knowledge. And that's knowledge. Nothing else do we consider knowledge because, well, now you have the deep tie between science and propositional knowledge because doing this is designed to yield empirical, physical knowledge about a world of objects. That's what it can do. Great. But it can't do all the kinds of things we need it to do like decide, is it better for me to have one kid or 10? Well, that depends. It depends on what? It depends on what you want. It depends on what your goal is. It depends on rationality, depends on telos. You have to uncover the other eye and let the whole world in through there. That's why I call this a lab leak or cheating. So Lawrence Krauss says, well, theologians haven't been giving knowledge. Well, what's happened is that the definition of knowledge since the enlightenment has been restricted to propositional knowledge. Now, when you hear Peterson and Vervecky sort of complaining about fundamentalists or religious people or Christianity and their propositions, well, fair enough. But scientists calling theologians on propositions is sort of the pot calling the kettle black because we all need propositions to live. I am Paul VanderKlay. There's a proposition. Without that proposition, everything we're doing right now is different. Paul VanderKlay has made over 500 videos that relate to Jordan Peterson. Paul VanderKlay has had over 500 conversations with people that have been interested in Jordan Peterson. Paul VanderKlay is a Christian foreign minister. Paul VanderKlay lives in Sacramento. Paul VanderKlay is sitting in a room and Rick is right down on the other side of the building. All of these are propositions and they're all pertained, but they are part of, and John has been really nice in terms of, they're part of knowing is this transjective back and forth. Knowledge is not just this little discrete thing that we can kind of work like a little package that comes from Amazon and do things to it or little atoms that we can combine into molecules. Knowledge is a very mysterious business. Part of what happened in modernism and so you had the modernist fundamentalist fight in the 19th and early 20th centuries. And beneath a lot of that fight was this question of knowledge. And to one degree or another, the modernists were the high and openness early adopter people, and they basically said, what if we got out of, what if the church got out of the business of propositional truth? What if the Bible doesn't make any propositional truth claims that can actually be correlated and verified in the ancient world? Well then what's left of your religion? Now you have Schleiermacher and you have in the modernist school, all of these ways of getting out of the propositional knowledge business. Now we've had a hundred years of that and we can sort of see where that leads. And it doesn't lead anywhere terribly helpful because what it usually leads to is just sort of the disintegration and the evaporation of the religion because propositional knowledge is a fundamental aspect of our ability to engage in a physical public world. Propositional knowledge is important, but it's not the only kind of knowledge. And so if you try to take all propositional knowledge out of Christianity, your Christianity just evaporates. You lose your Jesus, you lose the crucifixion, you lose the resurrection, you lose any kind of crunchy, and that's I think I got that word from Tim Keller, what's getting crunched in these crunchy things? It's propositions, because propositions are crunchy, they're hard, they're facts. See, as we're seeing the limitations of modernity, we shouldn't forget the benefits of modernity. And so in a lot of ways, the IDW and this entire thing is all about let's not lose a lot of what we gained from modernities. There's tons of good stuff there. But let's also recognize its limitations. And in many ways, this little corner of the internet with Jordan Peterson and John Vervecky and Jonathan Peugeot and all that we're doing here is all about, we wanna keep some things from modernity, but we have to recognize its limitations and what makes Lawrence Krauss and Sam Harris and a bunch of the old school new atheist nervouses, they see very clearly, oh, this stick that we use to beat down fundamentalists and religious people, it's no longer really gonna be available to us. And that's why Jordan Peterson got very scary for them. And that's why evangelicals and orthodox and a whole bunch of religious people who had for 100 years been beaten with a social pressure club, suddenly said, oh, I kinda like not getting beaten anymore. Yeah, but there's, but now you've got, but you've got lots of other bullshittery out there in the world that will sneak in with this too. And so part of that strict dogma of modernity, which doesn't work, well, it had its uses. And so part of the process of getting beyond modernity and now unfortunately, post-modernity is a word that was used already. So I'm gonna avoid using that word because that's gonna trigger all kinds of things. We're getting post-postmodern because we're recognizing now post-modernity has been around for 50 years and we're realizing, well, they saw some things that are true, but there's a lot they didn't see right. And I thought John Vervecky's treatment of post-modernity, both with Jordan Peterson and especially with Nick was really helpful. So, okay, back to the evangelicals. So just as the modernists were saying, we're no longer going to look for propositional truth in the Bible, and usually what happens if you have a family fight, you have action and reaction. So the modernists said, we're no longer going to look for propositional truth in our Bible. The fundamentalists doubled down and said, we're going propositional all the way down. And that led to all kinds of different interpretations of the Bible that increasingly began to look ridiculous. What evangelical scholarship really tried to do was they denied the modernists and said, no, we're not gonna say there are no propositional truth claims in the Bible. I mean, because number one, you don't do that to Julius Caesar's account of his victory over the Gauls. You don't do that to all the rest of these ancient documents. You use them, use them critically, but you continue to use them. So it's simply unfair to throw out the Bible because it's a religious text because, you know, so number one, we're not gonna throw out all propositional truth claims of the Bible, but we're also not going to go to the extremes that the fundamentalists went to. Because as Verveki I think noted quite nicely, they were captured by the same spirit of modernity that the modernists were. And so in sort of the same way that Verveki talks about atheism and theism, fundamentalism and modernism are also sort of trapped in a modern frame. Evangelical scholars to one degree or another, and they're all sort of on a spectrum. And generally speaking, a lot of the English scholarship, let's say have a generation ago from let's say FF Bruce. So here's FF Bruce's commentary on the book of Hebrews. And it's probably sometime in the 70s, 1964, copyright 1964, because as is usually the case, things happen a little bit earlier and differently in England than they do here. Someone like FF Bruce, it's sometimes been said that American evangelical scholars are always looking over their right shoulder, because they're always waiting to get whacked by the fundamentalists. English evangelical scholars were always looking over their left shoulder, because they're always gonna get whacked by the modernists. And evangelical scholarship tried to sort of have a way through the middle and said, we're not gonna be, we're not gonna just dismiss propositions, and we're not gonna be reactive about propositions. We are going to try to weigh how these propositions should be maintained. And so then you have big discussions about, well, in the evening and morning, the third day, and let's say Genesis 1, how are you having a day if the sun and moon that regulate day and night are no longer, are not yet created? So, and there you have someone like John Walton, who's at Wheaton, you've got people in my own tradition, Dutch Calvinists, who are sort of trying to figure out in biblical scholarship, the way between the modernists and the fundamentalists with respect to propositional knowledge. And they're trying to piece things together in the middle. And there'll be some more to the left and some more to the right. And you can find this in someone like Lydia McGrew, who's, she talked to Sam, and so she's more on the right, but if you talk to someone like Lydia McGrew and say, well, what about inerrancy? Well, that becomes sort of a test case for how fundamentalist you are. Because, and then there's also different layers of inerrancy, there's sort of technical inerrancy from the Chicago Inerrancy Conference. And then there's, I'd say, folk inerrantists who are, you know, saying, I believe it just as it says it. And for them, something like textual criticism is a threat. You wanted me to talk, that was a lot of talk. I could go on further. Now, what happens now with Peterson and Vervecky in this little corner of the internet is, now that to a degree, we can sort of put, we can frame this theological conflict between the modernists and the fundamentalists and the evangelicals within a frame, let's say, by taking a look at certain kinds of knowledge, like propositional knowledge, now sort of we have a way to frame these conversations in a way, and this has been around in evangelical scholarship for a while. For example, in the 1980s, the late 1980s, when I was studying at Calvin Seminary, we start studying books like Robert Alters, The Art of Biblical Narrative and The Art of Biblical Poetry. Well, why? Well, you have this documentary hypothesis, you had form criticism, you had source criticism, you had all of these modernistic tools to in some ways try to get at the propositions behind the text, because modernists are addicts for propositions. And Alter comes along and says, they weren't thinking like you were. And when you look at the repetition in the text, when you look at, why are, you know, finding people at a well is sort of like the Genesis version of The Bachelor. And so Jacob goes to a well, Abram's servant goes to a well and then when Jesus meets a Samaritan woman at the well, and I say to my adult Sunday school class, there's a little bit of sexual tension in this passage. Did Jesus have testicles? Yeah, I said it. Yes, he had testicles because he wasn't a eunuch. We just like to think about Jesus' testicles. And so, Robert Alter begins to say, we should deal with the text as a text, as literature, because yes, there's propositional information in there and people's skepticism will tend to run the gamut of their relationship with certain elements of secularism. But yes, it's also a literary text and there are literary devices and there is culture and there is mythology and there are all of these layers to it. And so when I was learning and I very quickly as a seminarian, I was reading older modernistic commentaries when I was trying to prepare sermons and it's like, these are of no use at all because people sitting in the pew don't give a rip about your documentary hypothesis about J, P and E and I was surprised when Peterson trotted that out. And to me, when he trotted that out, it showed he wasn't up to speed in terms of the tradition of biblical interpretation. He was kind of coming in as a newbie in terms of biblical interpretation. But Robert Alter comes along and says, these are literature and should be read that way and as a preacher, the literature stuff was really helpful for homiletics for preaching a lot more than the source criticism or the form criticism. Every now and then it had something that might help with the point but that was really helpful stuff. And then Jonathan Peugeot comes along and says, it's not just literary, there's a whole symbolic resonance that goes on in terms of us. And of course, Peterson connects that to the biological. And this is another new way that the Bible speaks to us in ways that perhaps we're not even taking in consciously. So what's been happening is the Bible is reopening in whole new ways, which is really wonderful, but that's now going to add more combinatorial explosiveness. And so a lot of the ways in which the Orthodox and the Catholics and the Protestants were divided, we're not divided in those ways as much anymore. And there's way more openness in Protestants via this kind of thing to the kind of work that Jonathan Peugeot is doing, but that'll be a long conversation. There's gonna be a lot of back and forth. And I realized that so fans of Peterson, when I say, you know, grabbing that one lexical understanding of meek, sort of out of thin air, instead of understanding the Sermon in the Mount in a first century Jewish context and what that word would mean in that context, that's all coming from grammatical, historical tools of interpretation. And so then I say, I don't think Peterson's got that right. Oh, well, they're Peterson fans. Of course they're upset. That's okay. So grammatical, historical isn't going away, just like science isn't going away. In a way, grammatical and historical tries to cover one eye, but not totally because grammar and history, so we're going to continue to see, and part of what's happened over the last, you know, one of the best, one of my favorite common, you know, one of my favorite New Testament scholars is Raymond Brown. Raymond Brown is Roman Catholic. Now he's more critical than some very conservative Catholics might like. Oh, thank you, Job, and thank you, Old Movie Music. And I don't know when these two things came in, but, you know, Rick brought two with one trip. So, yeah, this is going to continue. And what we've seen now in biblical scholarship too is sort of the breaking down of the silos. And so when I was at Calvin Seminary, I wasn't just reading, so Erdmann's Dutch Reformed publishing house was bringing over English scholars like F.F. Bruce and publishing him. But when I was studying, when I was in my biblical, New Testament biblical studies class, it was obvious that my New Testament professor was a fan of Raymond Brown, a Roman Catholic. And Raymond Brown is, I mean, when you're dealing with the Joe and Ene scholarship, now Raymond Brown's getting a little dated, but when you're dealing with Joe and Ene scholarship, you gotta deal with Raymond Brown. He's a Roman Catholic scholar. And I tend to think we're going to see increasing influence from the Orthodox. And what this is gonna mean is more and more information flooding in that we have to assess, which in my opinion makes this little corner of the internet with John Vervecky. And the fact that I can deal with a cognitive scientist who's so open and a symbolist who's so well versed in church fathers and art and symbolism and Jordan Peterson, and we have this thing called YouTube where I can talk to people who don't have time to talk to me, that's what all my commentary videos are, and I'm talking to you, I just feel enormously blessed because we're trying to figure things out by taking all of this stuff together. And a piece of that is evangelical scholarship. And we're just at the beginning of this because I'm in my 50s. And so what, maybe I'll be able to do this for another 20, 30 years if the Lord gives me strength. We're just at the beginning of this. And so it's gonna be bumpy, it's gonna be disruptive. And all of the, even the church categorizations, so I did a conversation coming out probably next week. I'm holding some of the conversations that I've been doing so I always kind of, unless they're really time sensitive, I kind of hold them up a little bit and release them later when I don't have things to fill in. I'm not gonna have anywhere near enough, I would need like an extra 18 videos banked to keep my channel going on vacation. So there'll be a fallow period during my vacation. So those of you who really wanna catch up, there'll be your window. But we've just begun, this stuff is going to redraw the map. Could Canada break up? Yeah, I think Canada will have a civil war or at least a breakup before the United States. And think about that. Church-wise, we are going to see redistricting and redistribution probably like we haven't seen since the time of the Protestant Reformation. And right now, the Orthodox are coming to America. There's gonna come a point when they're going to be, I mean, because what's happening now, I would assume, and I don't know, I would assume in the Orthodox is via Peugeot, via people coming into orthodoxy from evangelical, Christian Reformed ways, all of that is going to impact that which is sort of brought over overseas in some of the highly conservative places. So, and the Roman Catholics were already watching the drama going on there. Buckle up, boys and girls. This is gonna be a bumpy road for we don't know how long. And we don't know how many layers it's gonna get bumpy. So, yeah. Oh boy, now I'm really behind them an hour and 10 minutes into this. Rick, it's all your fault. Rick's like, what, yeah, yeah, there. What did I do? Hey, Paul, we've heard about the spirit of finessing, we've heard about the spirit of finessing geometry before, but do you have any tips on when and how to apply our lives, the spirit of a geo mystery? Throw a new word at me that I don't know how you're using. It's clever, it's clever. Well, in your life, you have to apply both. See, in some ways, the spirit of geometry is modernistic and to bring in Ian McGillchrist, it's very, again, as Vervecky cautioned us, right brain and left brain are sort of now memes that we are employing to talk about categories. But, you know, mapped territory, unmapped territory, mapping territory, I still haven't done a commentary on the McGillchrist thing, and that's the danger of not being able to get everything done quickly, because as things go past, it's harder to reach back and grab the McGillchrist conversation. But if Peterson is, it seems like Peterson is going to be putting out less things because of his health for a while. So if his output slows down, that'll give me a chance to catch up. So, yeah, I'm not gonna answer that because you would have to tell me what you meant by the word and I don't wanna get to some of the more, some of the rest of the questions. So here we go, keep going. All right, see, I'm still not done with all the questions from two weeks ago. Hi, Paul, I get annoyed, even angry, when priests and pastors, you too, uh-oh, go on and on about love. In other words, God's love for us and our love for God. What does this even mean? For God so loved the world. God is love. I mean, in some ways, if you're really reactive to the word love, you're gonna have a problem with Christianity because Jesus baked it in real deep. Love your neighbor as yourself. Love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength and love your neighbor as yourself. It's right there at the basis of Christianity. What do you mean by love? I think, I think Peugeot has some nice things to say. Love is in a way how we transcend differentiation, difference, and diversity. Love between a man and a woman, part of the reason that that's integral is the difference. And that's why same-sex love can never be like opposite-sex love. There's just an ontology there that's inescapable. There's a union of difference at its most basic abstraction. Is it some kind of emotion or feeling? Emotion or feeling go along with it. And again, just the love a parent has to a child. Do they feel it? Yes. But to Joe later asks, how can I quiet this baby? If you're up at three in the morning and you're terribly tired and the baby won't stop crying and you've tried everything to quiet the baby, you're not feeling a lot of love towards the baby. And this is why you'll find all these little signs. Don't shake your baby. Well, why would someone shake a baby? Cause you're frustrated. And you're frustrated because of love and you're not feeling love. And what love demands at that moment is you quiet all of this internal mechanism that says, I never wanna see this baby again, and says, I'm going to continue to hold the baby and feed the baby. And I am going to voluntarily suffer for the welfare of this child. That is love. It's right there in 1 Corinthians 13. That is love. And sometimes we feel it and sometimes we don't. But one of my definitions of love is, your wellbeing at my expense. That is what love is. And that is what is at the heart of the gospel. Our wellbeing at Christ's expense. The father's love for us. What about a father claiming to love the daughter he hasn't bothered to visit for 10 years? Yeah, that's a daughter is dubious of that father's love. So I just watched Tomorrow War, which is this hyped new movie on Amazon. And I'm not a film critic, but I was tempted to make a video about that for a number of reasons, especially after the crisis. For a number of reasons, especially after the Krauss conversation. It's not a good movie. But even in bad movies, there are certain themes you can sort of pull out. Well, one of the themes of that was, spoiler alert. So the main character's father was a Vietnam vet. I was trying to think of doing the math there. I guess it probably worked. And he was a Vietnam vet and he came home from the war and he left the family and he abandoned his son. And so his son was bitter about his father's abandonment. And then finally, of course, at some point in the movie, you're gonna have to have conversation about this because they brought it into the movie. And the father explains to the son, I came back from the Vietnam war and he didn't use these words, but we can fill them in. I had all this trauma, I had all this anger and I didn't know how to deal with it. And so if I had stayed with the family, I would have what? Been a drunk, beaten you, hurt you. And so the better alternative was to abandon you and to shield you from the monster I had become. And then later on, the father wants back in the son's life and in the life of his granddaughter. And the son says, well, no, not gonna let you back in my life. And the son would only finally do that when he finally had an appreciation for the truth that the love of the father was manifest in the absence. Now that's kind of hard on us because when you're a child, it's like, how can you love me if you abandoned me? And in a sense, the father was saying, it wasn't you that had the problem, it was me. And at that point, I was incapable of loving you the way I wanted to love you. And so I stayed away from you because I knew if I was with you, I would do damage. Now let's translate this to Job and his wife and their new baby. Part of the reason it's really good to have two parents is sometimes you have this, there have been, there are many days when I came home from work, I was at work all day, my wife was home taking care of our five little children, homeschooling them. And I'd walk in the door and she'd look at me and she'd say, your turn. And I didn't feel like much that I wanted my turn now because I was busy at work dealing with people and stuff. I wanted to come home and put my feet up on the couch and have a nice meal and watch TV and do nothing and just play with my children. But my wife is like, I'm done with the kids today. I'm going out for coffee with my friends. You take care of these rugrats. And what you do in a marriage is you swap and you realize, oh, my spouse is getting angry and frustrated with this child and her capacity to love this child, to give this child the love that this child needs is diminishing. So now I am going to step in and sacrifice my sleep for the sake of my wife and for the sake of my child to give my child what it needs because the real goal here, the most vulnerable person here is the infant. And the infant is just crying because it's just an infant. There's no reasoning with an infant. But love means I'm not gonna shake that baby. I'm not gonna abandon that baby. I'm not gonna react to that baby and hit the baby and say, I'm gonna hit you to get you to stop crying. Oh yeah, that makes a lot of sense. But this is what people do. Love is saying no to myself for the welfare of the other. That's love. And it's hard and it's complex and it's not always recognized and it's not always straightforward. God's love is frightening. Life giving act of creation, book of Job, yes. Don't debase it by calling it love. What other word are you gonna use? That's the word that the Bible uses. I could say agape, filo, eros, storge, C.S. Lewis's Four Loves. The problem is in the English language and it's the language I have to use with my church. I can walk around talking about agape and 15, 20% of my church will know what I'm saying because they've been around long enough. But anybody coming off the street will say, you need to have agape for your wife. And they'll look at me and they say, I might as well said, I need to have ben gay. You need to have ben gay for your wife. Well, ben gay might be an act of agape. So it's the word we got. And the corruption of that word isn't totally our fault. And I would place much more of a blame on shows like The Bachelor and romantic music that is pervasive in indoctrinating young people about love means romantic love. And all kinds of rainbow flags that say love is love. And it's like, really, really? The problem we have with English, we only have one word for love and it has to do duty with many, many different things. Love is not a warmish feeling. Love sometimes creates a warmish feeling. Love sometimes creates anger. God's anger is evidence of his love. The opposite of love is not anger. The opposite of love is indifference. Did Jesus say loving God consists in obeying his commandments? If you love me, you will keep my commandments, Jesus says. That's, I mean, preachers use it because it's the word in the Bible. Don't have another one. What else is there? Exactly, what else is there? What am I missing? I just hate the word. Maybe you need to see a therapist because you're gonna have to come to terms with the word because that's the word that's gonna be used. And as a preacher, I'd say I have even more right to be frustrated because when I say love, people interpret it according to all of those filters that the culture is giving them. And that's not at all the filter that's necessarily being meant in the Bible because again, the Bible uses at least four words for it. And again, I'd recommend C.S. Lewis's Four Loves and little tip, Audible has a version of C.S. Lewis's Four Loves read by Lewis. So that's really cool or at least part of it, I don't remember. So the Four Loves, C.S. Lewis, I recommend it. So 11.11, what's your wish? Gosh, we're so, okay. Done with questions from two weeks ago. Can you riff on deeper magic and Narnia? Oh boy. I have strange ideas about some parts of Christian orthodoxy, not Eastern orthodoxy. If Jesus only existed as God number one and never came to the earth as a man full deity with deeper magic that gave us the Bible in history, allow for salvation as the story of Jesus would be a myth that is true. Depends what you mean by salvation. I know what the apostle Paul said about our faith being in vain without a literal resurrection. I know some of the people that argue for the need of a literal resurrection argue for the priesthood of women. That means Paul's writings are taken with a grain of salt. So if one can argue for women, elders, deacons, pastors, they can also argue for deeper magic that allows for mythicist Christianity. Honestly, I wanted to ask this but didn't expect you to agree with me or change my mind, laugh out loud. I have an R. I believe that when Paul accepted Lydia's invitation in Philippi, we have evidence for female leadership in the New Testament church. Lydia was the leader of the church of Philippi. Now how does that translate into female pastors, priests, deacons, and elders? That's a far more complex thing. But I think you're really hard pressed to argue on the basis of the book of Acts that Lydia was not the leader of the church of Philippi. And there seem to be other, Priscilla and Aquila together worked the ministry to found the church at Corinth, quite likely. Women have been in the forefront of ministry throughout Christian history. How we manage the titles and how we manage the drama with respect to male and female. I can see, so I've got a lot of contradictory ideas about this, but people seem as contradictory. They're not contradictory for me. But on one hand, I can understand why it makes sense to only have male priests in the Roman Catholic church or in the Orthodox church. That's pretty easy actually, given all of what is encompassed in there. A pastor or a minister in the Protestant church is different from a priest in the Orthodox or Catholic church. They are functioning in different ways in different ecclesiastical environments. I can at the same time understand an ecclesiology which makes it inharmonious to have a woman as a Protestant minister. But that's different from having a woman as a Catholic priest. But what I don't like is in the Protestant church, the prohibition a priori against women serving in these offices. It depends on a whole lot of things, especially the ecclesiology. Because I don't think Paul had a problem with Lydia as leader of the church at Philippi. Now, is that a passing situation needed for a particular case? Maybe. But the admonitions in the book of Timothy, let's say, I think it's an epistle to a particular situation. And I don't see that as being no women heads of anything because it's tied to creation. And that text was used as, the entire women in ordained ministry in the church is a huge topic. And there's a lot more nuance to it than just throwing Bible verses back and forth. Now, again, given the modernist, fundamentalist, evangelical, very quickly you'd say, well, Paul's kind of, he's not a fundamentalist. He's certainly not a modernist. So in that case, I'm an evangelical because I'm sort of in the middle, at least with respect to the propositional spectrum and how that plays out in the theological debates over the last 200 years. And I'm evangelical on other things because I believe in Christian conversion. I believe in the quickening of the Holy Spirit. I believe in the transformation that the Holy Spirit does upon us. And in that ways, I'm fairly conservative. In that ways, I'm fairly conservative. So, yeah. But the deeper magic, yeah, that's a nice literary device that Lewis used. And actually thinking about atonement theories, Lewis was playing around because with Aslan taking Edmund's place, there's definitely a substitutionary element involved there. And there's also sort of a Christus Victor element involved there in that the queen was duped. And so what Lewis is really trying to do, I think in the line, the witch in the wardrobe, is to bring together a story in which you both have substitutionary atonement and Christus Victor atonement. And he does that, I think, fairly nicely in his stone table and the fact that the stone table, and so you have the mice gnawing away at the little bonds and you have the girls cutting Aslan off. I mean, it's a beautiful, Lewis could be so subtle. And part of what's interesting about Narnia is on one hand, he was so subtle that Tolkien didn't appreciate his subtlety. But I think there is some, Tolkien looked at, I don't wanna put words in Tolkien's mouth, but, and they had, Tolkien and Lewis had levels of their relationship that were difficult, partly because Lewis on one hand could be so subtle and peculiar in particular and stubborn about some things. But then when it came to like his relationship with Joy Davidman, you know, Lewis runs roughshod over the Anglican hierarchy and their rules and English law to a degree and propriety with taking up with this divorcee, who in many ways wasn't fully divorced when she came to England. And my reading of it is that she wanted to get out of a bad marital situation. And she wanted to switch husbands. She wanted to go from Gresham to Lewis. She had fallen in love with Lewis. She had become infatuated with him and she came to England to get her man. And she did. And a lot of Lewis's friends saw this and didn't think it was the way a Christian should behave. Lewis, Lewis was a wild guy in some ways, but we're all wild. So, okay. Oh boy, there's so many big questions. Good questions though. The term logos comes up a lot. Yes. And I'm worried about how threadbare that term could be getting via overuse in our little old corner of the internet because there's a lot of fudginess going on with it. What do you mean by this? Meaning me, oh boy. And what do Peterson and Vervecky mean? Are you using it in the same or at least similar ways? I think there's a lot of fudginess going on in this word right now. And it's a very old, very big, very important, very fudgy word. Now, what does the word mean at the beginning of the Gospel of John? Do I have time to read from how many books on my shelf on that topic? Because the word had been used by the Stoics. It had been used by various parties in Greek philosophy. It had been used by various religions. And so when you watch Peterson and Vervecky use it in their conversation, I don't think they're both using it in exactly the same way. And now part of what differentiates Vervecky and Peterson is that Jordan is a preacher. Jordan, part of what makes Jordan fun and evocative is that he can be a little breezy and quick with some things and kind of bring things together and patch them up and put them out there. I'm the same way, I'm not criticizing him. And I get called on this stuff and rightly so often in the comments of my videos that I was too cavalier, I was too simplistic, I was too haphazard with something because there's a lot of people who watch my videos that know a lot more about me, a lot more than I do about a whole lot of other things. And so they call me on stuff and often they're right. Not always, but often. And Peterson's sort of that way. And so Peterson's following the golden thread and the logos and Peterson's personifying this logos and he's sort of doing it because he's bringing in the Gospel of John, et cetera, et cetera. Vervecky quite a bit less so. And because Vervecky's a lot more careful and both Peterson and Vervecky have their modes, as do I. Ask me for something off the cuff, challenge me on it, force me to be a little bit more careful and a little bit more technical, I will do that. Same thing for Peterson, same thing for Vervecky. So in that conversation, they're riffing and flowing on each other. So logos can in some ways be an ordering principle. Sometimes logos is personified. It's often translated as word. In the Book of Acts, and I'm bumping into this quite a bit now as I'm going through the Book of Acts preaching, Luke uses logos in Acts quite a bit as a summary of what these apostles and evangelists are doing and what they're spreading throughout the Roman world. They're spreading the logos. Does Luke mean that in the same sense that the beginning of the Gospel of John means? Or is he meaning it in a fairly limiting set in terms of a message or a word or a posture or a body of theological? I mean, logos has that kind of breadth to it in a big way. Just got a phone call, I just gotta take a look. I got Daniel banging at my door and I got phone calls and stuff and I'm just trying to manage all of this. So it's a really good question. And it's a question that deserves a bigger answer and a better answer than I can give right now. But you're right, it's being used in a lot of different ways and throw Peugeot into it. Peugeot's probably a little bit more careful. But it's a really big word and it's a really important word and it's one of these words that in detective shows, when they have a wall and they have pictures and they draw lines and strings, logos is one of these words that just has strings going. And what our little corner of the universe is doing, little corner of the internet is doing right now is drawing even more strings to that word. So that word, you're exactly right and pausing and saying, now what do you mean by that word exactly? Because I had that thought and you'll hear me have that thought, respond to it a little bit in the video that comes out Monday when I sort of take the Vervecky video and the Lawrence Krause video and bounce some of those things off each other. Yeah, it's a good question. Grim Grizz, your PVK Vervecky is VVK. I don't know why he would be. Vervecky, Vervecky, oh, okay, I guess so. The JVVK, the algorithm fed me the leftovers of you and the apostles of purpose in December and aside from the urge to splice it with our talk for purpose of self aggrandizement, you can do that, and promote paintball for Jesus. I noted I was stuck, I was struck by quite the wave of nostalgia, that's interesting. In part of it, Peugeot maps Pentecost to Adam receiving the breath of life and how it brought through, brought the body of the church together. See, the power of symbolism is its reach and as is often the case, its power and its weakness is the same because you can put a lot of stuff together symbolically and then you have, all of this stuff was the kind of stuff modernity tried to limit. How do we limit it? So one of the ways that modern scholarship tried to limit it was authorial intent, which is a really nice thing. And so when NT Wright attacks, and so about 10 years ago, there's a big spat between more conservative reformed ministers and NT Wright over basically one of the themes that comes up in the Protestant Reformation, which Protestant reformers read in the Apostle Paul, which is the imparting of Christ's righteousness onto individual Christians. And that became a big part of the Protestant Reformation and certain schools like the reformed school and NT Wright in his looking at the, the looking at reading the Apostle Paul in light of a lot of the scholarship that has come about in first century Judaism basically says, I don't think Paul intended that impartation of Christ's righteousness into the individual life of the believer. I think the reformed, I think the reformational scholars who found that in Paul were bringing that into the text themselves. And NT Wright may very well be right, but you've got exactly the same dynamics with New Testament writers, the Apostle Paul's use of Hebrew scriptures, because Paul is using allegory, especially in one or two cases. He is using typology type and anti-type, not just Paul all throughout the New Testament. And so Jewish scholars then step in and say, hey, wait a minute, authorial intent, remember that, you evangelicals were using authorial intent to combat the modernists and to deal with fundamentalists because part of the irony of fundamentalism is that they started, all kinds of other things started getting smuggled into the text, into the message that fundamentalists were deriving from the texts and modernists and evangelical scholars were saying, hey, authorial intent, it's highly unlikely this particular author at this particular time could have intended that message, but here it is. And so symbolism, doesn't worry about authorial intent because your text is sort of living up here in the meaning register and the meaning wavelength of being, let's say. Then you have to ask the question, well, is it true? And now we're again, we're back into modernist things. Is it true in terms of reference between a physical relationship? That's what modernity focuses on. And then modernity tries to kind of scale up, peek out a little bit. Is it true in terms of the mind of the author? If 2000 years later, given the tiny corpus of writings we have from the apostle Paul, given the very limited amount that we can actually know about the mind of first century Judaism, we're going to in some ways definitively decide what this particular human being was thinking in 54 AD in this particular city in the Roman Empire. My wife and I have been married for 33 years. We regularly don't know what each other is thinking. And I'm gonna mind read this guy. Skeptics have a point, but yet mind read we sort of must. And it's reading the mind of God, which is what Christians are always trying to do and do together. And again, if you get really picky in terms of these little relationships, and the problem with modernity was not that it didn't bring out knowledge, it brought out plenty of knowledge. The problem is always with the application of that knowledge because that application is always human. And when I talk to people about something like, let's say the infallibility of scripture, I'm much more comfortable with infallibility because it's much more 4P than inerrancy, which is very 1P. Infallibility is much more 4P. And when it comes to infallibility of scripture, something I have to recognize is scriptural infallibility ends where my interpretation of that text begins, and I cannot engage with that text without interpreting it, which was basically the point that Peterson tried to make to Sam Harris in the first conversation in Vancouver. And Sam Harris, by virtue of his dogma, will simply reject that point. Because once Sam Harris really embraces that point, the rationalistic facade of monarchical vision modernity collapses because you are not an objective viewer, and you cannot and will not have a perfect monarchical vision. As a Christian, I say, only God can see that clearly, but God sees everything that clearly. So, back to the question. The rest of it, in part, Peugeot maps Pentecost to Adam receiving the breath of life and how it brought body to the body of church together. The rest of it was two of you discussing the inanimate left hand I'm speaking of, and it struck me that the tingling in those fingers at that time seems to have had the life sucked out of it by the splash of the whale that swallowed Jordan Peterson being confused for his second coming wave. Ha ha ha ha ha. Do you see why I see what I see? You see a lot. And the more you see, the harder it is to put together a usable, coherent framework. That's what we're all doing. And sometimes, you gotta go with the framework you got. Would you reflect on what was brewing in this corner of the internet before Peterson's return and how things played out? Wave two, depending on Peterson's health, might be a very short wave. We'll see. In some ways, okay, I'm gonna say something that I don't want anybody to misunderstand because it isn't ill-meant. There are many times after June 2019 that Jordan Peterson could have died. Many times, and Peterson has revealed that, Michaela's revealed that. It's really rather amazing, that Jordan Peterson is alive today and able to function as well as he did, even between now and January. Remember, wave two is really, only got started in October, November, January. He sort of started releasing videos again, and he's gonna take a step back now because of health. There'll probably be more of these step backs. We have no idea. But if Jordan Peterson had not survived COVID or Benzo withdrawal, which sounded like a very real thing, part of what was happening in this little corner of the internet before wave two was sort of waiting for Godot because is Jordan Peterson gonna come back? Is he going to do another biblical series? Is wave two gonna be like wave one only bigger? Will Jordan Peterson once again get into it with the press and talk to Kathy Newman and have those take down interviews? And well, we kind of got, we got a little taste of that with the Times of London thing that Peterson's like, I don't have the energy to fight that fight right now. And so I'm going to have conversations with people I want to and post them on my own channel and do conversations with other people who, I don't know why he picks the, I don't know what criteria he uses to appear on the other channels that he does. David Fuller mentions, and quite interestingly enough, Jordan has not been back on Rebel Wisdom. And I think David would love to have him back on Rebel Wisdom. Does Jordan, now we're trying to mind read Jordan Peterson, but in terms of the time between June, I got to keep my ears, June 2019 and January 2021, that was really the trough between the waves. This little corner of the internet was sort of waiting for Cudeau because Peterson was alive and we expected he would return, but we had no idea what that would mean. Sort of like waiting for the second coming. You're right. If Peterson had died, then he would have been more of a martyr and saint, at least for some, and villain for others. So, now that he's back and he did a conversation with Peugeot and he did a conversation with Vervecky, and Vervecky mentioned that there at least was, to my knowledge it hasn't happened. We'll have to see about Peterson's health. Another conversation with Peugeot and Vervecky together, that's gonna be interesting. Maybe Hank is gonna imagine I'm gonna do 20 commentaries on that video. Analyze every word, we'll pause the video and analyze all the use of the word logos and Peterson's nuance and Vervecky's nuance and Peugeot's nuance. Now I know some of you get a little frustrated with my first commentary on Vervecky Peterson was two plus hours and I barely touched the video. Oh, why would you do that, VanderKlay? Well, that's kind of a scholarship thing to do and this is what you do with biblical scholarship. Before I dive into a text in 1 Corinthians, I go back over the scholarship about what is that book, 1 Corinthians? What's behind that book? Because if you wanna understand what's in the book, you need to know something about the book. And what surfaced very clearly in the Vervecky Peterson video was there was stuff going on behind the scenes there. Was Peterson healthy? Is he being mischievous? Is he dealing with John because he knows John? Well, what are the layers beneath John's relationship with Peterson? Something that probably neither of them will talk about too candidly publicly because they shouldn't because this is personal stuff. So, yeah. And I think what was going on in our little corner of the internet is that we were continuing to develop our relationships with one another in anticipation of Peterson coming back, also not knowing what Peterson's second coming would mean. Now we know a little bit more, but again, because of what was put out on Twitter and what Michaela said at the beginning of a... I can't read the video chat here. That's what happens when I let other words into my site. What was happening in the second coming? Now we know more, but now because of what Michaela said on the audio version of the podcast and because of what Peterson's account said on Twitter, we don't know. The second wave might sort of come to an end. There might be another period of silence. Maybe the akathisia will finally be conquered. Maybe the akathisia is something that he has to deal with for the rest of his life, heaven forbid. We don't know. That's the way history is. But what's been amazing is that we've been able to sustain even just between... So we're talking about plans to do that conference in Thunder Bay at some point with Vervecky and Peugeot and myself. It's been amazing that we've been able to maintain good relations between the three of us. Why? Are any of the three of us hard to get along with? No, I think we're all quite easy to get along with. But by virtue of our position in established communities, let's say my church, someone somewhere in the Christian Reformed Church decides that it's not appropriate for me to ask a question on a video like, did John Vervecky turn Paul VanderKley into a non-theist? I mean, I'm in a position that if someone really wanted to come after me within the Christian Reformed Church, they could take a shot at it. Now, I think it would be a little difficult because they'd have to... The way the polity of the Christian Reformed Church works, you'd have to get me through my church council. And then the next layer, you'd have to get me through my regional classes. And then you'd maybe try and make a play for me at Synod. Nobody's tried that. If you really wanna come after me, I have about 10,000 hours of video you have to go through. Good luck. It's not worth it. Are there some people in the Christian Reformed Church that aren't particularly happy about how I've spent the last three years on YouTube? There very much are. Is it worth it for them to try and take me down? Well, the thing is, if they would get me kicked out of ministry in the Christian Reformed Church, that doesn't shut up my YouTube channel. So, it's sort of like, what's the point? But, Verveki and Peugeot and I continue to talk together. And that's kind of amazing. And the fact that Jordan Peterson, it looks like, is in some ways going to enter into the conversation in this little quarter of the internet in a bigger way, perhaps. Well, that has a lot of implications. I mean, John Verveki's channel is about 30,000. I haven't taken a look at what bump it got from his conversation with Peterson. It's a lot smaller than you might imagine. It almost always is. Peugeot's up around 120,000. Maybe we'll hit 20,000 later this year if current growth patterns kind of hold their own. So, there's a reason that Verveki and Peugeot are gonna talk with Peterson and I'm not. Because having a conversation with four would be a lot more than having with three. He's got established relationships with both Verveki and Peugeot. He knows who I am, but there'd be absolutely no reason Jordan Peterson would watch hours of Paul VanderKlay video. Might benefit him if he'd ask me, but he's not gonna do it because for a whole bunches of other reasons. But then the conference in Thunder Bay is gonna be a really big deal because that'll be the first time that Verveki and Peugeot and I actually meet each other in person. And our conversations are gonna be more extensive. And we are going to be playing on stage in different ways there. I will be preaching for a service. That was at least the original plan because this urban Abbey is a church of sorts. And so in that sense, I'm bringing in a different element of my person, which is my ecclesiastical voice, which is on the channel to a degree, but it's not forefronted. This is a personal channel. And what I do, I'm doing it from my office, but I bought all this equipment and this is a personal enterprise. So, but the church also supports it and sees it as being of kingdom benefits. So there's a lot that's here. It's a lot that's here. Sally Jo riffing off Grim Grizz says, Paintball for Jesus interdenominational league is the most valid church promotional thing in 100 years. Also similar to PewDiePie's meme review, we need church review. Oh boy. John James, who ran out of time. Dear Mr. VanderKlay, if it's all right, I would like to ask your opinion about attending the over the top evangelical worship type mega churches. I'm conflicted about it because on one hand, I feel so emotionally moved and close to God during worship, but at the same time, I'm concerned that it is performative and all about myself. Am I crying because I am feeling the Holy Spirit or am I displeasing God for LARPing? I'm concerned that I'm using worship in church to invoke emotional experiences to love and companionship that I always lacked as a child of divorce. I love Jesus and I want to do what's right by him. What do you think? Why, that's a good question. So I had a conversation with a woman named Sarah, who is a theological student at Compton in the Netherlands. And that conversation will probably come out this week at some point, if not next week. And she asked similar questions about, she's getting a theological education, which means now suddenly when she goes to church, there's whole new layers of analysis that are being engaged that weren't engaged when she first became a Christian in the small church where she found the Lord. That's what a theological education does. And so she had questions about, is it right for me to take, participate in the Eucharist and the Lord's Supper in this church, even if I don't necessarily share specifically their theology of the Lord's Supper? And my answer was partake, because Christ is acting through that church, but is not limited to that church in the same way that the Christian Reformed Church accepts the baptism of anyone who was baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. And I drew this as analogous in some ways to Sam and his biblical Unitarianism, but having to worship in evangelical churches. So I would argue that if you go to an Orthodox church and you see these incredibly powerful, moving, artistic icons on the wall and images and domes and incense and chanting, that that is a psycho technology just like evangelical mega sound, big, you know, skinny jeans, big box evangelical church. And while it's healthy to keep an eye on our emotions, your emotions are also given by God. And so I would say you're wrestling with a good struggle and those are good questions to ask. But my pastoral advice to you would be, you go praise God with your whole heart in that church. And yeah, you should be aware of manipulation, but you can be manipulated by an Orthodox church with icons and domes and beautiful architecture, just like you can be manipulated by a modernist building with hardly any religious ornamentation that is using a skinny jean wearing worship leader and powerful music. It's all part of communicating with the elephant. And so for the writer to ask questions is a good thing, but I would say there's nothing wrong with your evangelical church. Now to bring in some James K. Smith, are there some contemporary liturgies that could stand to be examined? Yes. Is there some other crud coming in through the music? Is there some other crud coming in through the music and through the participation in certain modernistic liturgies? Yes. Is it above critique? No. Is it sinful to participate? No. We give, we are asked to make a joyful noise to the Lord that joyful noise comes in lots of different packages and lots of different cultures. I have been in churches across cultural spectrums making all kinds of different noises. I've certainly got my preferences over which ones work for me. What do I mean by work? Which ones, and this, this I think is the interpretive key that you want to focus on. Is it helping you be a better Christian? And that better Christian is where you bring in the biblical critique, where you bring in, where you listen to your neighbors. And I would say, is this helping you to trust in Jesus more fully? Is it helping you to love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself? And you can ask trusted Christians around you just like in a way you're asking me. You're doing a self check, that's a very healthy thing. And so keep doing that work. It might be that at some point you decide it would be better for you to go to a church with a different kind of liturgy. And I think that's absolutely appropriate. And so in my conversation with Sarah, I brought up my friend Warren Mills, who's in Australia. And Warren grew up in a dispensational church. For a while he was in a charismatic church. Now he's in a highly liturgical Anglican church in Melbourne, Australia. And loving it, loving the liturgy, loving the disciplined motion, historically informed, symbolic, all of that stuff, loving it. He also loved the free form, charismatic. So I think God uses these things in his church. And they all have upsides and downsides. We all have to, I think, deal with the critiques. But I would not say that you are sinning by, I would in fact say, if you're sitting there critiquing the service, there's probably more sin in that. Because what you should do is be there present before your maker and humble yourself before his majesty. And now I'm gonna bring in some of my own reformed liturgy. You meet God, you confess your sins before God, you receive God's pardon, you listen to God's word, you partake in the meal, you fellowship with the body. All of these things are what we're doing in church. On a Sunday morning, often. And so if it's got a big band, praise God with the big band. If it's got a cantor and images on the wall, praise God there too. If it's frozen chosen, or if it's Pentecostal expressive, find the right place that helps you grow in discipleship. What are the metrics of discipleship? Love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength, love your neighbor as yourself. Grow in trust of Jesus more than you trust yourself. To me those are the metrics. So that's my answer. Well let's see if we can do one more. Let's see if we can do one more before we get to Cord's question, which I answered in the text. Hi Pastor Paul, I apologize if this is asked already. I was wondering what you thought about what the right Christian mind is. How completely should we view reality Bible through a symbolic lens? I am worried it could lead to confirmation bias. Through the criticism of confirmation bias implies that there's a neutral clean room view of reality exactly. Does the Reformed confession offer a complete immersion of a Christian life, or do you think the best we can do is move between the modernist and the Christian lens? I think setting modernism and Christianity as opposing each other is difficult because I am in many ways a modernist Christian, and there's modernity in my Christianity. There's also pre-modernity and post-modernity, and so those are sort of operating on different levels. In a modern frame if you ask what the right Christian mind is, even the formulation of the question almost invokes, as you later said in the question, sort of a Christian clean room, a monarchical vision on what a Christian is. And I am more, I think if we'd see more in a sort of a vervecchian, transjective thing, what being a Christian means for you at your specific time and place in all of the commutatory explosiveness of who you are right now would be different from being a Christian in medieval Europe, would be different from being a Christian in Africa, would be different from being a Christian in many different places. And so the rightness of this will be much more 4P and not 1P. It's gonna be true in terms of you need to hit the mark, and that mark for you is specific with all of the combinatorial explosive complexity of who you are. And so this is where I bring in sort of the tension between a bounded set and a center set. Center set is very much like hitting an arrow. Bounded set are the orientation points around which we deal with the various details of our life. So now obviously in my Reformed tradition, that's an element of who I am. It's multigenerational. And there are things about my Reformed confession that I find superior to other traditions, and that's part of the reason I continue to inhabit. But I also am cognizant of some of the limitations and weaknesses and liabilities of my tradition. My tradition begins just before modernity and has a fair amount of modernity in it. And so there's some strengths in, let's say, the symbolic lens. But part of the strength of the symbolic lens is that it has far reach. Part of the weakness of the symbolic lens is that the binary discernment yes and no. Does the scarlet rope, Bible very seldom talks about color. But right there in the book of Judges, Rahab's rope that goes out of her home on the wall is a scarlet. So people jumped on that very quickly. Oh, that connects to blood because red to blood. And so does the scarlet rope symbolically connect with the blood of Christ? No, a lot of people have made that point. Does the scarlet rope connect with the blood of menstruation? Does the scarlet rope connect with the blood of English monarchs? The weakness of symbolism is that you can just keep playing a lot, you can keep playing it all day. And you can have anything mean anything. And this is part of where modernity arose and said, we need an interpretive framework so that anything can't mean anything, but we can actually draw meaningful relationships between things that are productive in the world. That's the strength and power of modernity. And that's why in some ways now as modernity recedes, Peugeot with his symbolism comes onto the stage and it's a revelation. Wow, I can do this, I can do that, I can do this. I can see the relationships. I can predict, I can forecast. Jonathan Peugeot, I mean, Jonathan Peugeot, part of his ministry is prophetic. Now, if you listen to that in a charismatic frame, which is also within the modern frame, that's something that people often don't forget, because it's very much a rejection of the modern frame. And that way it's parallel to fundamentalism. The Pentecostal charismatic movements are a huge rejection of the modern frame. And so for a charismatic prophet, I'm having a vision and I had a dream. Boy, you're gonna meme the heck out of this thing. And the Lord appeared to me and I saw a sign and it was over Kansas City and there was a bus and there was a car and so, but that's sort of a denial of the modern frame. I'm saying basically screw you, modernity. I'm gonna have a vision and I'm gonna have a dream and I'm gonna draw the symbolism together and just go on Google and find the prophetic bulletin boards on the internet. I'm sure they're all still out there. They're quite something to read. We had an earthquake here in Northern California and there's an individual I know, he's got some obsessive compulsive disorder and every time I see him, and some of you around here will know who I'm talking about, I had a dream and in the dream there was a train and I just saw in the newspaper that there was a train derailment and so I dreamed about that train derailment and then there was the earthquake and then there was 24 was in the dream and I just found a coin and it had 24 on it and he just keeps going and going and going and going. And modernity says, ain't buying it, I'm putting together a box here and anything outside that box, we're gonna keep out of the public realm. That's modernity. Peugeot comes along and now, Peugeot's got a lot of modernity integrated, Peugeot understands all of this stuff and now he comes out and says, I'm looking at the symbolism and things are going to get more chaotic before they get better and a certain form of Christianity is going to die and Peugeot is acting like a prophet and people are responding to Peugeot as a prophet. Even though Peugeot is not saying, I had a dream last night and the Lord revealed to me that Jordan Peterson, when he redos his biblical series, is going to do it in the theater in Toronto and he's going to star with the book of Proverbs. He's not that kind of prophet. So, yeah, it's a good question. All this stuff is integrated and so again, the fact that we've got Jonathan Peugeot with his interpretive framework, we've got John Vervecky, a non-theist, but you saw from the question and answer, there's some elements, talk to Nate in our community here about some of Vervecky's non-theism is kind of connecting up with ancient Neoplatonism and so there are connections between Vervecky and Peugeot. There's also huge differences between Vervecky and Peugeot. There's connections with me in here, but I'm Dutch Reformed and Protestant and so it's an interesting combination and we have the ability to speak with each other and then there's all the personal layers and yeah. So I obviously, on my channel, to a degree, promote, so on the video that I take some Vervecky and Peterson and Krauss and Peterson, I also bring in Abram Kuyper. So I'm adding some of the neo-Calvinist late modernity theology because a lot of what Abram Kuyper and Herb and Bovink were doing was exactly that stuff about the propositional and the fundamentalist because Kuyper and Bovink were trying to not lose the propositional but not just simply be reactive fundamentalists so that Kuyper and Bovink are trying to meld the stuff in and in my particular corner of the world, via Calvin College, you know, the four horsemen of the Calvin philosophy department, Richard Mao, Alvin Plantinga, Nick Waltersdorf and I could either throw Jelima in there or George Marsden, one of my favorite historians, you know, there we've got them in the neo-Calvinist Kuyperian downstream from Bovink tradition. So it's, combinatorial explosion has stuff all over the place but I tried to bring at least some of the Dutch Reformed neo-Calvinist stuff into the conversation where appropriate but because, you know, now I've not only got the roots of Kuyper and Bovink and mid-century Christian reformed and Calvin seminary and Plantinga and Waltersdorf and Marsden and Mao in me, now I've got Peterson and Vervecky and Peugeot in me and part of what we all are is we take all of these various strands and then that has to cook up with Patterson and the Dominican Republic and Sacramento and Rick and Freddie and Joey and the meetup and the people I talked to in my Randos conversation and the family that stopped by yesterday in an RV to wish me well and then the RV that came last night dumped a lot of garbage that I was angry at when I was complaining to Rick this morning and that's what we are and that's what we do. And to go back to the previous question, Christ takes all of this and uses the skinny jeans worship or the Orthodox worship or the Roman Catholic worship or the frozen, chosen reformed worship or the black Pentecostal worship and all of this and works through us to accomplish his vision and his kingdom. That's probably a good place to stop and so no, I haven't watched inside. You should tell me why you want me to watch inside. I tried watching it so like I said, I often watch TV with my wife and so it was just her and I said, hey, a bunch of people mentioned this to me, let's try it out on Netflix and we started watching it and we both found it so distasteful within about 20 minutes. She's like, would it be okay if we not watch this anymore? I said, yeah. And so I didn't watch the whole thing. So if there's an element to it that you think I really should buckle down and watch the whole darn thing, I'll probably just do it by myself because my wife already watches like, I don't like this. I didn't like it much either. But so tell me why you want me to watch inside with Bo Berman. So next week, Father Big Mac wants to know how do I pray? Maybe I'll have to ask him how does he pray too? So end of questions, our first question. First question will be next week, will be the 23rd. First question, July 23, before my birthday. So first question, July 23, Big Mac's question. Cool, and we are way behind. Okay, all right, good. Thank you for being here. And shoot, I didn't get any questions from the floor this week, sorry about that. And no pushback, I just guess I just got so busy and so caught up into it. So maybe next week I'll do better. So thanks for watching. You can end transmission, Rick.