https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=l0WjjqipVbs

 Hi, this is Paul. This is part five. So remember Sam said four, Hank said 10. We're up to five. I don't know who's going to buy a Chicago pizza, Hank or Sam, but this is part five of working through the Jordan Peterson, John Vervecky video. Now what was really nice was the way that this video and then John's question and answer on Bridges of Meaning really dovetailed and in this area quite nicely. So I'm going to pick it up a little before where I left off in the other. Jordan was again talking about culture war stuff and the video that I commented on, on some of the Bridges of Meaning discussion was also on the culture war stuff. And I really loved in that video, if you haven't watched the video of John Vervecky's question and answer at the Bridges of Meaning discord, I thought he in a much, well, Nick didn't interrupt him as much as Jordan did, but John really nicely laid out where, how John deals with this question of post-modernity and why it's inadequate to deal with what John Vervecky's main goal is. He wants to get at reality, truth. I mean, he's a searcher. He's a searcher for truth, for reality to see and to know. So I'm going to pick it up here and continue on in this. We'll see how many more it takes. So you said the answer to nihilism. That isn't that isn't exactly a comment on my comment that the culture war is about a claim that the drive to power is at the core of Western being. I think that's an equally nihilistic claim. I that's that's my point. The claim, the claim is nihilistic or my claim about that is nihilistic. The claim that power is a fundamental reality is an attempt to assuage the wounding of nihilism, but it is fundamentally mistaken in its endeavor. It will it is it is it is constituted the wrong way. It's like framing a problem the wrong way so that you know, you not get the insight needed to get to the solution of the problem. So I think of it as a fundamental framing. That's what I'm trying to say. OK, that's why I'm not. I'm that's why I'm hesitant to say either yes or no to it, because I get it. Yeah. Well, I believe that I believe that it is miss frame because I don't think it would be taking us in such a pathological direction. The whole argument, exactly. If it wasn't miss framed, you know, just a thought. What are these videos? Except my thoughts around watching this. I. It's also been a few weeks now since this has come out, which I think is helpful because it affords perspective. But given, you know, Jordan is at this point, well, he's not well enough. There was a there was a note on Twitter a couple of days ago from Jordan's account, either from Jordan or someone who is managing his account for him, basically saying that he he sort of has to take a step back. He's his akathisia is back to a degree. And I suspect he's got a few of these talks already in the in the can, as it were. And that's part of the reason why they've gone down to a weekly release instead of two to a week. He's probably got a bunch of these that are already laid up, because as in John Verveckis case, it was released about a month after. So the channel will continue to be able to produce content. And I certainly hope and pray and my prayers are with Jordan and his family that the akathisia can reside, can subside and that he can once again, you know, pursue these conversations, which he's you know, he's really pursuing. And there's one coming. There's another one coming out on psychedelics. And there's been some of some of you have sent me some other videos by the same author. And so I'm going to be looking at that a little bit more. The whole psychedelic question is an interesting question philosophically when it gets into these these questions of, I'd say, inside versus outside of I don't like subjective, objective that framing, we could say public. But anyway, my point, and I interrupted these two, my point is that given everything that has happened to Jordan over the last five years, another aspect of this conversation that I think is healthy is Jordan being able to talk to a colleague about. Some of the issues that drove Jordan to make the decisions that he did, which eventually led him to, you know, he's not a professor. I don't know. He's probably still a status is likely still with University of Toronto. I haven't heard that there's been any official status with respect to that. He's he had a sabbatical that he was on leave and he certainly would be subject to health leave. But I don't know if he could ever go back and be a professor there. And so I mean, John Vervecky has been he's a very careful speaker and he has, you know, really worked hard to stay out of the political fray. He doesn't believe that that's not the aspect of this conversation that he wants to be involved in. And I completely agree with that. I perhaps touch on political things a little bit more than he does, partly because as a pastor, my domain is a little bit more broad. But as a pastor, too, I try to differentiate my work from the political aspect and the work of of Jordans that I'm most interested in is obviously the religious aspect. But I thought I thought it's really helpful to have a conversation about some of the culture war stuff that that Jordan wants to talk about from an academic point of view with respect to are we are we. Are we talking about Foucault and Derrida and post-modernity in a credible way? A way that is fair and not just straw manning, but but to do some more serious analysis. And so I think this conversation between John and Jordan did achieve at that. And Jordan was able to talk with a colleague about post-modernity and compare notes. I had a friend who I was a president of a board and he was the he was the director of the agency. I was president of the board agency, was the director of the agency. This is within the church and that he lived in Ontario and had to continually travel back and forth to Michigan and always had to deal with the the US customs to get in and out. And so his answer to the standard question of why are you traveling? Because whenever you'd mention any employment, you know, suddenly everything would get weird at the border because why are you going into the other country, taking a job away from a national, et cetera, et cetera? You'd always say, I'm going to compare notes. That's all we tell him. I'm going to compare notes. So I really liked here her. John and Jordan are comparing notes on post-modernity. And I found it. I found it very helpful. And so part of what I'm trying to and for me, this dovetails with the, you know, the the increasing crescendo within 4E cognitive science about embodiment and embedded and extended and enacted cognition is most. Right. You see this as a subset argument of one of those elements. Yes. But that's a huge. But like I said, I'm really having a hard time. I know what you mean. But and I suppose what you're trying to do with everything you do is to expound upon this. But I certainly want you to expound upon this. Let's go into those three modes of alternate cognition a little bit more deeply. OK, so I mean, so the first distinction, of course, was classically made by Ryle. And we even carry it in psychology when we make distinctions of our own procedural memory and things like that, which this is the distinction between propositional knowing that something is the case in which what you're trying to do is basically assert, you know, the truth of the semantic content of a. Right. And that's that's akin to the proposition that to believe in God is to accept a set of propositions about the nature of God. Yes. And that's what always strikes. That's why I never answer that question, because I think that's the wrong framing of the question. So I can't answer it. OK, well, man, you're helping me out here. So because you're differentiating, you're helping me differentiate my sense of the non propositional space. And I mean, I know some of this and I could see how, you know, this is this is an area where, yes, some collaboration would be helpful because John has has developed these four P's and Jordan has, I think, rightly sort of hinted at it. I think one of the aspects that both of these two will have to deal with is that. Modern science is a sub-domain of modernity and in that way is deeply. Dependent upon propositionality. In a way, you know, is deeply dependent on propositionality. And so some of the. Limitations of propositionality. Also limit the domain of science. And and that. Curtails or should curtail the ambition of science to be a totalizing discipline, which is at the heart of many of the people like Krause. I finished listening to it and. You know, towards the end of that conversation, I said, you know, I think towards the end of that conversation, Peterson's like, well, religion asks, you know, why and Krause then says something like, well, all why questions should just be basically dispelled by how questions and I think. But the problem is that two minutes later, he just using science explained. And this is why I did. Basically, this is his reason for being. And it's like. You can't live like you are prescribing. It isn't possible. And and you and you betray, you betray your you be you betray your agenda within moments of asserting it. So anyway, so so as we continue these conversations about science and religion, and this is, I think, a big part of what Jordan continues to try to work on, because in many ways he. More than many, I think really takes that the challenge of science and religion. Seriously, from both ends, instead of what some religious people do, which is sort of just, oops, dispel science and what some scientific people just dispel religion, neither are going to be dispelled. They both have their proper domain towards also when towards the end of the Krauss conversation, when Peterson is talking to Krauss and Peterson says, well, perhaps we need a fourth. You know, he's talking looking at the American three, the legislative branch, the judicial branch, the executive branch, that there needs to be a symbolic branch. And he was talking about parliamentary and, you know, monarchies. And, you know, it reminded me of Abraham Kuyper's fear sovereignty. And you can look that up in Wikipedia for for a brief look at it, but. There's science has this has its sphere. And what we're really trying to do is trying to figure out the appropriate domains and how these different forms of knowledge interact with the with their appropriate domain. And that very much gets into to a degree. Abraham Kuyper's neo-Calvinist ideas around sphere sovereignty, which he put into place to one degree or another in the Netherlands in the beginning of the 20th century. He was he was a he was a Dutch reformed theologian. And he was also he also became the prime minister of the Netherlands. So he obviously had a political philosophy as well. Because I know that the knowing what and knowing how circuitry is separate. Yeah. And I've known that since I wrote Maps of Meaning. And I know the inside circuitry is separate. And, you know, that's what I've been getting at also with regards to this idea of revelation and then critical thinking, which we started all this with and never got back to, even though it's just a trivial issue. The logos were following the logos in love. Oh, God, I hope so. That logos is not very static. Oh, yeah, I hope so, John, because it's certainly the only justification for my existence. Red skull and all. I think there are many reasons that justify your existence, my friend. Yeah. Well, and that's, you know, you could see where and Peterson has talked about this a lot and. How this culture war stuff weighs on him. I got an email from someone that basically had attached to it a 35 page PDF about how Jordan Peterson is a neo-Nazi. And I skimmed through that thing, just a gasp at, you know, one of the examples of an argument would be, you see what Jordan's got, how he's got his finger on his hip. Aha. See, see, see. And, you know, the arguments, the arguments are deserving are about at the level of a Monty Python sketch. You know, and these are the kinds of arguments that this email and this 35 page PDF had. And. Well, again, as a Christian, part of how I deal with this is. Part of what Christianity affords is if you believe that your final judge is an audience of one, which is God. And. And. You know, it's one of my Mormon homeless people. He's he's he's always like me and when when me and Jesus Christ, we're a majority. And so one of the things that he says all the time. And there's a degree of of confidence that that affords. And, you know, the Red Skull attacks and all of these attacks by high status, powerful people in the culture war. You know, it's it's it's. It's hurt him and and that's it makes me sad and it makes me angry because I've watched. I've probably I haven't watched every single video on his channel, but I've watched easily a majority of them and I've watched many of them multiple times through and I've watched his his class lectures, which he recorded and to to to call him a neo-Nazi is just preposterous. And yet in this in this silly culture war, it's a. It's a sin. Oh, I think that's an inadequate self-appraisal. Oh, thank you, John. That's vastly appreciated. I so I think you would admit and I think, you know, there's been a growing consensus from the failure of computational cognition or even behaviorist to we can't reduce conscious. Why failure, John? Because what we what we've what we've noticed is that consciousness doesn't seem to be something that's explicatable in terms of the relation to logical relations between. It's not propositional. Very good. Very good. So you think we've actually found that out. And that's the failure. Is that is that does that mean the failure of AI? And as it's now, when he says you think we've actually found that out again, this is sort of science as certainty. And consciousness is not propositional. I certainly agree with the statement, but. This this quest for certainty, it's completely human. It is a human quest. It is itself not a propositional quest. It very much gets into some of the McGill, Chris stuff. But but when we, you know, we should pause when. When we imagine we have grasped some of the certainty, I'm not trying to be a skeptic, but I just I just wanted to note that. Presently constituted. It depends. It depends, because what's happening in AI is that AI is moving off a sort of proposition. Yeah. I'll come to you. The idea that cognition is computation and that the mind is a formal system is being replaced with the. Now, this again is what does he mean? The mind is a formal system. Well, he actually dealt with that in the Bridges of Meaning conversation. The new astronomy. And so it was like, aha, but there is a language of the universe. That's what Galileo called it. And that's math. And that's why you've got the prioritization of math. And then everything tries to imitate math. So we get the idea of knowledge as a formal system, right? A formal, logical, mathematical system. So a purely structural, as the postmodernists will later say, because they also call themselves post-structuralist, is purely formal structure. And all we're going for is logical coherence. And then that brings the third thing, which is reason. Is nothing but logic. Reason is nothing but logic. So all of those three actually fit together very, very profoundly. If you think about it. Now we're in just to track it. Now we're in like Kripke, Hilbert. The idea that the mind is an embodied, autopoetic, dynamical system and that thinking isn't in the head. It's the way the embodied brain is dynamically coupled to the world in an ongoing evolution of your sensory motor. Right. You mean hence hence the justifi... There's I think there's in there also a deep critiquing of individualism. That we for the most part, our assumptions are here we are as individuals. And again, individuals are we are individuals. We should be treated as individuals. But the thinking that we're doing is not something that we're just simply doing on our own between our ears. It's something that we are actually doing together. And I think, you know, so why why on earth do. You watch me think along with these other thinkers and you think along with me, how does this help us? Well, this is sort of a validation of what John just articulated, that thinking is a communal enterprise. And I did three conversations yesterday about the church. And they'll probably come out later. Did one with Karen from The Meaning Code. I did another one with Sarah from the Netherlands. And I did another one with Anders from Arizona. And in all of them, you know, that the church was sort of the focus. And part of the reason why, you know, we're working on estuary and why as a pastor, I work on church is that this thinking. That this thinking and especially this believing, and I don't mean believing in a strictly propositional way, this believing together that we do in the church is very much in line with what John has just laid out. This is what the church is for. The church is for a thinking community to be a thinking community, a thinking, believing, living together community. Today, I had a conversation with Mathias. That will come out before this video, because I'm going to put that out Friday morning, who who grew up in a Mennonite community in Germany. And of course, Julian in our channel, and you can find him much more frequently on the Randos channel. You know, Julian is participates in a very serious. Hutterite communal living situation. And so part of what the church creates is, in fact, these thinking and believing and living together communities. And the goal of this is, in fact, to. To to grow an agency and to grow in knowledge of God. Now, again, when I say knowledge of God, we think about that in this siloed, modernistic, secularist sense that knowledge of God is somehow a religious thing. But I want to point back to the early days of modernity, when you look at someone like Galileo or Newton in many ways, when they are measuring gravity and working out Newtonian mechanics, they are. Pursuing the mind of God and desiring to know God better. Well, what God? Well, God, number one. And how do we know this God? We know this God by this this transjective, this transjective relationship with God. And in fact, and Christianity has done this all along. We do this in community. And so a big part of of the development of Christianity throughout the ages has been the development of the Christian community and the norms within the Christian community, which in many ways not only has the morality of Christianity, as Tom Holland has shown, deeply penetrated and really captured. A great deal of Western morality are relational assumptions about equality and brotherhood, for the most part, have captured the Western imagination. And we try to in many ways approximate this even within the state. Nationalism is in some ways a an attempt to apply. Christianity in geopolitical ways in the West, democracy certainly is. And again, this gets into this this debate about sphere sovereignty. Well, maybe I should maybe I should put it right in this video, too. Panel at Oxford, you said was Oxford. It was the Oxford Union debate. Yeah. Yeah. OK. So and I know you're also interested in social transformations and what's happening in the universities and you describe the crowd at Oxford as woke. So I'm going to ask you, I'm going to tell you something I've been thinking about. I'd like you to tell me what you think about it. Sure. So, you know, I was thinking for a long time about the advantages of a of democratic monarchy like Great Britain. OK, so imagine imagine instead of executive, legislative and judicial. There's four branches of government, OK, legislative, judicial, executive and symbolic. OK, and so you need it's helpful to have the Queen because then the president isn't the Queen. Yeah. Or the president. That's the great thing about a constitutional monarchy. You and I both have lived in Canada and the United States. So that's OK. So you can part. So you might say that in a place where there is no fourth branch of government, the president, the executive, tends to take on the symbolic weight of the king. Yeah. OK. We agree on that. That's possible anyway. I think it's one of the problems of American politics. Yeah. OK. Now, I would say that's also related to the problem of the separation of church and state. And one of the things the West seems to have got right is the idea that we should render unto Caesar what is Caesar's and render unto God what is God's. Now, this this area would be a fascinating area to to talk to Jonathan Peugeot about, because in one of my conversations with him, he basically said, well, I'm basically a monarchist. And that that does very much flow from. The. The the the Orthodox kingdoms of the East. You had us, you had a, you know, and to a degree, the constitutional monarchies of the West, I mean, the queen is the protector of the church. And and in the West, they develop this dance. And Tom Holland writes about it in his book Millennium or it has two titles. I bought the Millennium book, even though I had the other book got it from the UK. And in the West, they had, you know, throughout the medieval period, they had this long dance of power struggle between Pontus and emperor. And that goes all the way back to Constantine. So, you know, this has been something that that we've been working on for a very long time. And so now Jordan is suggesting that perhaps a fourth symbolic branch would be appropriate to to differentiate these roles. Well, it's an analogous idea. That's OK. You don't don't all just continue. I mean, I knew that we describe more, but OK, yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Well, imagine there's a practical necessity for the separation of the religious impulse from the political impulse. But imagine that there's a psychological necessity for that, too. And then if there aren't domains specified out for the different domains of of practical thought, political, economic, religious, then they contaminate each other. And what happens is you don't get rid of the rid of the religion. You contaminate the politics with it now. Or as the president of the Southern Baptist Conference said, every time religion and every time church and politics gets in bed, church gets pregnant and the the child doesn't look like Jesus. So I would argue that when church and politics get too closely intertwined, the church gets corrupted and in fact, both get corrupted. And and this is something of what's behind. The ideas of Abram Kuyper in terms of sphere sovereignty. And you can find this on Wikipedia in Neo Calvinism. Sphere sovereignty is known as differentiated responsibility. It's the concept that each sphere or sector of life has its own distinct responsibilities and authority or competence and stands equal to other spheres of life. Sphere sovereignty involves the idea of an all encompassing created order. And those of you who keep going back and forth with me about natural law, you can see created order is sort of the Dutch Calvinist alternative phrase to natural law. I prefer created order. I'm a Dutch Calvinist designed and governed by God. This created order includes societal communities, such as those for the purposes of education, worship, civil justice, agriculture, economy and labor, marriage and family, artistic expression, et cetera. Their historic development and their abiding norms. The principle of sphere sovereignty seeks to affirm and respect creational boundaries and historical differentiation. And so when I was listening to Peterson say this, I thought he's taken a page out of Abram Kuyper. Sphere sovereignty implies that no one area of life or societal community is sovereign over another. Each sphere has its own created integrity. Neo Calvinists hold that since God created everything after its own kind, diversity must be acknowledged and appreciated. For instance, the different God given norms of family life and economic life should be recognized such that a family does not properly function like a business. Similarly, neither faith institutions, churches nor institutions of civil justice, the state should seek totalitarian control or any regulation of human activity outside their limited competence, respectively. The concept of sphere sovereignty became the general principle in European governed countries governed by Christian democratic political parties who held to an integral part of held it as an integral part of their ideology. The promotion of sphere sovereignty by Christian Democrats led to the creation of corporatist welfare states throughout the world. And of course, plenty of all this can and has been debated. Sphere sovereignty is an alternative to world views of ecclesiastical ecclesiasticism and secularism, especially in its status form. During the Middle Ages, a form of papal monarchy assumed that God ruled over the world through the church. Ecclesiasticism is widely evident in the arts. Religious themes are strong, are encouraged by arts primary patron, the church. Similarly, the politics of the Middle Ages often consists of political leaders during the state instituted on and on. Some say that as Christian Democratic parties were formed, they adopted the principle of sphere sovereignty with both Protestants and Roman Catholics agreeing that the principles of sphere sovereignty and subsidiarity boiled down to the same thing. Although this is at odds with Doiweird's development of sphere sovereignty, which he held to be a significant distinction from subsidiarity. And of course, you know, the further this goes, the more debated it would be. The doctrine of sphere sovereignty has many applications. The institution of the family, for example, does not come under, does not come from the state, for example, unlike Roman Catholic in the Roman Catholic tradition, Christian schools and the Dutch reform tradition and many Christian reform church, despite the smallness of their communities, launched Christian day schools and they did so. And the institution of the family, for example, does not come under, does not come from the state, but they did so. And the pastors weren't in charge of the day schools. They were basically family associations that created the day schools. You know, the pastor might come and do chapel or something like that, but pastors don't run the day schools in Dutch Christian reformed churches. Pastor doesn't run the church. There's a council, there's a board. They run the church. The pastor doesn't see a lot of these ideas have been deeply impacted many of the forms of what we do in our culture. But, you know, this, this to a degree gets at questions of education. And so, for example, the kinds of again, in the Christian reform church, parental associations run the school and and collaborate, you know, collaborate with others. And this, this, you know, reached its peak. It's still bandied about in my tradition. In the Netherlands, it sort of was worked out in pillarization. Kuyper himself founded the Free University, where ministers of the reformed Church of the Netherlands could be educated without interference from the Dutch state, because educating ministers lies beyond the sphere of civil government in Kuyper's view. And so there was an earlier split off in the church, the offskyting, that Kuyper's groups then eventually came together with to become the Christian reformed church, which was an alternative to the state church. And the Free University and Free Church are are separate from these these state churches. So it's very interesting. It's very interesting reading some of these and listening to what Peterson had to say. You mean, hence hence the justification for freedom of speech, you might say. Well, and also also the freedom of action, freedom of action and also, you know, a freedom for people to explore different ways in which they inhabit their body. I think that's also an important thing. So I did want to get back, though. So if we, you know, when you talk about freedom of action, you're talking about freedom of action, freedom of action, freedom of action, freedom of speech, you know, when he said that I've listened to this a few times, obviously, and when different ways for people to inhabit their body. For for a. Within the context of a point of the integral nature of a human being, that form of differentiated, which I'm not denying. Seems odd, it sort of reminds me of the. Of what a psychologist might call disassociation of a person from their body, which which I think very consistently in John schema would be seen as a disorder, because the ideal would be whole integration between. A living nephesh as as the Hebrews would call it, not not a strong body. Mind division. If you, if there's a growing plausibility, so much so that, for example, Bernardo Castro and I take him seriously, I don't agree with him, but Bernardo is a sharp guy. He, he proposes a kind of absolute ideal. Who is that? I don't know him. Bernardo Castro, Bernardo Castro. So Bernardo is so convinced. I haven't listened to John's conversation with Bernardo. Bernardo was right. He was right. He was right. John's conversation with Bernardo, Bernardo was recommended to me fairly early on in my videos and I haven't really paid him much attention. And he's a very sharp guy that the arguments of trying to reduce consciousness computationally, et cetera, I failed that he is willing to. Right. Advocate for, and I don't disagree. I don't agree with him on this, but he makes a plausible case that reality, you know, absolute idealism, that consciousness is the ultimate reality. And whether or not that's the case, all I'm trying, I'm making a weaker claim on the basis of that. I'm taking that as evidence that there is a growing consensus that the attempt to, you know, explain consciousness computationally, or even just in terms of, of a sort of, sort of behaviorist set of skills or something like that. I think that's failed. So to go back to the four kinds of knowing, you've already acknowledged the propositional. Sorry. I want to inject one more thing here that's relevant to what you just said. If that, if you don't mind, I don't mind at all. Jordan should start doing commentary videos on the people that he talks to. I mean, again, I can't point the finger at him for interjecting because that's all these videos are. You know, I think the atheist critique of religion is a critique at a propositional level. I've made this similar point, Jordan. I've made the point that they're not, you know, they're not paying attention to, I mean, when Nietzsche runs into the marketplace, he is talking to the atheists when he says, you don't know what you've done when you've killed God. Right. And so to think that religion is primarily about asserting propositions for which there is no evidence. And the God that the atheists attempt to kill is a propositional God. And what we've seen in the culture is that even if they manage to shame and exercise this propositional God out of the culture, plenty of other gods leaking through the bottom. Is to miss all of the non-propositions. So I make a distinction and it lines up with this. You know, I think that religion is not primarily about knowledge. I think it's primarily about wisdom because wisdom is about that fundamental bodying it. The problem that comes when I deny a video that I want to do, and I wind up making it, mashing it up with the other video that I decided to do. This is exactly an example of it. But I think these conversations, if you set them side by side, there's some very interesting relationships that develop. And so I've been watching what's been happening to Richard Dawkins, for example. Right. Now, Richard's idea, and I'm an admirer of Dawkins. He can think, you know, I mean, he's brilliant. And I've read his books. I understand what he's doing and why. And I get his argument. I think it's incomplete for reasons we could get into and probably will. But I think there's something missing there. And then it's playing out is that when you remove the religious sphere and you confuse it with superstition or you fail to... So, so this week I'm working on, I'm working on Paul and Barnabas go to Cyprus and there's a Jewish Magi named Bar-Jezas. And Paul basically says he's a charlatan, dresses him down, curses him, and he becomes blind for a while. And the pro council of Cyprus then becomes a believer. Okay. Superstition. Where are we going to put the boundaries around that? And, and, and believe you me, I, I am not a pastor of a Pentecostal church. And I, as some of the conversations that I talked with this week, you know, my college years, I went to a charismatic Christian reform church, and some of you might think that's an oxymoron. Well, no, not really. It was charismatic. It's an old Christian reformed way. And so I participated in plenty of healing services and, and a whole variety of things. Okay. And so I've got plenty of my own skepticisms and BS meters about all sorts of things that, that fly in the church. But part of the, part of the issue is modernity sort of tried to create a nice clean space by saying, here's the natural, here's the supernatural. The problem is where is the symbolic in there? Because it isn't nice and discreetly contained. And the, the line between natural and supernatural is not a line that, that, that people, it's not a line that people obey. You can shame them out of it. And, and now this is a very big deal because this was in many ways, exactly what the enlightenment wanted to address and rein in, and in some ways, also the Protestant Reformation too. And in fact, the embrace of propositionality was exactly designed to address this because if you could, if we could limit ourselves to correspondence between language and objects, well, then we could sort of get all the superstition out of the way. And if we could say that perhaps to use this language that I don't like the objective and the subjective never touch. But that won't wash in Jordan space and it won't wash in Jordan's life. So a little careful about the, the, the, the, the easy breezy use of that word superstition to discriminate her and you confuse it with superstition or you fail to discriminate between the valid elements of it and the superstitious elements. You don't get rid of the religious impulse. It goes somewhere else. And I think where it goes, if you're saying it's going into secular religiosity now, I, well, what do you think? I agree. I mean, what does it look like to you? No, that's I, I said that I've written a P I've written on it. And I, that was my argument is that, is that we're seeing many of the aspects of religion being manifest in, in secular arguments, as someone pointed out, the only difference being in many, unlike at least the Christian religion, there's no possibility of absolution, which is, yeah, yeah, but that's not funny. That's seriously not funny. I agree with you. I know it's serious. Not funny. Believe me. I know it very well. I know you do. I know, but, but that also points out what a remarkable achievement the idea of absolution is because it's like the presumption of innocence, those two things. Those are miraculous. Yeah. Well, I, I agree. That's, that's why you gotta be careful about this getting rid of superstition and then using the word miraculous out. What, what exactly do you mean by using that M word right there? Constructs of thought. I agree. Uh, and I, I, you know, I'm glad we're having this discussion. One of the, when you, when you talked about the symbolic, I, one of the problems I sometimes have with, with you from having read you in the past, and we'll talk about this is as you say things and I don't really understand what they mean. I mean, they're, especially I find them vague enough that, that, that I really want them to know how you're defining things. And I've really, he's a little frightened by the woo. Really enjoyed the fact that you've been defining things. And I think the, the, the, the, uh, so I would agree with you completely. We have to realize. And I've had this discussion, as you probably know, Richard and I have had discussions about a lot, there's a movie about us called the unbelievers and we, we spent a lot of time together and I think our views have, have come together in different ways. I would argue that religion on the whole has not been a good thing for people. Okay. That's the first argument, but, but. Again. Yes. Is this, which I are you looking after when you're making that sweeping value judgment. In order to, but we shouldn't realize we have to realize that in order that it does serve an evolutionary purpose. When he says religion is not a good thing. That is a statement of dogma from his church. It is, it is, it is purely that in the same way that someone who is ordained in my church will, when put in a spot, have to say things like Jesus is the son of God, it's just dogma from his church. If you want to call it purpose, it's there because it has, it has survived all of societies because it does, it meets some human needs in one way or another, and therefore we have to ask what needs does it satisfy and realize what they are and how can we, how can we provide them without the fairy tales? Why do fairy tales exist? What function do they play? And again, this is of course, Jordan Peterson's, one of the main points that he made is that fairy tales are not arbitrary. Again, for Peterson, they are, they are evolutionarily purified dreams and mythology, and that's where, you know, when he, when, when, when Peterson would call them dreams again, then he's sitting right next to CS Lewis because what did Lewis call the other world religions? These are, these are good dreams. And, and the reason Lewis used that because these other world religions are dreams and in waking up, you see Jesus in the flesh, the logos becomes flesh. So, you know, but this, this missile about fairy tales will just, just keep watching because he's about to do something that I almost fell off my chair when I saw it. So get, get rid of the fairy tales. Obviously has never read Tolkien on fairy stories. So I guess we definitely do have to ask that question and an extraordinarily serious, you know, Peterson's like, I'm not going to agree with you there, but we'll keep the conversation going and one of the things that we might want to do, if we can figure out how to do it is also to have a discussion with Roland Griffith. Okay. Back to the psychedelic. So we're going to, we're going to have to do more work in the psychedelic space. And, you know, when it comes to those of us in the church, I'll, we'll talk about Anselman in the comment section here. We'll talk about Jonathan Peugeot. Yeah. We, we, in the church are, are, are, have a fair amount of skepticism about, you know, the, about these chemical route to God. Do you know who Roland Griffith's work? Not as well as you obviously. Okay. Well, he's been investigating psychedelics and with psilocybin. Yeah. And he's a very solid scientist. I've heard people talk about psilocybin. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Well, because my fear with these psychedelics is that we're stumbling into a category mistake. There's, there's, there's a mystery there that's virtually unfathomable. And, and, and, and Griffith's is a very, very solid scientist. And that's another place that would make an interesting, but it's, it's relevant to this point because, because there are, I think the reason that there has to be a religious domain is because religious questions will never go away. Well, so even if you get rid of the answers, you can't get rid of the questions. Oh, I want, but you never want to get rid of the questions. I would argue that is what sent, that's my big argument about everything is it. Okay. Go back to the other conversations. We know what is true. Well, what is true? It's from science and in what domain and what P is that scientific thing? True. It's true in the propositional and it's true because it's here. There's this correspondence between this word and between this physical aspect. And again, that's extraordinarily powerful. And one of the, one of the true blessings of the enlightenment was the kind of discipline employed to get very clear on a whole bunch of things and to sort of get off the, get the cruft out of that and to, and to have a very solid range of knowledge, propositionally, procedurally that we could engage. Now. I get now keep that in mind when he's about to talk about this stuff. That we have the questions. I would argue that is what sent that's my big argument about everything is that we have to encourage questioning. In fact, that's what education should be based on. It should be based on answers. It should be based on questions. Is water H two O. I think we should say yes. Is water, is there a carbon, is there a carbon atom in water? I think the, I think, I think it's the answer is no. That's what modernity is good at. That's what this propositional space is good at. And so, well, well then, then what kind of statement is he just making here? This is, this is something like scientific superstition. I would argue this. Oh, it's all about the questions. Oh, please. So I don't think wanting to, I have no desire to get rid of those questions. Like why, if you want to call it, why are we here? Why did I would argue the why questions ultimately, however, the difference may be. And I know Richard has gotten involved in this too, and because he wrote the forward for one of my books, but the, the why questions are really all how questions. Really? The why questions are really all how questions. How about the should questions? Are those how questions too? Again, I hear this and it's like, I'd set my hair on fire if I had any left. They only remain why questions if you believe there's some fundamental purpose. Now, again, keep this in mind because what he just said right here, he's about to forget just a minute or two later. If you, and since there's no evidence of that, ultimately, when you ask why are we here really means how are we here? When you ask why does your heart pump blood? It doesn't mean that there's some, someone made a per it means how does it, how, what are the biochemical processes by which, you know, your heart allows your body. Okay. Why are we here? No wrong question. I thought questions were the whole thing. Nope, nope, nope, nope. How are we here? Oh, okay. Remember put flag in it. Okay. So, all right. So let, let me respond to that a bit. And I understand your point and take it very seriously. And so, but what I've been looking at, because I do look at this biologically to begin with, because I, I try to look at things scientifically in so far as to science allows those things to be viewed. Okay. And so to the degree that I can look at religious matters from a biological perspective, I do that because it's simpler. Okay. So I believe that the religious instinct. And I think he's right. It is simpler. Okay. So I believe that the religious instinct manifests itself in a variety of fundamental motivations, but they're, they're, they're abstract. Motivations, but they're, they're, they're abstract motivations to some degree. So the experience of all that's a major one, the, the experience of beauty. That's another one. The, the experience of admiration and the desire to imitate those are, those are crucial. And so, so one of the things that I would point out, you can tell me what you think about this and I've been trying to formalize this idea and I don't know its extent. So I look at Christianity in particular, although not uniquely Christianity, but Christianity in particular as a thousands of years investigation into the structure of the abstracted ideal to imitate. Right there. We get the best definition of Jordan Peterson's relationship with Christianity. He just laid it out right there. It's that's exactly right. And people like, where is Jordan with respect to Christianity? It's right. Let's get my finger right. It's right there. It's just bang. Put it there in a sentence. Struck a thousands of uniquely. So I look at Christianity in particular, although not uniquely Christianity, but Christianity in particular as a thousands of years investigation into the structure of the abstracted ideal to imitate. Now, maybe we should say that this is Jordan's propositional definition of Christianity. So imagine we imitate those we admire. Okay. But we're abstract creatures. So we want to know what's the essence of what should be imitated itself. It's not just that we're abstract creatures. We have to use abstraction again, back to the world is too big for us. Commit to real explosion. All of this, all of this cognition stuff. We have to abstract things out of the world in order to manage complexity too large for us to handle in moments in time and space. Now we investigate that it's not all explicit. We have to represent it in music. We have to represent it in art. We have to represent it in architecture because we're heading at it from multiple different domains. And that is a reductionistic argument, right? It says nothing to do about divinity itself. Sure. It's purely psychological, biological argument. Well, where I would disagree with you, and I like the way you've described it in many ways, but where I disagree with you, I guess, would be the word investigation. My problem with Christianity. And I've said this, you know, I've debated once at Yale many years ago, the, uh, you know, theology and I've argued that, and I've never, I've argued with theologians, I've said, give me an example in the last 400 years of a contribution of theology to knowledge. What does he mean by knowledge? Oh, wait a minute. And you know what they all say? What do you mean by knowledge? Why would they ask that? This is exactly this question about propositional truth because he's saying science, science, it's all propositional. This is what we're looking for. Okay. Now don't forget that thing I asked you to remember because we're coming up to it. Now, what do you mean by theology? Well, okay, maybe, but, but, but I would argue. Now he's right here being himself. He's owning it. He's, he's in the moment. He's in his flow state. Point to Nietzsche and, and, and Jung. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. But I would say if you are asked a psychologist or a chemist or a biologist, what contributions and all they list these things, and they'd list them propositionally. The point is that my problem with Christianity is it stopped asking questions. It's stopped. Okay. So look, okay. And it was, and it was, it was a dictum. Here's the answer. Don't ask any more questions. And that is the antithesis of what I exist for. So I think that's what he just say. Look, more question. And it was, and it was, it was a dictum. Here's the answer. Don't ask any more questions. And that is the antithesis of what I exist for. Of what he exists for. Sounds awfully purposive to me. It sounds to me like he imagines he has a reason for being. And is this just at what level is this reason for being instantiated? So I think that sir, don't ask any more questions. And that is the antithesis of what I exist for. So as CS Lewis would say, he's finding his chest, but remember what he just finished saying over here. And I know Richard has gotten involved in this too, and cause he wrote the forward for one of my books, but the, the why questions are really all how questions. In other words, why questions are really all how questions, but over to here. In by theology. Well, okay, maybe, but, but, but I would argue. Because I would point to Nietzsche and Jung. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. But I would say if you argue, ask the psychologist. Is it my problem with Christianity is it stopped asking questions. It stopped the investigation and it was, and it was, it was a dictum. Here's the answer. Don't ask any more questions. And that is the antithesis of what I exist for. So I think that's right. Look, look, factor analytic studies of religion reveal something like two factors. There's a dogmatic element and there's a spiritual element. And if you, if you do large scale surveys of people, now you see that their faith in the dogmatic element has declined substantially, but their spiritual claims have not. But again, I, and right here is in many ways where we're dealing with the propositional. And, and a lot of what happened in theology in, in the late modern era was they, they tried to do things, you know, think about Schleiermacher. They tried to do things that would, would reduce the dogma out of Christianity to get all of the, all of the propositional statements out of it. That that's what a lot of liberal theology attempted to do. It's get the propositional statements out of it. And so then of course, fundamentalism comes back in and says, Whoa, no. And then they, you know, nail down the propositional statements and say 6,000 years. And, you know, they just nailed down a bunch of things. It's, it's completely understandable sociological response to what's going on. But it all revolves around these questions about these ways of knowing. And, and the, and the question is ways of knowing what now his idea of, you know, all why questions are really just how questions in disguise. This, this is, this is a question that's been asked a lot of times. This, this, I mean, that is seriously scary stuff because you've just thrown out morality you really have because along with why is why not and why should you build, they were talking about a hydrogen bomb. Why should you really build a hydro? No, those are only how questions, which gets back to Jordan Peterson's point of maybe, maybe we should ask the why question sometimes. The, should we take this virus and this bat virus, this Corona virus and, and develop it into something that could be transmissible between humans? No, don't ask that why question. Just, just how about the how question? Oh, so this, this propositional way of knowing is a really important conversation and it's been beneath the surface of the major war in Western Christianity over the last 200 years, which has been the modernism fundamentalism debate part of this pointed out by, you know, by Darwin, by the rise of science, by the rise of propositional truths, which sometimes are in, are in competition or contradictory to other propositional statements that you find in the Bible, let's say, and, and again, the subtraction story basically says, well, we had all these assumptions and then we just, you know, realize that Noah's flood couldn't account for the grand Canyon, yada, yada, no, it can. And then off you go. But here's the difficult question. The reading of the Bible all along the way continued to develop as the other philosophy was developing as well. And the reason you know that is if you read Augustine or origin, or even someone like Calvin, there were these, these felt tensions between certain propositions and others the church had been dealing with all along again, back to the, the Galileo question where Galileo wasn't at odds with the Bible. He was at odds with Aristotle. And, you know, this is well known yet it's usually trotted out. Well, let's talk about fairy tales. Well, why is the subtraction story the fairy tale that it is? And I don't mean that pejoratively. I mean it quite a fairy tale is mythology. And so is the subtraction story. Now it may be right. It may be wrong. There's a degree of wisdom and I can certainly understand why the subtraction story arose the way it did. What do I mean by the subtraction story? The, the idea that it's all just superstition and the more science we knew, well, then suddenly we could just lay all that stuff to bed and it'll all go away. And Peterson's point with Krauss is it's not going away and it's never going to go away because there are some category questions and a lot of the mappings of these categories very much line up along the lines of for vacu's for peas here, which is why I paused the one video that I sat down and said, I should really do another commentary video on for vacu Peterson, but I couldn't just leave the Krauss stuff alone. It's just, it's just way too tasty. What do you mean? It's, it's about embodying it. It's about establishing a relationship with it. Yes. It's about worshiping it. It's about taking it into your identity. That's the worship. I think. Well, I think, well, you, Jonathan described worship as celebration. So it's a celebration of it. And attention. And reverence. Well, reverence for sure. But the celebration part is, is interesting because to what you celebrate is what you hold in highest esteem and to hold something in highest esteem is to pursue it in the hopes of embodying it. And that's worship. But we, yeah, but we've lost. Well, maybe this is, maybe this is to your point about worship. We've lost the depth of celebration. We have reduced it. You see it in black gospel music, don't you? And then it runs into rock and roll from there. And then you get the, you get stadiums full of people experiencing it without noticing what they're doing. When Peterson went to Liberty University, it was fascinating because some of the comments that he made was he was very moved by the celebration, by the worship. And, you know, I know every now and then someone jumps onto the church channel is horrified by what they find going on at Living Stones. And they expect to go to like St. Elijah, Orthodox in Oklahoma City, which, which I subscribe to because they have some really good, like there's some really good teachings on the gospel of John there. But, yeah, it's a little different at Living Stones. It's we're just brimming with authenticity here. Well, I felt that spirit when I went to Leonard Cohen's show, when he stood up and everyone clapped and, you know, he sings Hallelujah or is it the apocalypse? I think that's the song. He's got a couple him and Johnny Cash in his later years got a couple of songs that put you in that space right away. But I agree. I think that's that is that is a version of of celebration. But the problem with that is right is it's been too located in the it's on its ontological locus is entertainment. Yes, you're right. Exactly, John. Entertainment. It's like, no, it's enthusiasm. Yes. And Fios. He's about to make the point. I'm just going to be possessed by the God. And that's what I was trying to get at. Right. In some we don't even notice when it happens. That's what a stadium is, too. When you cheer when someone puts the soccer goal through the net. Of course it is. Hey, look at that man's aim. Couldn't we all aim like that? And wouldn't that be wonderful? Yes. And we'll do the wave to that. And don't we notice that we're worshipping God? No, because we killed our religion by presuming it was a set of axiomatic set of presuppositions and listening to the 19th century rationalist atheists. Well, what we what we what we've done is we have confused modernity's understanding of religion with the phenomena, which is, I think, a fundamental mistake. No, with our blind critique. See, and. This question of who's responsible for the corruption of religion with modernity. Now, again, now the Orthodox and the Roman Catholics, well, the Orthodox especially can stride in here and say, ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. You Protestants and the Roman Catholics are like, well, we tried to fight it with the Council of Trent and the Orthodox will say, no, you accommodated to it with the Council of Trent, but the Orthodox are using the Internet. Because the phenomenon, because the because first of all, we have to make the phenomenon trivial and then critique it without noticing things like the spirit in black gospel music. I think taking that seriously. Yeah, yeah, I like I like your reformulation. I think that's better said. Thank you. So to go back, if consciousness and this kind. So there is there's a knowing that is right, dependent on your state of consciousness. There's a knowing through consciousness. And that's what I call perspectival knowing for for what consciousness does. Is it foreground some things, backgrounds, others makes things salient? So it's doing, if you'll allow me a term, I'd point it's doing salience landscaping for you. And what that does is that is that drawing things to your attention. Yes, but your attention always also does that. So is that part of that? Because you kind of you kind of choose where your attention goes. You choose it. But sort of right. Or you participate in it. You participate in attention. That's what I that's what I was saying. You don't just attend and you don't just receive. You participate. There's both, you know, and they use these metaphors without, you know, I think fully unpacking them. You know, there's the top down. Do you think that is that is that is that participatory attention akin to the dance between revelation and and critic criticism? So is it revelation and dialogical evaluation that constitutes the participatory element of attention? Well, I think what it's doing is it's if I'll speak more of the theological language, it's realizing. So there's. Attention is doing something like prioritization, relevance realization, right, in the dialog between imagination, where we stop thinking of imagination as just images, useless images in our head. I want to. It's helpful to just know the Great War between Owen Barfield and C.S. Lewis and their early days, I believe, was just over this point. Because Lewis was much more of a rationalist at that point. I think you're probably still in the again, Michael L. would know this better because he's he's read the Great War. I haven't read the Great War, but I believe it was it was just over this point about how does the imagination function. And it was Barfield who came in on the side of the imagination and finally convinced Lewis that no, imagination is not just simply the dismissive concept of what Krauss calls a fairy tale. The imagination is is deeply important in how we frame the world. Use it the way Corban uses it, imaginal. And this is what's coming out in Friston's predictive processing. Imagination is it permeates your perception. It's permitting you. It's right to say that. And this, I think of Roger Scruton and Jordan Peterson's conversation, which, again, was one of my favorite ones that's online, where Peterson says, well, we don't see the world directly. We see basically low resolution cartoons and there's a great deal of projection that's going on there. And I think that that's that's true of Vervecky's use of the imagination here. I'm as much. That's why Jung said we live to dream. Well, but the thing that and there's there's something true about that. But and but I want to I want to I want to caveat it because people will say it's all a hallucination. No, no, no, it's not. No, it's not. Most of the most of the prediction. That's weird. Yeah. Most of the predictions are accurate. Yes. Exactly. Yeah. Can't be just a dream. When I moved my finger to touch the space bar to pause this video, that's it's not just a dream. It's an accurate prediction in my mind. And again, this is not happening consciously. It just, you know, because because I'm in a, you know, when I'm really getting into some of this, you know, it is a bit of a flow state. And again, this is why, you know, I do this. This conversation was in many ways shamanic. And many of you, many of you bore witness to that. Exactly. Exactly. So you've got you've got imagination if you'll allow me the spatial language coming down and out. Right. That's right. And it covers it, covers what's out there. And we see the imagination, but it pertains to the reality. Yes, there has to be a member. We're doing is continually adjusting the imagination to the reality logos and the prioritization is the way of adjusting. So we see the map. We don't see the territory, but we also see the is that right? We see the map. We don't see the territory, but it's it's a are it's augmented reality. Although I would use a word other than reality, but augmented is is it's in a sense what they're trying to do with a are. We also see the errors in the map. Right. We see the map and the errors in the map, but we don't see the territory. Yeah, but the errors are where the territory push. If you'll allow John to finish his statement, it's nose three. And what then what those errors do is they can't if if we're properly receptive to the way the errors are deforming the map, they can turn it into a globe. And a globe is still not the thing, but it's damn better than a map. And so that there's a receptivity that's also important. And yeah, well, then, you know, and it is definitely the case that insofar as our map is accurate, which means it's been generated as a consequence of a rectification of our previous errors is that it is an adequate representation of the external of reality. It's an adequate representation of reality, which means we have molded ourselves to reality. See, this is also why I think, John, that the like I think that men and women select each other for manifestation of the logos. Whoosh. And again, it's not off topic, but it's like. Oh, and again, this is a big area for Peterson. How does the how does the story verse get into the matter verse? A lot of it through human human mate selection. I mean, I'm talking, well, because I said that's it for fake. It's like, whoa, it's like something. It's like in one of those scenes in Harry Potter where where Dumbledore grabs Harry and he's got that that that thing that he just whooshes in and out. It's like, whoa, how we go. This was a deep critique. You know, yeah, yeah, yeah. Keep going. It goes all the way to the well. What? OK, so look at this. So men organize themselves into groups and they they they take the the quarterback out of the stadium on their shoulders and they say by doing so cheerleaders, here's your chosen mate. And the cheerleaders jump up in the air with their legs spread and say, hooray. Bring him to me. And that's the isn't that the dialogue between men and women down the ages? And you might say, well, I've been watching The Bachelor with my daughters again. And it's like, yeah, that's kind of the way it goes. Oh, what a metaphor. You know, sometimes I make metaphors in my sermons and then people look at me like the pastor shouldn't make a metaphor like that. But that was a doozy. Well, why would men vote for the stallion when they're not the stallion? And the answer is, well, it's better to be a follower of the stallion if you can't be the stallion than to not be at all. And I so when will I release this with respect to I did a conversation with Karen Wong, it might be up on her channel already, but this was exactly part of the point I was making with respect to Karen when we were talking about Jordan Peterson's idea of how the ideal judges us. Oh, and I mean that in the deepest evolutionary sense as well. Or have I got something wrong? Because when I said this is the fundamental animating spirit, I really meant it. And so then if men and women are choosing. And in a Darwinian sense, again, each other for manifestation of the logos. Then that's the spirit that drives the evolution of consciousness. It's not it's. John for. Let me catch up a little bit. We we went to mate selection and we went to quarterbacks and we went to cheerleaders spreading their legs and voting up that, you know, you know, beta males voting up the alpha male. Oh, shamanism. And it might be random, random variation on the option side. But that doesn't mean it's random variation on the selection side, obviously. And so then the question is, what are you selected for? I imagine your wife is pretty fond of you when you manifest that. Well, yes, I have a wife, too. And I don't think he was hearing him well at that point. But, you know, again, this has been a this has been a critical aspect of Jordan. And in some ways, you know. And understand her displeasure with my multiple shortcomings and justified displeasure, I might say. The first videos, I did quite a bit of speculation about what happened before this video thrown off. Maybe had a fight with his wife could be too. I mean, I've been married. Thirty three years this year, so I understand a little something about that. But I'm sure that she's happy when you do manifest that part of you that you said you wanted to manifest. But I get I mean, I get maybe I don't get you. I see what it is. Is your mapping the receptivity and the selection onto sort of masculine and feminine, maybe sort of yin and yang in a Taoist thing. But if I was to respond as a Taoist, I would say. But can't I have that relationship also with you? Does it have to be necessarily embodied in a sexual difference? No, but I know I think it's also embodied in that in that it's that it goes all the way to the bottom wherever you look. Well, wouldn't that suggest then that something like the Taoist notion of yin and yang there before is a is a more fundamental representation of the reality precisely because it applies to all cases? Well. More more fundamental than what? See, and I think. John has sort of switched over to a dare I say a dogmatic religious frame of Taoism, and Jordan is sort of in the dogmatic Darwinian frame where something like mate selection is fundamental and at the bottom much more than, let's say, a a abstraction such as chaos and order, chaos and order are both abstractions. They're far more abstract than. Human reproduction, which is obviously very physical. The idea is like we kind of lost each other in this in this. What they what they call it when I can't think of it right now in Harry Potter, when they, you know, they grab onto this thing and they whoosh, when they go off to some other place of masculine and feminine. I mean, I I I certainly that's certainly possible. That's certainly possible. I mean, I like back in the old days, remember when you had a modem? Some of you don't know that. But if you're old like me, you do because back when you when you sort of lost the handshake and you have to redial and try and get back with that bulletin board server, bulletin board server. I think, you know, I think reality is the battle of good and evil against a background of chaos and order. So the cast and order would map quite readily. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry, go ahead, please. I was just saying I can see that in sort of that. That's a very good. The reason is the order is the map that you're describing, right? Because in so far as it's in cordon concordance with reality, it's a map that enables us when we apply it to get what we desire. Of course. OK. And then disorder emerges when that prediction, it isn't just a prediction because it's predicated on desire, which is where the cognitive scientists went wrong. Because it's not just expectation, it's it's desire. I think we'll pause it there. And so this was number five. And we're at one hour and 19 minutes, almost one hour and 20 minutes out of two hours and 30 minutes. So and if I keep slicing in new videos that drop, I assume next Monday it might be the psychedelic video that drops. But I've got vacations coming up and I tend to lose interest. So I don't know, Sam and Hank, how you're going to split the difference between four and ten. But, you know, when I finally get out to the Chicago Westuary, we'll be looking for some deep dish pizza. So anyway, I hope this was helpful. It's probably as good a place to stop as any right now. Let me know what you think in the comments.