https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=aczPrbel7ng

 thing. So why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself. So I am 37 years old, I grew up in the Lutheran Church. So Lutheran Church, Missouri, Senate, which is of all the spectrum of Lutheran churches were a pretty conservative one. I went to a Lutheran middle school up through eighth grade and then a public high school. And it was kind of my early 20s, I actually got really interested in sort of like Eastern philosophy, Buddhism, meditation, I did some martial arts, stuff like that. And those ideas kind of always resonated with me, but I always still made, you know, the Pascal's wager of the Protestant, you know, I'm, my hope is in Jesus for my salvation. And that never changed. I almost wonder looking back, if there's not a parallel between like my interest in some of those other religions, and other people at that same time, finding their way into atheist materialism, like a crisis of faith, they go through college and encounter new ideas, things like that. Long story short, I met my wife when I was in my first year of dental school, we got married pretty quickly after we met, we were both really interested in kind of the Protestant Christian world. And so Mark Driscoll was really big at the time, we listened to a lot of Driscoll sermons, got really familiar with a lot of that content. And because of that, we sort of moved away ideologically from the Lutheran Church, even though we were still attending. And now we go to a, you know, non denominational church, which there's sort of a denomination to the non denom churches, we go to sort of a mini mega church, if you will. And more recently, and it wasn't since I've encountered, like Jordan Peterson's ideas, especially they resonate with me as like a person who really likes science. And Jonathan Peugeot especially, I've got my Jonathan Peugeot shirt on for this, as you can see some some Peugeot merch. And just tying this whole thing together, these ideas from the sort of Eastern, you know, mystical ideas tied into Christianity. We've both been really intrigued by orthodoxy. And some of the doctrine seems to make a lot of sense. And I was really just hoping to get your take on that phenomenon as a Protestant pastor. And the reason I wanted to reach out to you specifically, and I have to personally say thank you for the content you're doing the work that you're doing. I don't see anybody else with a Protestant background in a you know, committed Protestant church, sort of exploring these the space and interacting with these these thinkers. And so, again, personally, not just for me, but your whole community, a genuine thank you to the work you're doing. Thank you. Yeah, you know, gosh, it's. So of course, I started, I found Jordan Peterson, I think he was mentioned in a Rod Dreier blog. And of course, once I was reading Rod Dreier, to the to one degree or not, I was already sort of adjacent to this thing. Because of course, that's Dreier's path. He went there earlier. And then Jordan Peterson and how Peterson was addressing. And again, when I think back, I didn't quite know why I was intrigued by him. I had some inclinations. And then very quickly, people are like, Oh, you should talk to Jonathan Peugeot. I didn't I could barely pronounce the dude's name. And I watched a couple of his videos. I was like, I have no idea what's going on with this guy. Yeah. I have no idea what's going on with this guy. Yeah. And so then I spoke with john a couple of times and continuing with these rando slots and conversations. And then the discord, the guys from my local meetup here started the discord. And, you know, then suddenly all of these people sort of wandering over to orthodoxy or curious about orthodoxy or exploring the doxy. And that was interesting. I had a number of years before I had met, I had read Molly Worthen's book on Apostles of Reason, which is kind of a treatment of the Neo Evangelical movement in the 50s and 60s. Carl F. Henry, Billy Graham, Fuller Seminary. And there's a really, there's a couple of interesting passages in that book where there was, there were earlier waves of orthodox curious that went through the church as well. And I noted that. And then one of the church planters in the area. Well, so then when I was here in Sacramento, we were doing church planting. And so then we would tend to get guys straight out of seminary. And when we started that, it was still toward the end of the, you know, the mega church non-denominational seeker movement. But within a few years, a lot of the younger guys in their church plants were doing typed out liturgy, weekly communion. And they, you know, one of them was talking about orthodoxy. And it's like, Huh, what's what's what's going on here? And of course, now since the Randall's conversations and the Jordan Peterson stuff, I'm I'm fairly neck deep into it. And I haven't done a lot of conversing with orthodox priests. I've had some invitations from some of them and just scheduling it never really worked out. I guess that the main questions I have still are number one. To what degree is this wave going to be a redux? In other words, you have orthodox immigrants coming over, especially since the fall of the Soviet Union, the the and so they've got all these immigration reopened to the United States, to the degree that here in Sacramento, there's a significant Slavic, Ukrainian, Russian population that when my son, who actually kind of looks like you, when he was in high school, he had long hair. And he when he'd go to he went to the local public school, and he was known to be white, not Russian, because there are so many Russians around that they had to distinguish the non the non, the whites, the non Russians from the Russian whites, right. And many of them who came to Sacramento were actually evangelicals, which was fascinating. So there's this, there's sort of old country, old world orthodoxy that's been in America. Now, Jonathan Peugeot, when he comes to orthodoxy through French Canadian, his parents went evangelical, now he's an orthodoxy, another, you know, another friend who, you know, another friend who came through the discord, she was a Protestant missionary in Africa, she came back to North America, met someone via the discord server, and is, you know, pursuing orthodoxy. I I've had a number of conversations off camera, with couples and individuals who are exploring it. Mike, my conversation with with Sally, that was on the channel. So who was again, pursuing orthodoxy, I'm, I'm sort of waiting to see what happens longer term, with many of these people coming in with this wave into orthodoxy, how, how many will stick, because I think, I think some will, you know, they're excited, it's new. It resolves a bunch of tensions and questions that are sort of within Augustinian Protestantism. So Nathan Jacobs, who I had conversations on with early on, who went to my alma mater, got a PhD at Calvin Seminary, and then went orthodox, you're really curious to know what my professors think about that. Sure. So, and he seems very, you know, he's an artist, he seems very much at home. I think some who are going there will stick, it'll it'll stick, and they'll stay there productively and happily, I think others who go there will find, well, you know, again, every church is different, too. So some are going to have real synergy with their priest. And that there's going to be good synergy with the community, others, it might not work. And so they might wind up Roman Catholic, they might go back to some Protestant church. So I'm really just kind of watching and waiting. And I understand why orthodoxy, a good number have also been sort of gone Roman Catholic, and sometimes Eastern rights Catholic groups, or, you know, things like that. Sure. But I, I'm, I'm of the opinion, generally speaking, that there's no real simply going back. Every time you sort of go back, it's also forward, because everything that's happened, you're going to bring into that space. And so it's going to be a new mix. And it might be a great mix. Sure. But it's not going to be what burn power is finding in Tbilisi, Georgia. Okay, sure. Right. Okay. That makes a lot of sense. Because that was my thoughts on Protestantism is, I think it's, I want to take credit for the idea, maybe I can't. But I remember saying before I heard Peugeot say it that Protestantism is kind of steeped in this Western Enlightenment rationalism, with some supernatural addenda added on to explain the questions that we can't answer. And I feel like almost as soon as you seed that territory, it sort of lays the groundwork for scientism. Because the way we look at it, and the argument I've heard, and I think it's a fairly plausible argument that atheists make, as they say, we've got two baskets, there's a basket of natural things and a basket of supernatural things. And over the last 100 years, we've been able to take things out of the supernatural basket and put it in the natural basket. And in humans like trends, we think trends are our truth. As funny, my brother in law is a financial planner and shared with me the statistic that traders on average that actively trade their portfolios underperform the market average. And I think the reason is we see these trends, trend that goes up, we try to jump on it, and then we get burned. And, you know, this is so the parallel would be, we see this trend of things moving from supernatural explanations to natural explanation. So the argument that naturally follows is, look, eventually, we're going to empty out this supernatural basket. And apologetics, and I was I was really into apologetics for a while, like William Lane, Craig, and those guys, their sort of mode of operating is to say, these things in the supernatural basket have to stay here, there's no rational way we're going to be able to take them out. And in that's, I think that's a decent exercise in the culture that we're in. But what I've seen in orthodoxy that I haven't seen in Protestantism, and we'd be curious to hear your thoughts if this is something we could, we could bring into Protestantism is this idea of a whole worldview. It's a system that's a whole worldview that way through which we view the world like the natural world is an extension of the meaning that underlies it, rather than meaning being, you know, epiphenomenal to naturalism, which again, I don't think we would say that as Protestants. But I don't think we interact with that idea enough on the whole. I think that's right. Part of, you know, when I when I now four years later, look back and ask myself, what intrigued me about Jordan Peterson, it was that he was trying to resolve what might be called Cartesian dualism. That's what Alvaro Pagio is clearly trying to lay out or explicate an integrated worldview where spirit isn't reliant upon a separate substance than matter material substance to have the world connect. And I so not only will all of these former evangelicals and Protestants coming into the Orthodox Church change orthodoxy in America, but orthodoxy in America is going to change Protestant churches to I mean, it's going to go both ways. And that's already happening. And that was happening, you know, a decade before I found Jordan Peterson, and we've had these conversations here, we're seeing the process underway. Now part of the new atheist assault was, like you said, I think you said it really nicely. We're skeptical about what's in the supernatural basket, there's only one basket. And so what you have exactly on the other end of that is now Peterson and Joe saying, Yeah, you're right, there's only one basket. But these things that are in the supernatural basket, you're not getting rid of that. In fact, the things in this other basket that you're relying on, those are actually dependent upon exactly the one basket is nested in the other. Exactly. And that, that conversation. So I was just finished a really interesting conversation, I hope he decides to share it. And we touched on the issue of scale, which is what I'm always pushing vervekion, that this is going to have to get down to people with low IQs, people who never going to watch videos, you know, moms, women, busy people who have no time for any of this esoteric jargon, right? That happens through the church. It takes a while, but it is happening. And usually what happens in the culture is that these pressures that you and I are feeling, and we're talking our way through it as a community, we're sort of digesting it, those pressures are also on people who are not paying any attention to this conversation. And so there's actually adjustments that they're undergoing to that we're going to begin to see. And I mean, this is how this is how things actually change cultures. So it's coming. And I, you know, again, as I've said many times, I have zero problem with people pursuing orthodoxy. Because number one, that's it's Christianity. Number two, I think the Orthodox Church in America is going to bless the larger American church by bringing to America access to certain, you know, certain theologies and a heritage that for the most part in America, America started almost uniformly Protestant, and then Catholics have been sort of coming in and having a powerful impact, especially in the last 50 years. And now it's the Orthodox turn, they're going to come in and America has always sort of been this. It is in many places are many ways a religious melting pot where the the orthod what's what's the the treasures from orthodoxy are going to be brought into the conversation. And that will change Catholicism in America, and it'll change Protestants. And, and then what happens usually is all some of these new things, these are going to go out to the rest of the world, because America is such a cultural leader in the world. And that's going to be diffused out into mission, you know, mission movements in Africa and Asia, just as those movements are now also coming back to America. America is sort of this, this pot in which it it spills out into the rest of the world, but the rest of the world also contributes to it. And so it's a very dynamic system. And orthodoxies, an important part to play in that I think right now. That's, that's really fascinating that point about how the influences happen slowly, but you kind of have to get down to the ground level in order to do that. Do you see technology changing the way that that plays out? And so the background I would give to that question is, for example, the the printing press where ideas sort of became something else, they're almost tangible, because you by holding, you know, you can hold paper, I can almost hold an idea, and I can share the idea that, and so there's almost this, I wonder if with the advent of the printing press, the press and enlightenment rationality, if those two things kind of came on together, as part of the same idea, and I could be wrong on this is just something I'm sort of thinking of in the moment. But that the idea that we can write and share ideas now all of a sudden, those ideas themselves have more value than they would in the abstract. And so now that information is so liquid, that we can we have, you know, algorithms that are sort of manipulating the way we think about things, if there will be some other pressures to rearranging the way that we think about the world, or if, if it's such a strong phenomenon for things to change at the ground level that communication like this will be able to kind of supersede any technological influences. Well, I think I think the technological influences are going to come part and parcel with it. I mean, even now, you know, I think about this often, because I'm always sort of torn between investing my time and energy in YouTube, versus, let's say, writing, because before YouTube, I did a lot more writing. And since YouTube, I've done less writing, and they're very different media. But if I were writing these things in a book, it wouldn't have my voice. It wouldn't have my beard, it wouldn't have my bad habit of not finishing my sentences. It wouldn't have the pathos that I bring at times in video, or even just in audio. So yeah, this, this is gonna be a big change. And even with respect to the questions of orthodoxy. So, Sunday morning, I, you know, I was getting ready for church. And for some reason, I, you know, I usually spend Sunday morning getting getting ready for church, not just in terms of dressed and everything, but getting my messages polished off and planned out. But somehow I opened up YouTube. And there, right there, there was both the Oklahoma City Orthodox Church live streaming. And right below it, Madison Square Church in Grand Rapids, Michigan, a church I used to attend, they were live streaming. So I dropped into both live streams. And, you know, obviously, they're vastly different in that the Protestant Church, the preacher was there, the stage was there, it's very Protestant, the Orthodox Church, it was very Orthodox, the the canter was going through the liturgy, the camera was static, you could see the walls, the lighting. And I thought, huh, it's, it's easier to go to church online in Protestantism, by virtue of the shape of the Protestant Reformation and the printing press. Yes, yes, 100%. Then you just just having a camera in an Orthodox Church, listening to the canter doesn't make for good TV. Right, right. So that's, but now yet, I mean, it's so funny, because I really have to dig up the clip of Nathan Jacobs. Because one of the things that that I learned from him very early on was part of the value of orthodoxy that he eventually embraced was he sees all this innovation that happened after Augustine. And of course, Luther, Calvin very much follow Augustine, the Protestant Reformation is deeply Augustinian. Nathan Jacobs had a lot of critique of Augustine. And so you know, really value the Orthodox because they've maintained the message. Okay, fair enough. And actually, Protestantism is an entire effort to reclaim a message that they believe all kinds of other things had a fixed on to it. And so it was it was very much a primitivist impulse, we're going to get back to sure. And but orthodoxy is similar in that way, because they're saying, No, we've we've not only maintained the theology or the principles ever orthodox preachers basically throw that book, you know, just throw that out. But we've made I mean, it's all in the liturgy. We've maintained the liturgy. But you're doing it in English. Oh, interesting. Okay. And so that that is not a, you know, in that sense, Mr. Orthodox, you're post your own Vatican too, because you're doing it in English. And you've had to adapt to have an intelligible in America. And those adaptations are not inside inconsequential. And so all of those tensions, we're going to be sifting through. And as people who have let's say, gone the whole full gamut, so they were raised in church, and then, in early adolescence, they threw the thing off. And they listened to all kinds of Sam Harris. And then they jumped on the Jordan Peterson bandwagon, and then they found Peugeot. And now they're seeking an orthodox church. All of those steps are still built into them. And they're going to bring all of that into the Orthodox Church. And the orthodox, you know, at least that I'm aware of, are plenty internet savvy. Sure, you're wearing orthodox merch. Yeah, right. 100%. So that's not, that's not nothing. And, and I don't I'm not saying it's bad. I'm just saying, all of this is part of the process. And orthodoxy has and will continue to change to but differently than, you know, the big evangelical church, when they hear that podcasts are the hot thing. So Mark Drisco leans into podcasting and you know, all of that stuff. So I'm just aware of all this stuff. And I'm I'm fascinating to watch it all develop because it's it's gonna happen. And the technology is going to impact it. And, and again, the conversation that it was Sally where she was so frustrated at her orthodox parish because they basically closed down and I watched that one. That was Yeah, that was great. And so there she's sitting with her orthodox study Bible out on her front lawn. And she's like, I'm a Protestant again. Right, right. Because she doesn't want to submit to her priest. And that that that submission is part and parcel of the whole package. Whereas the Protestants tend to be, this is a voluntary association, come or don't come. And all of that stuff is built into the political, the religious culture of America volunteerism. So it's, it's a very live. It's a very live experiment. And I think it's a happy one. But we're all going to find out stuff where that surprises us. Some good, some bad. Yeah. No, that that's absolutely fascinating. I know exactly what you're saying with that. And I've thought the same thing that Protestantism, there's there's an ethos there that's very American, individualistic, even to, you know, the criticism Protestants often get, which is you're allowed to interpret scripture for yourself. So the scripture, it's, it's what I read. And there's sort of a individual element to that. And I think that would be, correct me if I'm wrong, maybe orthodoxies critique of even even these influences entering orthodoxy itself, that there could be some good ideas that come in, but they're going to bring things in with them. This idea of being able to choose your own, you know, choose your own adventure, so to speak. And, and that's along the lines of what you said with the YouTube thing. And that that's kind of, I think what I was trying to touch on this idea that the the Protestant Church in Grand Rapids makes for better TV than the Orthodox Church. And so the medium is not entirely agnostic to the thing that it's piping through. So natural selection will, you know, that if we have our church has better lights, or we have better lighting, our theology all of a sudden is going to have a little bit more credibility in that medium, because it's going to reach more people, these ideas are going to resonate, they're going to be discussed. Whereas the the orthodoxy, that might not be the case. And, again, I don't know the answer to that. But I think it's, like you said, it's kind of a fascinating part of this, this whole experiment. Yeah. Oh, and, and people sometimes don't see that, you know, the dome with Christ on it. That's a technology. You know, that's in many ways, that's, that's, that's Roman, I don't mean Western Roman, because the Eastern consider themselves Roman, you know, the dome, that's all technology. And the art, the frescoes or the mosaics, that's all technology. It doesn't, you know, we're not born into the world with frescoes and domes and icons. These are there of a period and the period is, is that again, not incidental. And so, you know, if you listen to say, Jonathan Peugeot's origin story, he's an art school, when he when he decides to get into icons, he's going to intentionally and specifically choose traditional iconography, because there's contemporary iconography. And Jonathan Peugeot turned away from that. So that's a very primitivist, originist movement. But even what once we once we put our choice in and our preference in, you know, it's, it's hard not to choose in 2021 and not enact a consumerist spirit. Which which again, when when some begin, well, I'm going to choose orthodoxy, are you going to still choose it when your priest says, you know, we're closing because of COVID, or everybody needs to wear a mask, or nobody's allowed to wear a mask? I mean, are you, are you really going to submit to your priest? And what if the priest in this parish and the priest in this parish are not on the same page? And then, you know, how does that respond to the hierarchy or their bishops? And I mean, you don't really escape these questions. And, and again, that's not to say that the questions are bad. But it's, it's there, we always, and this is deeply within Protestantism, because, you know, with Luther, wow, you know, now via the printing press now via Erasmus, we have an opportunity to do better than St. Jerome and the Vulgate. We're going to get at the text itself. And once we get at the text itself, then all of these other questions that were that are plaguing us about relics and indulgences and corruptions in the clergy and all of this other stuff, we're going to all that's going to sweep everything away. Well, it didn't. And so neither will deciding, I'm going to undo the Protestant Reformation, and I'm going to undo the great schism and I'm going back to the liturgy that seems to have the closest DNA connection to the Apostle Paul. Well, you're going to do it in Greek. And the last I read the New Testament, Paul didn't leave us a liturgy. I'm going to go back to Christostom. Okay, that's fine. But Christostom was not Paul. And there are a number of centuries between them. So the the, the impulse of always trying to get behind, or underneath, or around that there's there's reason for that. But you don't finally, I don't find it compelling to say, Okay, then, then now I'm at the quintessential. Okay. I'm still so I remain skeptical. Yeah, no, that I think that makes a lot of sense, like, especially, like you said, those problems that exist in orthodoxy. They're so visible in Protestantism, that in contrast, it looks like, well, they it doesn't look like they're dealing with the same issues. But the interview was it, Sally, do I have that right? Yeah, that interview that was really enlightening for me when she said, Yeah, I'm Protestant sitting in my wife and I watched that together and you know, laughed at that part. Regarding technology, I think where I am trying to formulate this in the moment, I think where I may push back a little bit on the idea of the fresco and the dome being technology is that it's still limited in material space time. So you have a certain amount of people that takes a certain amount of time and a certain amount of physical resources to construct this dome or these frescoes. Whereas nowadays, the technology is two major differences. One is, is it's leveraged. And so the counterpart would be we could have one artist that if 1000 years ago, this one artist could make 10,000 frescoes and distribute them throughout the region. Now, we have that's the fresco. That's the idea. These ideas are more, you know, viral, so to speak, then there's almost some value in it being limited in material space time in that way. And then the second part is almost this as technology trends forward, it looks like there's what the tech companies want is our attention, they want our psychology. They don't care as much about where our physical bodies are, where we're present. And so their aim is to get at our psychology. And I think a side effect of that is, especially with you know, this metaverse and all this stuff, there's this separation of physical space from where you are, where you are emotionally or mentally. And so a church service that streams online, there's just, you know, I know, Peugeot would say that there's something that's just not the same thing about not being present with that. And so that's where I'm really concerned about what technology does and whether there are some some bad ideas baked into the cake that are, you know, more or less inevitable coming down the pipe. And again, I hope I hope I'm wrong about that. But we'll, you know, it'd be interested to see how it plays out. I think your concerns are very valid. And and those differences between between something in something tangible versus I mean, I can touch the screen right now. But that's very different from touching an icon, or touching a fresco, or even touching a book. So no, those those are those are very real. And point taken. That's very true. And we. And even the some of the studies on children, and screens. Yeah. And Peugeot himself said, you know, and he's a, you know, bigger YouTuber than I am. He's, you know, we're these beings of light. And this is, this is monkeying with, this is monkeying with a lot of things that we don't really understand. I mean, could it be that someday we're gonna treat all of these screens with a great deal more care. And you know, it's, it's not uncommon in certain, especially before COVID to go into a store or restaurant. And here's an entire family, toddlers included, you know, sitting down scrolling through things on iPads and, and phones, and what's what's happening to us? So, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's that's very real. And there's a, there's an element of of participation and context in a building with a dome, and with icons and a fresco that there isn't with, you know, you walk into the sanctuary here, and there's a big TV up front, the TV up front is just was just economic for us to, you know, hear the words and the the church plant that is now using our space to with us. I mean, they're they're using paper. And although they also have it on the screen, and when I was with them for their ordination service, and I found myself using the screen and not the paper for various reasons. So no, this is no, those are those are all good points. And then we just don't know. But yeah, you know, the Oklahoma, the Oklahoma City Orthodox Church, they've got that camera out there live streaming. Yeah. And so suddenly, you have this choice. Well, do you say, well, we're gonna turn our back on this completely and not live stream our, our Sunday morning services. You can do that. And you can say, No, we're going to be really disciplined and insistent upon, if you don't get down here physically and participate. You know, we're going to be purists in that sense. And I have respect for that. But that also always comes at a cost. Yeah, because then suddenly, all kinds of other options are forestalled. And sure, I think there may be just an element of living in that tension. I mean, it must day to day, there are hard decisions to make in regard to that. I think that's, that's maybe a good way to look at it. I don't know, did you catch the New York Times article that Facebook wants to get involved with hosting religious services? I thought that was pretty fascinating. No. So it's this idea with the metaverse, which I have a lot of thoughts on that. I'm kind of a tech nerd and VR and all that stuff. But this metaverse now they want to get it so they want to host religious services, which I think is probably one of the worst ideas I've heard in quite a while. Just in terms of, you know, you have this commercial entity through which flows the communication of, you know, priests and parishioners and congregants with each other. And it's, I'm, I can't remember when it came out, but I just pulled it up. Okay, me July. Oh, my. Well, you know, part of, you know, so I've got these two conversations today and, but I'm always thinking, you know, my videos are usually just because I'm thinking about stuff. And then it's like, can I, can I actually formulate this enough to, to explain something? I'm just going to throw this up on my blog so I can find it later. For sure. Yeah. You know, and I was, I was just listening to the rebel wisdom treatment of the Beatles documentary that came out. And early on, I forget is Todd Armstrong made the point about how, you know, the Beatles in some ways began, you know, take sort of took music, you know, almost up there into the religious register. Sure. Exactly. Say it that way. I mean, obviously Facebook is interested in this because they have the data and they know new atheists, notwithstanding, they know how popular religion is. I mean, if porn is king on the internet, religion is number two. Sure. And so just from a business point, they're like, if we could really get into the religious game, that's a lot of money. And I think, you know, one of the YouTube knows this. And part of, you know, YouTube is Google is always sort of walking this line in terms of, you know, that their politics versus how much of this, the countercultural stuff do we, not the popular countercultural, which really isn't countercultural, but the, the kinds of channels that get demonetized and, you know, those are the counterculture ones. Sure. And, but there's always a bit more tolerance for the overtly religious. And part of that is these, these corporations know you cut out the religion. It's death to your business model. Right, right. And religion is this, you know, it's like this very deep cultural layer that, I mean, the new atheists were just playing wrong. You know, it is all of their stuff is nested in religion. Right. Yeah. And, but to, but the, but to think about Facebook, I mean, it's all they're already changing. You know, we stream our service. So when we went to COVID, we, and we actually were doing it before too, but we upped it in some ways. So we stream the service on our website, on YouTube and on Facebook. And I, I eventually I thought, yeah, we're going to stop streaming on Facebook once we really get YouTube and the website up. But no, I very quickly realized we couldn't. Yeah. Same with our church. Because Facebook is where the people are. Right. Getting rid of junk here at church using Facebook marketplace, and I never used it before, but my daughters are like, use Facebook marketplace. And so they're not dumb. They know they have the data. But to think about Facebook, you know, the church of Facebook. Yeah. And to me, that was it. And I wouldn't even assign a bad intent to whoever's making those decisions. I think it's a fundamental misunderstanding of what religion is. I think that they would see religion as a community exercise, and that they are very well versed at facilitating communication between people. And so this is an obvious next step. And I think that's, that's maybe kind of what I was trying to hint at earlier with these sort of bad ideas that are just baked into the cake of social media. This, this could be one of them, this idea that religion is just about people talking about things with each other. And it doesn't necessarily have to happen in a physical space, it doesn't have to have any special physical elements with it. It's it's all virtual. And, or it could be virtual, I guess. And there's nothing unique about, you know, virtual meeting versus versus an in person meeting the way, you know, that's there are people that would say the conversation we're having is the same as we would have in person, which which I really doubt that actually, I think it would be quite a bit different. If nothing else, the latency, I feel like the latency on zoom is something that we've all adapted to. But this idea that if we both try to start talking in the same millisecond, we can manage that in person a lot better than we can do it on zoom. Yeah, but even little things like that. It's just this is almost a coming fundamental disregard for material reality or the significance of material reality as something important, which is quite a shift from where we were, you know, 50 years ago, where material reality was, was it? Yeah. And 50 years ago, some churches were on the radio, really big churches like Robert Shuler, they might be on TV. But 50 years, you know, now the ubiquity of, you know, my mother goes, my mother goes to her own church and then comes home and because of the time difference, you know, will catch my service and maybe catch a niece's service. And Sunday, I was talking to she's actually the mother of the church planter who's at our facility again, because she goes to her church in the morning and then goes home and tunes in on our church right after that. And it's a strange new world. Yeah, it really is. And we've run into that with our church as well. It's we're blessed in that our lead pastor came from a worship arts background, and we just moved into a new facility. So we are more dialed in than we should be regarding technology and lighting and streaming. And like I said, we it really does feel like a mini mega church. It's a very high production, the lighting is great, the sound is great. And we get, you know, maybe three or 400 people per service. But it's been such it's sort of an issue because the live stream is so good. And people had to do the live stream over COVID. And like one of the elders said, it's just it's easier to come to church on your couch and your pajamas are going to be people that want to do that into the future. Yep. I listened, you know, a decade or so decade and a half ago, I listened to a lot of Tim Keller sermons. And, you know, there were always some free ones, and then you could pay there like 250. And, you know, he was quite open with, I don't necessarily want to make my sermons too easy to come by for that very reason. And most people will admit that all coming to church is way better than staying home. Staying home is way easier than coming to church. And right now, especially sort of in this, this COVID twilight that we're in where, yeah, we're open, and there's no restrictions, and you can come. But others are still staying home. And then every now and then I'm tempted to, let's just cut out the live stream. But then I recognize that there are, especially because of the my YouTube channel, there are certain numbers of people that are depending on the live stream. And then the question is, now, am I enabling them to not find a local church? But again, I know that some of them, they go to their local church, and then they check out the live stream. So I wouldn't necessarily want to cut that off. And others are living in areas or have health issues or one issue or another where they can't practically actually participate in a physical local church. And because I've had conversations with them. So yeah, do you feel the weight of that as a pastor? Because I've listened to some of your other talks regarding, you know, Dunbar number and how it's, it's so important to be able to relate to, to your your people, if there are people that are watching your live stream that, you know, see you as their pastor, but then you're not able to interact with or find out about their life and do the actual, you know, pastoral care type stuff with Oh, completely. But it's, it's not. I would have imagined that well, there'll be tensions between attention for my local people versus the massive number of people on the internet. That's that's that's true. But it's also that by virtue of the internet, some people are far more disclosing on zoom, yeah, pastor, and I can actually do certain work with them that probably they probably not doing with their local pastor. Now, should they probably are they know? Will they maybe never. So it's important that the work get done. And so like with all of these things, there's all of these situations where I just sort of have to ride it. Because I can't answer the question. I could be a purist and say cut it off, you know, but I have too much experience to know that just cutting it off would be would do damage to other people and there are there are goods to be had. So, oh, that those questions. I live with those questions all the time. Oh, I can imagine. I mean, even, even before COVID before the live stream stuff, I know that that's, that's been a criticism and in our churches in a growth period, and I've we've been there through that transition of 150 200 people, that's a completely different dynamic than even four or 500. Now you're, you're into, you know, entrepreneurial organizational dynamics where you're trying to do, you know, things like community groups to now get the numbers back down, but the community group isn't necessarily, you know, you can kind of carry the church culture through it. But there's, there's a relationship that you you don't have with the pastor as you encounter those those kinds of numbers. And I definitely see that I'm a lot more having, you know, living in it living through it, I'm actually on the elder board at our church. And so I'm in these meetings and just seeing that dynamic change is it's I think it's not just growing pains. I think there is something fundamental that does kind of dissolve away as as you grow like that. And you can try to reclaim it again, like I said, with organizational dynamics, but it's not, it's not the same thing. No, I was so Madison Square in Grand Rapids, I went I started attending there when I was in college. And then they were sort of 200 250 on a Sunday morning. And then within about three years, not because I was there, but within about three years, they went from like 200 250 to 1000. So then there were two services on Sunday morning, and then there were three services. And then they then they decided they were going to tear down, they were going to build an additional sanctuary on the site that so they figured they could go up to like 1000. But because of the DNA and the history of many people in the church, they're like, we don't want to be a mega church. So they decided to sort of go up to like 1000. And then they were going to do church planting. And that was in the 80s when was happening. Okay. And so, you know, I look back on it now. And I haven't had a I haven't had real close contact with the church since then. But I have kept in a little bit of contact with the the pastor who was my pastor there. And he just recently retired. So and I and a lot of the people who came here to work with me and our church planting phase, a lot of them had when I'd also gone through that church. And so we so I was able to kind of keep tabs. There's no easy answers to any of this in terms of we're going to stay small and we're going to play. None of those new churches that you plant are going to be like this, and are multi site and there there's just no easy answers. And yeah, but but all of that has to do with the constraints of physicality. Right? Exactly. Exactly. And the high texture. And so it's no, that's why you have elders. And that's why you wrestle with these questions. Yeah, right. It's not easy. Yeah, always trade offs. And that's again, why I say, you know, with respect to the Orthodox, there's no going back. Yeah. The church that you were when you were 200 people, and now you're 500. That church you had when you were 200 people is gone. It is not coming back. And I deal with that. So my, my last, not now my wife and I, you know, during COVID, we had, you know, kids living with us and joblessness and all that stuff. But there that now for the first time in 30 years, my wife and I are empty nesters. Nice. And, you know, my kids who are now in their 20s, they come home now and it's like, oh, and the kids are always kind of like, what's the big deal? And so that I sit down and say, Hey, look, when you were three, you know, you have, you know, you only have a limited idea of the amount of love and attention and care that we poured into that little three year old. And you know what, that little three year old in some ways is gone. But when I see you, I still see part of that three year old. And so and this is true of our children, but it's also true of our churches. Yeah, that's a fascinating way to look at I think that's that's really great. That's, it's encouraging. Like I said, I being on the elder board of a church is going through a period of growth like that. It's, I think that's a, that's a great way to look at it. So and that that that church and often, especially with churches, you start going there and you fall in love with something because, you know, you know, God met you there. And God did a work in your life in that place with those people. You know, you to use this broader language, you know, you had a transformation there. And so that building that community, that group, that pastor, those songs, that sermon, that's all holy ground. Yeah. And so then, you know, when my wife and I, when my wife and I were married, we were married in that church. And that church is now the hallway to the sanctuary. But that church is holy ground in some ways, because those sacred moments happened there. And I guess, you know, this is something that when I think about the Christian faith, and I think about the work of Christ and the resurrection, I can't figure out how Christ is going to deal with time in that way. But I think he will. Because I think the age to come is going to, I don't think we're going to lose the sacredness that we've tasted here. It's not going to be limited. It's certainly going to be purified. But, you know, and to me, again, when I when I think about these things, I, you know, these are some of the reasons that I am still a Christian. Because I, within Christianity, I see that vision. And, and I think it's important for churches to, you know, I it's when my when my daughter, my daughter dropped in last night, you know, I ran over and she's not she's not really a hugger so much. And I gave her a hug. She has to tolerate it. And, and I say, Yeah, you're gonna have to let me love on you a little bit because we're empty nesting and we're doing a little bit of lamenting and mourning and grieving. And, and so then as church leaders, it's helpful to lament and mourn and grieve. Yeah, that little 200 member church that you fell in love with that is no more. It's appropriate to lament and mourn and grieve and in that way honor it. But yet via the resurrection, have an understanding that there's something of that holy moment that will not be finally lost, but will be reclaimed and even redeemed and purified and will become the seed to greater to greater things yet to come. Oh, that's really, that's really encouraging. I was, that's, that's really great to hear your perspective on that. That connects a lot of dots for me. I really do appreciate that. And I think that's the same for our individual journeys, you know, whether you and your wife decide to stay with your current church or move towards orthodoxy, or even just in your leadership capacity in your church, introduce some of the riches and treasures of orthodoxy, even into your Protestant church, because part of the, you know, part of the capacity that Protestants have shown, this is very much an American thing too, as much as the wider culture doesn't like the word, we are, we are going to appropriate some of these things. And I am already, I have already appropriated much from Jonathan Peugeot, sure. And from other Orthodox and Roman Catholic and Protestants of other traditions, and even, you know, non, you know, Jordan Peterson, however we classify him or John Verbeke, and we're always Christianity is a, is a religion where as, as Jesus parable says, God, God reaps where he did not. So Ah, yes. Yep. Okay. And so then as a leader in that church, you can say, you know, I've worked with plenty of leaders before in churches, and sometimes leaders get restless, but they're, that's pastors too. But you're, you know, you stay in this church, because maybe your wife wants you to stay or your children are flourishing here, or it's connected to the job or something like this. And there are all kinds of compromises, but you say, Okay, but I do have this band. And so I'm going to take some of these values and gifts, and I'm going to see what we can incorporate here. And again, in terms of Protestants, there's a flexibility within Protestantism that I, Rod Dreher was recently in town, and there's a church that hosted his that little conference, and it's quite a small church. And it was fascinating, because after the conference, they had a little communion service. And it was sort of Protestant, it was sort of boomer, it was sort of seeker ish, but they also are bringing in some sacramentalist things too. And I thought, Oh, look at look at look at what they're doing here. Look at what they're doing here. And, you know, Protestantism has that flexibility, where, in maybe Rome, or an Orthodox Church, it's like, No, this is, this is the discipline. We're not going to do these things, because this is who we are. Fair enough. Protestants, it's very American. It's like, here's the canvas. Yeah. You know, especially in non denominational, it's like, Oh, we're gonna have some icons here. You know, yeah, the Christian Reformed Church, but yeah, it's funny, because even before I started, even knew who Peterson or Peugeot was, even before I recognized, you know, I could articulate the value and symbolism. One of the most powerful moments I remember is the first one of our first experiences with this church is they, it was, I believe it was a Good Friday service, I think. And they had everybody in the church write down on a piece of paper, either it was a sin, it was some, something from your past, just something bad. And we one by one had to bring them up to the front. And they had somebody up there that nailed them to a big rugged wooden cross just nailed everybody's, you know, little pieces of paper. And then I don't know if they burned them after that or shredded them or what, but I just remember how powerful that was. And I remember in that moment thinking, how cool is it that somebody either saw this or had this idea and was able to implement this for Good Friday, which the church we were at, there's that never would have happened. And so to your point, I think that's, like you said, here's the canvas, what's going to work for our congregation, what's going to, you know, make Christ most glorified in this space with these people. I think that's really, that's really cool. And, and, and yet without the detracting from, I mean, there's always also beauty and restraint. And, and so both, you know, we appropriate this idea and then boy, we did it poorly. And we put something in it. Oh, well, well, maybe not do make that mistake again. But I mean, in Protestant churches, you're just always experimenting, especially when you're going through a growth phase, because it's like, okay, now we've got to scale this to, you know, maybe two or three different worship services. And now these two different worship services, they're taking on their own spirits, too. You know, they have their angels there. Right. The 11 o'clock services like this and the 930 services like this, but we're still in one church. And, you know, maybe we've got most of our elders going to 930. And then well, who's who's eldering at 11? And I mean, yeah. Oh, that's great. Well, we're about out of time. Perfect. Any things I didn't was, I don't know, I always ask, make sure there's, you know, if there's something like, I really wanted to talk to Paul about this. No, that's, this was, you know, for two reasons, it was really just incredible to have that back and forth. I also wanted to personally, you know, again, say thank you for the time you devote to this. I know that it's not easy to get videos and edit videos and really just appreciate your perspective as a pastor. And so I don't want to discount that as, you know, somebody who is a member of a congregation, you're not my pastor, but I really do appreciate the perspective in the words. And, you know, you're you're good at what you do. Oh, thank you. Thank you. Is this something that you'd give me permission to share? Yes, absolutely. Okay, good. Because I'd like to share this because again, I, these conversations are really the favorite part of my channel. I really love them. That's awesome. Yeah. And I know they're, they're never, I get to see the analytics. And so I know, you know, commentary on Jordan Peterson's video with for Vakier Peugeot, that gets all the hits. Oh, yeah, for sure. But this, this to me is where things are scaled and things are applied and, and where the real treasures are. So anyway, well, it's lovely. It's lovely to meet you, Adam. Yeah, you too. And I really, I, you know, God bless your church and your journey as you, you know, you and your wife continue to figure things out. And I really appreciate you getting a slot. Yeah, thank you. Well, take care of yourself on this. Yeah. On these happy December. Yeah, happy December. Take care.