https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=LkS4an01-yU

 I actually don't recall my grandfather wearing these. My grandfather always wore ties. So there's a lot going on with this. They asked that I would do the live stream in it today and I told them I wasn't quite ready for that. And they looked at me like I was a weenie, but they're just gonna have to deal with it. So thank you very much, Jacob, for these lovely gifts. And as I said to him, I'm going to play with these, not in sort of the dismissive childish way, but very much in the vervecchian way. And Jacob, you should introduce your dog to the world because your dog has not been on the channel before. Well, maybe it has. So this is Happy. She's a little bit skittish, but yeah. People on my channel have seen her. She's a star on my channel. Well, when Rick walked into the sanctuary this morning, Happy barked at him. So we'll have to mend those fences because Rick has a dog and Rick is a great dog lover. So yeah, so we'll do the question and answer this morning. We're doing it in the room. We usually do it in on the Bridges of Meaning Discord server, PVK Q&A recorded session. If you need, things have gone off the rails already. Griswold Grim says, well, that's pretty much. You have no idea how far from the rails we are here, Gris. I know it all looks nice and tidy here in this little corner of my office, but Jacob came in and saw the rest of the glory of my office and so he can testify to the immensity of this mess. He also ushered, he also uttered the standard words when he first met me. He said, you're taller than you look on YouTube. And he said, I already knew that, but I didn't quite know that. So Jacob has had some realizing this marriage this morning and Vindonk, you should say something. What do you have to say for yourself this morning, John? Happy to be here. And I'm sorry we missed you at breakfast this morning. I also actually had intended to bring even more vestments for your perusal, but it turned out that they had been disposed of earlier, so it came implemented. I actually saw a picture in the chat of Paul with his father wearing his clerical collar. Hmm, hmm. Yeah, things getting very psychological here. Actually Vindonk was trying to procure for me some used Roman Catholic clerical clothing, which would be, it would seem very Protestant of us all to appropriate, but there we are. So welcome to everybody who has joined us on the channel. The first thing is invite Critical Drinker onto the live stream. Critical Drinker, I'm happy to talk to the Critical Drinker anytime he'd like to. It's the least I can do after I've been making mileage from his channel this week. I've now done a few videos commenting on his and probably some more will come. I've got some other ideas to follow up on. Also this week had a wonderful conversation with Josef. When Josef came into the channel, Jacob said, oh, you have to talk to him, you have to talk to him. He really knows his stuff. And I was very happy with the way that conversation went. And I'm always a little disappointed because I really wish that the conversations would be the star of the channel. And the YouTube analytics never testify to that fact, but I think they are the stars of the channel because truth be told that you all in the Discord, in the chat room, you are the stars of this channel. And you are why I do this. This morning I posted the conversation I had yesterday with Jonathan Pigeot, which I was actually a little nervous going into that conversation because, you know, it's one thing to be a pastor and to sit down face to face with someone off camera and ask nosy intrusive questions and ask them to be honest. It's another thing to do it on YouTube. And, you know, Jonathan was very gracious. He could have just said, you know, hey, I'm a YouTube celebrity, leave me alone. Don't ask any intrusive questions. But he, Jonathan is not that way. And he opened himself up and opened his heart. And I thought it was a really productive conversation, especially at the point that he said, you know, where are all these questions coming from? These seem like your problems. And the uncomfortable fact of ministry, which Jonathan can likely attest to is that most pastors are probably out there probing their own problems instead of really helping other people with theirs. Wouldn't you say that's often true, John? Yeah. A lot of very highfalutin conversations are a coverup for whatever unresolved issue are happening underneath the surface. Yeah, yeah. John is another one of these guys who is often behind the scenes. There are quite a few videos with me and John talking on our channel and there'll be more. But John has very early on was quite an influence in the formation of parts of this channel, particularly with Estuary. And John, for those of you who don't know, is really the bishop over Estuary and that he's training the... John, you need a better name for that darn group. Estuary, I mean, I'm dyslexic. I can't keep the letters, the words in the right order. What's this thing you're doing? Health Net. Health Net. Health Net. Yeah, think of snot and thinking of hope. Health Net. Sounds like my health insurance, Health Net. Health Net. Or it sounds like these allies, Estuary Leader Support Network. Estuary Leader Support Network. Health Net. All right, so I know I should probably get to the question and answers because Rick is, I'm sure looking at how many questions have accumulated and then he gets nervous because Rick posted about the best meme about our, yeah, see, he's showing me. Get to the question, VanderKlay. Rick posted a really good meme this week on Twitter about our relationship. Maybe he'll post that meme in the live chat. Anyway, all right, Tony Rosa asks, following on the heels of the Seeker Church movements worldwide and church planting movements in missions, I've been seeing a lot of emphasis on disciple making movements in North American ministries. I should say that as is true with many things in the church world, you have to differentiate between the attention that something is given and its presence. So, disciple making movements have actually been quite strong throughout. They predate the Seeker movement and they've been quite stable actually. And I have on my shelf a whole variety of books about disciple making. And so that's partly prompted by the great commission making disciples. So, the disciple making movement's been around a long time and theologically, it's very interesting in terms of the degree to which Protestantism is actually self-aware of its own theological base. Part of what Jacob enjoys doing is trolling me on my Calvinism, because I'll say things. That doesn't sound very Calvinist. And you Calvinists aren't really sticking to your Calvinist credos. And yeah, he's right, he's right. People are really bad at sticking to their credos because we take one thing and we elevate and say, this is us. But then we've got all this other stuff that we do and live by and the dissonance escapes us all. So, disciple making movement, yeah, it's been around constantly through the Seeker movement and the Seeker movement would also dip down and appropriate the disciple making movement quite regularly. And in fact, the end game of the Seeker making movement, which was, I forget the name of the book. So Willow Creek over the last number of years after the Seeker movement peaked in their very evangelical social sciency way decided to do a study as to how, as to whether or not their intentional practices were yielding transformation in the people who went to church. And surprise, surprise, they discovered not as much as they thought and not as much as they wanted. So they have, hey, there's the fire department once again on the podcast. So they've done actually an enormous amount of study in disciple making because typical of the Seeker movement, they then said, well, these are the measurable traits of what it means to be a disciple. This is what transformation should look like. It's basically if a whole bunch of ministers decide to get degrees in psychology, which many have, and then try to nail it down in a very modernist industrialized way and say, we want projects that are going to lead to these outcomes in the people and we're going to measure it and we're going to ascertain the processes. This is something that I don't know, but I bet you John Vervecki would be quite interested in if he realized just how much of this goes on in certain corners of evangelicalism. So that's sort of- Yeah, go ahead, Jacob. Dumb question, what is disciple making? Okay. Disciple making is the intentional formation of the disciple as patterning the master. It's making disciples. It's if I, Paul VanderKlay wore vestments, fasted every seven days, tithed, did a yearly pilgrimage to the Camino, if I had all of these practices, let's say this is the five pillars of Islam, if I had all of these practices, then my job would be to instill these practices in my disciples. So it can be practices, it can be beliefs. And so the disciple making movement has been the intentional attempt to discern the practices of Christianity and transmit those practices into the disciples. Into the next generation to basically make copies of the master. So the oral law. Yeah, that's a pretty good way to think about it. Or at least the behavioral law that isn't necessarily codified in the written. So yeah, that's a pretty good way of thinking about it. So disciple making ministries focused on obedience rather than knowledge, correct. Small communities rather than centralized structures, correct. Are you aware of this rise of VMM as a paradigm for ministry in the US? I don't know that it's a rise. It's always been here. And you can find it, my entire adult ministry as well as participation in church, I've seen it as a near constant. And it's especially interesting in Protestantism, especially in those areas of Protestantism that have what Protestants have sometimes called easy beliefism, which some of you will listen to and say, yeah, that's Protestants, that's easy beliefism. I can be a wretch and a jerk and an idiot. And as long as I walk down that altar and embrace Jesus as my savior, I can go on being a wretch and an idiot and a horrendous person. Now, what tends to happen in the parts of Protestantism that are very credo heavy in this way is that they have all of these around the back ways of taking care of the other side. And for that reason, disciple making movements are endemic in Protestantism because all you need is one guy sleeping with the organist or molesting children and saying, I'm saved by grace. And the disciple making movement stuff is gonna come roaring right back in. Oh, but you're not, Tim Keller has lots of ways of talking about this. You are saved by grace alone, but not by grace that is alone. So all of these ways of Protestants sort of figuring out how work and life meet. And so the ministers and the Christian-informed church of the Dominican Republic would just cut through that when are you saved by grace or works? And they'd all say both. And of course, all the Calvinists would hang their heads and we haven't made proper disciples of these national pastors because the correct answer is grace, not both. On goes the church stuff. So yeah, DMM is always with us. If so, how does the rise of this paradigm intersect with the answering the current meaning crisis? Again, I think it's always with us. It's part of the structure of the difficult questions of Christianity, which are how does Christ save us? A couple of weeks ago in my sermon, I read C.S. Lewis's letter to Arthur Greaves. And C.S. Lewis was writing Arthur about his conversion. And what Lewis said to Arthur was one of the main obstacles I needed to get over was how is it that a man's birth, life, death, resurrection, ascension 2,000 years ago could save me? What does that word save mean? What is the mechanism of my connection with Christ? And the options within this dispensation are fairly limited. Is it behavior? Basically, is it upper or lower register? So this stuff is always with us. Anybody wanna make any comments about that answer? See, you know, Rick, I think it's when they're all in the room without faces, that when they don't have faces- Hey, Paul, it's Lance, I'll tell him. Okay, go ahead, Lance, go ahead. It's funny, we just talked about this today in another chat. And I think the thing that's interesting is people are lamenting the lack of discipleship within churches. And I was a good Methodist boy, but then went into a Willow Creek style, non-denominational, and I was doing house church. Like the entirety of everything was the pastors wanted to get people into discipleship. I mean, that was like everything. It was announced ahead of time, small groups of disciples, small groups of disciples. And so I find it fascinating because Nebraska to Kansas, everywhere I've been, that's always been the whole focus of my entire life. I'm 52 now, right? So yes, it's prevalent. But the thing I would add is I think in terms of the form of discipleship, it's really like a sponsorship. You do have, I think there are folks who wanna instill certain propositions, but I think the best models are where it's real, the mask is off, and you look at someone who's further down the road, he's walking the walk and you say, I want that. And that person comes along beside you and helps you do it, you know, and kind of shows the way and you hear the person you call with your struggles and so on and so forth. And so it's a way to multiply the pastor, I think, in many ways, if it's done well with the right kind of people along the road. But I'd be curious because it appears as if this seems to be interesting to some people, but I've just seen it being pervasive. Yep. Absolutely, absolutely pervasive. Go ahead, Vindak. I wonder if it is helpful to differentiate kind of a tension between emulating the example of Jesus, which would inherently or automatically or inevitably create a kind of a uniformity that means that all disciples ought to look alike. And we, in our American individualism, we've come up with the idea that, you know, I might ask the question, which I actually do ask the question, why did God create me the way he did and place me in this location for such a time as this? Now, that suggests an enormous differentiation between other people who were created differently, who are in different locations and at different times in the world. So, okay, so what is it? Are we all becoming like Jesus? Or are we all attempting to live out our unique purpose for which God created us the way he did? And that tension is almost inevitable and it will play itself out in church organization. And I don't know who the person was who was speaking earlier about the small group and discipleship program. I'm having those conversations at my church right now. How are we gonna do this? Are we going to try for uniformity and everybody read the same rooted book? Or are we going to figure out how each person is different and what differences do they bring to the table to offer a wide and full or ministry posture to the surrounding community? Yep. And it gets into the, go ahead. I was just gonna say, I think we, I don't know, I referenced Romans 14 maybe too much, but I think there are certain things that need to be conformed, that to be a Christian must be conformed. But that's not everything. And so there's this weird tension between a certain type of uniformity in certain things, right? Maybe you could think of it in terms of closed-handed versus open-handed issues or maybe not. But there's gotta be something that unites, right? And also from a definitional standpoint, right? It's Christ who's the founder and perfecter of our faith. Right? And so we need to look at him as our example to follow. But to your point, right? People are made different. People come from different backgrounds. And I mean, we can't expect somebody who's out of rehab yesterday to understand the faith and to live it out the same way that somebody who's been in the pews for 20 years, right? So there's a tension there, but I think in some way it's almost solved by us looking at discipleship as kind of like, in some sense, us living out Christ's commands inside of the church to love one another and to not ward it over one another and to be patient with one another and to always look to build up one another. But I think where we get off track is when we start looking to some super Christian that we can think of, right? As, well, you need to be like him, right? Or her, right? Instead of Christ, right? And just an interesting analogy, I heard from Paul Washer of all people, but he was talking about how maybe the church is a little bit like spokes on a bicycle wheel. And so we're all trying to get to the center, right? But we're starting out from different places and as we get to the center, maybe we look a little bit more like each other, but those lines never actually meet, right? Except in Christ. But anyway, I don't know if that's useful. I think we get off track mostly when we say that you're not a Christian because of somebody's opinion of that. That's where the real trouble begins. If we can keep our hands off of other people. God, and how our opinions about their status as Christian, I think we'd be fine. So what you all triggered is a very long conversation that's, I'm sure, pervasive within many Christian groups. So when I came, so I was in the Dominican Republic for a number of years and then I came here to Living Stones and the whole class was sending all of the clergy of the classes to Willow Creek. So one of the first things that happened, I came here in August and by September, I was on a plane with some of the leaders of this church going to Willow Creek. And so right away, it was my job to study this stuff and try and implement some of this stuff, yada, yada, yada. And so when I got back, I started thinking basically in terms of Willow Creek, like Willow Creek was thinking. It's the Willow Creek reveal study. And Rick, if you wanna pull up my screen, Rick does have access to my screen, although I didn't tell him I was doing this. So they made a book called Move, What 1,000 Churches Reveal About Spiritual Growth. And the whole point of this effort was to identify what spiritual growth looked like. And again, these were the people that were at the peak of Western Protestant evangelical Christianity. They had social science, they had theologians, they had everything at their disposal. And so what they tried to do was, okay, we're going to measure spiritual growth. And so this whole book is this entire study. The difficulty is always the relevance realization of this and how it's all upper and lower register things. Whether you can actually bring this up. And I think you can do it to a degree, but you can never actually contain the thing. And when you look at, let's say, archetypal realities or archetypal characters, we could ask the question, how many significant biblical leaders, Old and New Testament, were murderers? And the answer is most of them. And you might, for a moment, imagine that if there is something that you do that should disqualify you, certainly it must be murder. Certainly it must be murder, taking the life of an image bearer of God. Moses did it, David did it. We don't have as much direct evidence, but the apostle Paul perhaps did it. So this is part of, and so it's these tensions that activate these kinds of conversations. So Calvinists are sort of at one extreme end. Basically the answer to who is included in a future with God, the answer is everyone God wants. That's a pretty good answer, actually, when you think it through. Because when you have all these other answers and you say those who fulfill the law, you have to ask, did Moses fulfill the law? Moses killed the Egyptian. There's a difference between killing and murder. But when Moses killed the Egyptian, wasn't it murder? No, Paul, and this is the funny thing. This was one of the most surprising things when I heard about it, because the way I was always taught it, the Jewish way of teaching it, is he proved that he would be a good shepherd by protecting the weak from the strong at the risk of his own status. He was a prince of Egypt, and he saw a slave that the only thing that meant to him was, this is a slave. And he protected that slave. And that's what actually qualified him to be a leader, a shepherd. So absolutely shocked when I heard the idea that Moses was a murderer. It was like beyond anything. This is where we go. This is exactly where these conversations always go. Because can we qualify? And I'm betraying my Calvinist upbringing because Romans one, two, and three, is there anyone that is capable of qualification? And that just sets up then, of course, Protestant reformational theology. Only Christ by his merits can qualify, and so on and on and on. So that's why we always wind up, these conversations always go where they go. So, but that's why I see these tensions as perennial. And I think they go beyond Christianity or Judaism. They, I think they're just structural into the nature of reality. So. Paul, I just, quick question for you. In terms of your experience though, you kind of maybe would start off like John mentioned with the materials, but isn't it best that once you get past that, it's actually just a living life with someone, who's further down the road with you that's helping you get through life and you kind of fumble your way through it all together, but there's just that loving relationship. I've always found that to be the most critical aspect of discipleship and not so much around the propositions. Look at Christ. I mean, he, the disciples lived with him. And then look at Peter and Judas. You know, why was Peter restored and Judas took his own life? I mean, every time we try to systematize, we, every time we try to definitively systematize, we find we can't do it. So then we say things like things can't be systematized, but that is sort of around the back way of systematizing it again with, and that doesn't work either. So we're, we just always wind up in these similar places. Anyway, all right, next question. So I have now spent the first 30 minutes on the first question, which is our practice. So anyone who would like to be my disciple must spend 30 minutes on the first question and then rush through the rest and have Rick chastise me afterwards. You know how many questions that we have still? And you have to get through them. Maybe he's a little less anxious now because we have caught up in the past, sort of like, you know, the US government having a balanced budget. So is mental health a helpful frame at this moment? Is it doing more to clarify or to obscure the realities to which it refers? That's a really good question. Mental health, that formulation of it came as a, as an attempt to address the moralizing of certain behaviors and conditions that seemed to not be appropriately moralized. And one of the best examples of this was AA and alcoholism because alcoholism was often seen as a moral defect. AA came along and basically for the sake of recovery, medicalized it and said, oh no, alcoholism is a disease. But it's a rather interesting disease in that, it's an interesting disease in that you don't cure it by taking pills or chemicals. You cure it by talking and accountability and all sorts of, sorts of, sorts of relational immaterial approaches. So I think we'll be, I think mental health as a frame will be with us longer, but as is almost always the case, there's a lot of very large scale opponent processing in a culture. And so when we leaned too heavily on the moral, the therapeutic came back and sort of medicalized it and that was typical of materialism and modernity. So, oh no, alcoholism, it's a genetic disorder, but they haven't been able to find the alcohol gene. And you could find this in many, many, many conversations where the questions are, have a moral valence. Even you would think, well, a heart attack, a heart attack is a physical problem. But then people say, well, if he didn't eat, if he didn't eat at McDonald's every day of his life, maybe he wouldn't have had that heart attack. So these things just go back and forth. And I think opponent processing is at a large cultural level is sort of a good way to imagine these kinds of questions. Go ahead, John. The size of the DSM seems to be related to this question. Yes. Tell people what the DSM is. The Diagnostic Statistical Manual. We are now at, I think version six or seven. I'm not totally current anymore, but that thing keeps getting thicker and thicker and thicker, which actually means that, at least in some people's minds, the insurance company should be required to pay for X number of diagnosable deficiencies. And it gets very interesting with other things. Let's say I would claim that my white privilege is not a moral defect, but is in fact a disease. So if it's a disease, there's no longer a moral valence. But that then tends to cut both ways because we don't give the blind driver's licenses. So maybe we shouldn't give those who have white privilege voting rights. I'm waiting for the insurance companies to reimburse me for getting into rehab for being Dutch. Dutchmen do need rehab. All right. Ross Byrd with a second question. What do you make of the recent rise of moral histories in the vein of Jesus and John Wayne? Why now? Oh, is it new and mostly secular or old and following the lead of the Old Testament prophets and chroniclers? Is Dumais playing the role of a prophet or a historian? So just this morning, I was in the midst of a little Twitter dust-up because that pesky gadfly, Neil Shenvy, has been mining Twitter analytics about the followership of certain evangelical actors in the current evangelical culture war. And he's been posting his results. And many of the people who own the Twitter accounts that he's been diagnosing in terms of their Twitter following have not appreciated him posting this data. And he came back pretty hard and said, hey, now, wait a minute. We've got people writing about Jesus and John Wayne and a whole bunch of books like it. Let's be fair. There's a lot of data. And when I read Jesus and John Wayne, part of what I appreciated about the book was, in fact, the data. There's a ton of data that says people have their religion and their politics all mixed up together like their peanut butter and their chocolate. That to me wasn't really so much of a question. I expect people's religion and their politics to be all mixed together. I'm a little bit more surprised when I find people who are complaining about it a little bit, oh, how should I say it? Ignorant, willfully ignorant, blind about the fact that their politics and their religion seem also mixed up together. Politics and religion run on nearly identical bandwidths in us, which is why I use time as a differentiator and say politics is now and religion is always. So the fact that one would appropriate history for moral argument, that goes all the way back to the Hebrew prophets. And the New Testament authors employ that all the time. So when you find Jeremiah wrangling with his political opponents, when you find Elijah, Elisha, and when you look at the moves that, let's say the apostle Paul makes. Jacob, have you trained your dog? I don't know why she doesn't like Rick. I'm guessing it's because he doesn't know. I think she doesn't like the apostle Paul. I think that's what's going on. I think she doesn't like the apostle Paul. I think that's what's going on. I think that's what's going on. So this is an old, old tension. And it's, one's valence as a, one's presence as a prophet is very much dependent upon one's context. And this gets into the point that Megan Domb and David Fuller made in their recent conversation, that in our culture, and also Jonathan Peugeot's point about parasitic storytelling, in our culture, people run around acting as if, you know, it's the 19th century or the 1950s, and they're being prophetic and brave to talk about certain things that were not in vogue in the 19th century or the 1950s. And no, it's 2020, and you're gonna get into a lot more hot water in many contexts if you say certain things that were in vogue 150 years ago but are out of vogue now. And so then you have to ask yourself, well, what exactly is the prophetic? Is the prophetic merely counter-cultural? And so this morning, my video was entitled The Prophetic Vocation of Jonathan Peugeot. Why did I identify his vocation as prophetic? Not so much as being merely counter-cultural or counter-narrative, although Peugeot is that in some respects. But again, those kinds of questions always depend upon context. What I see, and I'd love to hear Jacob's opinion of this, what I see the vocation, the prophetic vocation, in the Hebrew scriptures of was calling people back to faithfulness to their God and covenant faithfulness. That's what I see the prophetic vocation as. And so when, for example, John the Baptist comes and Jesus basically identifies him as Elijah, it's because that's his prophetic vocation. Well, what do you think the prophetic vocation is, Jacob? Well, I mean, yeah, the idea of the unfaithful wife, right? So calling the unfaithful wife to return to her husband, I would say is one of... So there are three themes. There's father-son, right? So we are God's children. He is our father. We are like a wife to God as a husband. And this gets... I have a whole video on this. So please understand what I mean here, slave and master. And we are avadim, right? To be an avad, which is the Hebrew word for slave. And usually in the Bible it gets translated as servant. To be an avad is an integral part of just like being the wife or being a child of God. We are slaves to God. Yep. Yep, and that runs right through the New Testament too. Same questions, the bride of Christ, children of God, or sons of God actually, more technically in Greek, and doulos, slaves of God. But again, partly because of contemporary sensitivities. If you were to... There are some translations that write slave instead of servant. It's just that Americans, when they think of servants, I think they think of British butlers and maids. So people would rather think of that instead of a slave. So anyway, so, yep. All right. It's a good one too. What's that? Bonds movement is one that's used in a lot of translations. Maybe we could think of it as an indentured servitude in US history. Yeah. Yeah, there are lots of... There are lots, I shouldn't say there are lots. Americans tend to think of the modern version of slavery that was abolished in England and America in the 19th century when they hear the word slave. That's part of the way language works. And yeah, indentured servant, bond servant. Yeah, translation is not an easy business. The last point I like to always make about this is in as it is defined in the Torah, right? If a master harms his slave, the slave goes free because the master has actually violated the relationship. When you have an escaped slave, you cannot return an escaped slave. Why? Because that slave is not... And remembering this, it's actually a beautiful analogy throughout the Torah that has been completely perverted, I would say partially by Paul. Paul of Tarsus, not Paul van der Kley. Paul van der Kley might continue the perversion but... Philemon, I'm not a fan of that book. Really interesting. That's very interesting. All right, Chad the Alcoholics question. How do the seemingly ecumenical worship services described by Corey Ten Boom in the flea-infested rooms of Ravenbrook come to fruition in our current world? Does it take absolute malevolence and collapse for unity to emerge? No, it doesn't have to go that deep. Last night I was speaking with a woman in our church who is one of our elders and she was just visiting her daughter and son-in-law who are missionaries in Africa and she was talking about something which for her was a new experience but for those of us who have done foreign mission service understand in the African country where her daughter and son-in-law live, her daughter and their children live in a missionary compound. And it's been my experience that in various situations like that where you have differing cultural similarities that you can get degrees of ecumenicity you can't get in other contexts. So I think a big part of the reason that say Protestant Catholic relationships are far less fraught today than they were 50 years ago is that the culture has changed significantly. American culture is far less Protestant than it was 50, 75 years ago. And with the decline of over Protestantism, Protestants, confessional Protestants, practicing Protestants and practicing Catholics now find themselves as allies in many ways that they were rivals before. So ecumenism can arise in surprising places including in a little space like a number of people have said that bridges of meaning discord is surprisingly ecumenical but ecumenical in the best ways. And I think there's a lot of truth to that. And a lot of it has to do with context and what brings us together. So I actually wrote a sub stack article on why Neal Shen the annoys so many people that one might imagine to naturally be his ally. Let me see if I can pull it up here. Sometimes I write things and I like the way I phrased them and I can't always pull it up directly. Yeah, so Shenvi is mining all this out analysis and then why might a Roman Catholic see Jordan Peterson as a hero or even a Hasidic Jew see Jordan Peterson as a hero and this Roman Catholic see his own Pope as a traitor? Why might a member of the Protestant Presbyterian Church in America, very conservative reform denomination think Tim Keller is a traitor while loving James Lindsay who is an atheist? By virtue of formal alignments, this might seem irrational but it is in fact common. Our usual surface ways of mapping the world don't often adequately account for it but the dynamic is really an expression of what I mapped out a few videos ago in terms of centered set versus bounded set dynamics. And so then I went on to say mining the data to map these dynamics does us all a service. We and our communities, especially in the midst of spiritual warfare, could use better data. Being pissed at Neal Shenvi for this sort of thing is like being angry at your therapist for serving up something you didn't like to see about yourself. Disregard his analysis if you like but when he's serving up data, it's best to face it. So, go ahead John. I wonder if you noticed that Chad made the distinction between ecumenical worship and ecumenical conversation. We do a lot of good ecumenical stuff in this corner of the internet and I think that estuaries pride themselves in being able to welcome any in all comers but I think that the very reason why estuary is not actually the church and there is a clear distinction between those two is that I'm not so sure that in worship we really are all that eager to go ecumenical. And so, I have a friendship with Jacob. Jacob and I have pretty substantial differences such as around the individual Paul of Tarsus. To what degree do Jacob and I worship together? How formal can that be? What kind of unity can Jacob and I? Now, I think it's fairly, I think Jacob and I can say, well, we are worshiping the same God and he might say, well, it's that Trinity that's a real problem. And I would say, okay, I understand that but my first interaction with the blog was actually a very interesting podcast or interaction with the podcast. It was a very interesting podcast out of the UK that was taking questions and answers online and I asked them this question about, does God open poorly addressed mail? And I think he does. When the Israelites are in Egypt and their cry goes out, even if they have forgotten or lost a lot of knowledge about their God, their God claims them still and acts on their behalf. So, no, it's a great question. Thanks, John, for bringing up that difference. It's very helpful. All right, Thomas, ultramarine, facts equal truth in our current culture. Can we get anywhere without redefining it first? Redefining facts, redefining truth. Thomas, I see you're in the room. So I don't know if you wanna illuminate this at all. Yeah, yeah, it's truth, truth. Yeah, redefine truth because facts are not true. And currently, people treat it like it. Yeah, if you just recite facts, that's truth. That's how it's understood. Yeah, because truth can be broader than facts. And I just read this in the book, that's true, that's true, that's true. And I just read this this morning that, you know, let's pull up the fact that Hitler was a vegetarian. And for a lot of people in Northern California, they might say, well, vegetarians are good people. They're kind to animals and vegetarians are overflowing founts of goodness and love. Hitler is a vegetarian is a fact, but what truth does it elicit? So, yeah. All right, Jay, pineapple pizza. What comes to mind is mathematical. Calculus is the way of summing up areas and volumes. The smaller the step size you take, the closer you get to the actual quantity. If you look early in my channel, I had a conversation with an engineer from Toronto, where we talked about the asymptote. And it was a very fun conversation, one of the early ones on the channel that got into calculus and it was a good time. Or just like a higher resolution photo gives you a closer representation of reality, although this gets into the previous point about facts. But more, but takes more info and time to load. This website explains math with illustrations. All right, that's, Jay, you might be in trouble with Joey, because that was not a question. And any question that requires homework, Joey doesn't have a lot of tolerance for. So, those of you who are curious about this can go ahead and click on the link. But at this point in the conversation, I'm not gonna spend a lot of time diving into it. Justice from Portland. Is there a symbolic relationship between the great high priest who comes from outside the tribe of Aaron, and the Protestant clergy who comes from outside the line of apostolic succession? You know, every now and then you get a question like this, and you read it and it just makes you say, because of course there's Malchizedek, the great high priest. Jesus is of Judah, not a Levite. Protestant clergy, clergy, just this morning when I was talking to Jacob about the gifts that he brought me, you know, I said, you know, these, I mentioned to him that sometimes people will call me father. And Jacob was a little surprised. Why on earth would someone call you father? You're not a priest. But for many, the differentiation between priest and minister is sort of lost. And when it comes to questions of women in church office, that differentiation between priest and minister, I think is quite significant. So, there's a lot going on here. So, I am going to take this question, Justice from Portland, and I am going to, like Mary, ponder it in my heart, because I think the question is profound and potentially revelatory, but I don't know that I can do it justice right now. I don't know if Jacob or John have any thoughts about the question. Well, I mean, I would say it's, I would say it's clear that the role of priest, there are different, you know, there's the Aaronic, the Libyanic priesthood, but we have many priests in the Bible that aren't from Aaron. And in fact, you know, Israel is called a nation of priests. Israel is called a nation of priests, right? I think it becomes a problem when we try to collapse all stories and every archetype into a single one, because I think that short changes the Bible. It's not one story, it is a library of stories. Good answer. So someone wanted to say something from the room? I wanted to ask if you can elaborate on the question, because I didn't, I didn't get that. Well, I think Jacob has offered a really good response to it. Part of what's behind the question, I think, is the Book of Hebrews, where the author of the Book of Hebrews highlights that Jesus is a priest in the order of Melchizedek. Now Melchizedek is this very interesting figure in the Book of Genesis, that after Abraham rescues Lot and the five kings of the plain, Abraham does not enrich himself by the plunder, which in common law there he could have, and he also tithes to Melchizedek. And this opens up especially for, I love the way you just put this, Jacob, about the different stories, because Melchizedek in some ways, what do you think about Melchizedek, Jacob? I'm really kind of curious about how that figure works in your system. So this is the thing, Sam and I have been talking about this a lot, and it was the first time I found out that, so anytime you see what is, I would say, an obviously weird translation in the Christian Bible, you know there has to be a theological point behind it. And so the idea of translating Divrati Melchizedek as order of Melchizedek, it's like, okay, you're shoehorning, you know, in ways, this isn't left foot, right foot, this is, no. Trying to put your foot in a glove type thing. And so, look, the book of Hebrews, I call a theological crime scene, and it is. Well, this is the rest of the New Testament, we're on our way. Because if you were to take its logic, oh, well, didn't Jesus bring sacrifices to the temple? Were the priests at the temple greater than Jesus? I mean, it is a theological crime scene. And anybody interested, Rabbi Skowak has a very good, he goes through the entire book of Hebrews, and he just rips it to shreds as it should be. All right, so here we are. We are in an estuary, this is what we do here. So that's why I love Jacob. Jacob does not pull punches. Jacob tells us what, and again, I've said it before, this is my rule in small groups, that people should say what they think. Because for Jacob to sit here and say, well, Paul's a nice guy, John the Donk used to be a minister, I don't really wanna tell him what I think. When Jacob says, the book of Hebrews is a theological crime scene. Then we can have a conversation. So yeah, so there's a lot, I don't know if I helped you understand the question better, but this question goes deep, and it could take a long time to suss out. So I'm gonna pass it by. Hey, Paul, regarding the Bishop Baron. Babylonian Bee. Oh, Babylonian Bee, two Beebees. We also got Beebee Netanyahu, so not him. The Babylon Bee interview with Elon Musk. Earlier in the interview, Elon expressed a sense of crisis of meaning when he was younger. Yes, he did. So he ended up reading religious books and found difficulty with the Old Testament. He's not alone in having that experience. I'll say it that way. I would like your take, Paul, with the difficulties of the Old Testament. Well, Jacob has shared his, I... Yeah, right. Maybe this is why Jacob is not as angry with me as he is from the one that I was likely named after. Because I don't have a lot of difficulties with the Old Testament. And I think this is part of, and Jacob might find this strange, but among a lot of the reformers, Calvin is often regarded as one who at least tried to take the Hebrew Bible seriously. And a lot of the reason contemporary people basically pull a Marcion, and Marcion was this early heretic who basically said that, well, there are two gods, and if you really wanna know Jesus as God, read Luke and Acts and Paul, but throw away all those Hebrew scriptures. One of the things that happened, what was a crisis in the early centuries of the church, was the question of, to what degree do you understand the New Testament in the light of the Old, or should you primarily read it as an addendum to Plato and the Greeks? And so this is, I know there's a lot of popularity around church fathers today. That was a knock against church fathers that the church fathers didn't take the Hebrew scriptures sufficiently seriously because, the Lord of the Old Testament could pronounce the ban upon Jericho, could tell Israel to conduct holy war. When Saul didn't follow through, according to Samuel's command, Samuel took up the sword. So there's, and the fact that young Elan, who probably was, who had a particular picture of Jesus as kind of nice, probably saw some of these things as kind of difficult and brutal. But when I look at Jesus, and I think if you read, I have a lot of respect for, oh, who used to do The Daily Show? Stuart? Yeah, he at least, when he would talk about Jesus, would say things like, have you actually read the gospels? Because Jesus can do things that look pretty Old Testament-ish at times. And what churches have done is sort of paper over a lot of those things. And I don't think Calvin papered over some of that stuff nearly as much as let's say someone like Luther. So that's my response to that. Anybody else? All right, I think Jacob's holding his tongue. He doesn't want to get a reputation beyond what he already has. He wants to know what the limits of the estuary are. All right, JWL, hey Paul, I would love your thoughts on the Jonathan Swift's tale of the tub, or in the discussions of the 17th century with Rothworth, Goetheur, John Serpent, Tillotson, et cetera, concerning oral versus written tradition. I know nothing of this. Specifically between Protestant and Anglican schools of thought. I do understand the classical differences between Anglican and Protestantism. And you understand more than I do. Anglicans are always, Anglicans are birthed by their history, and what a history it was. But I'm having trouble understanding the difference, differences that are still applicable today. The 17th century Anglican views of oral and written tradition sound a lot like how I understand Protestant views today. If you could shed some light on this, that would be most helpful. I really can't, because I know very little of this, but I bet you that there are some people who can, and they probably are Anglicans, but I don't really know much about it. You know anything about this, John or Jacob? I know nothing about this. Well, for starters, the Anglicans are Protestant. They are. Thank you, Henry VIII. All right. Richard, regarding your answer today, which was last week, you quoted, your God is one thing that he will not deconstruct, which is the alternative to the religio of continual religious deconstruction. I'd like to point out that in the religio of continual deconstruction, we are in control, or perhaps our command of speech is in control. That's an excellent point. This is in contrast to, you know, religion, right? Boy, I don't know. People are stressed out, racing to deconstruct simply because the agentic God is a loose cannon and full of questionable decisions. Now, you have to realize that every time you identify a questionable decision, you are making a value judgment on a decision, and it's sort of a sleight of hand of speech to slip into the passive voice and implicitly suggest that it is the divine passive. What do I mean by the divine passive? You can find in the Bible a variety of divine passives. The divine passive is when something happens and it's implicitly assumed that God did it. Now, this gets us into the question of, this gets us into the whole agentic versus arenic question. And you'll notice that in my last Critical Drinker video, I paused with a slide of thinking about God number one and God number two as agentic and arenic. And here's a fun thing. One of the mappings of masculine and feminine is agentic and arenic too. And the video that I plan to follow up that video with, which I haven't made yet because I'm still gleaning wisdom from the comments section and from feedback from that video, is I'm going to start, or early on in the next video, I'm going to play Jonathan Peugeot's description of masculine and feminine that he did with Mercury and Andrea with the bangs, because I found that to be a helpful little riff that Peugeot went on. Manuel, who together with Mark are sort of the twins of a certain way of attempting to colonize me, I thought really made a good comment on that video when he reiterated a point he's tried to make to me a few times of mapping the emergent emanation and emergence on my number one and number two. And there's also a mapping there that can have masculine and feminine, where feminine is very much emergent and masculine is very much emanation. So there's a lot of interesting mappings that go on with this. And so I'm rather, I pay a lot of attention when I listen to people who deconstruct, continue to slip into the divine passive, but don't own it. Because what I actually find with people who have deconstructed and thrown away organized religion or at least developed religion, that without too much time having passed, they're very quickly once again, slipping into the divine passive. They accept that they have now taken away agentic named agents such as the Lord or Jesus or how many other agentic gods that they find and are substituting feminine, areonic entities such as universe or being but they very quickly give such things agency. And one of my favorite examples of this is in the movie Avatar, where they're playing pantheist all along the way until the big fight with the evil Colonials, fighting all of the romantic naturalist tree creatures. And then suddenly their God is fighting for them. And it's like, forget your pantheism right away there because your pantheist is, your pan is purely feminine. It's not agentic, it doesn't assert. And really what's underlying a lot of the questions that I dealt with a little bit above about Elon Musk, what he finds in the Old Testament, C.S. Lewis puts his finger on because C.S. Lewis says, the God of the Bible is a hunter, he's a warrior, he's a husband, he's a man. Now, are you saying God has sex in terms of, and we really have to clean up this sex and gender language because sex is biological and gender is upper register. Sex is lower register, gender is upper register. God makes man and woman in his image. The masculine in that picture is not at the male and female, it's in the making. And to give you a little tip of where I'm going in the follow-up video to that one, part of the reason we pray to Father and part of the reason Jesus is male is because of how the Lord of the Old Testament and Jesus in the new behaves with respect to the world. For God so loved the world. There's directionality in a gendered universe there that should be born witness to in language. And what we see happening now with a lot of deconstruction is slipping into feminine divine passives, which are frankly sometimes cop-outs. So that's, people always say, why aren't your videos shorter? Well, there's some brevity for you. And then a lot of you are gonna say, I don't really quite know what you meant. Hence the length and the illustrations. So I don't know. I don't know how that answer suits any of you. Anselman is gonna love it. There he is. So Anselman is in the comments, he's doing his thing. So yeah, and because anyway, I'll save that for the video I want to make. I'm not ready to make that video, but because a lot of the, I know I don't put my little heart on every comment and I know I don't actually get to read all of the comments, but I am in the comment section of our channel. I say our channel because you and I both create those comment sections. I'm in that comment section every day, multiple times a day going through those comments. Now I don't always necessarily read everyone with the patience and depth that perhaps some comments deserve, but I do take the comment section very seriously because one of the things I learned right away when I started seriously playing with YouTube was that you all have a ton of knowledge and wisdom that I don't have and I gain from your comments. And I, you know, Peugeot sort of joked to Michaela Peterson that, you know, don't read the comment section. And then for many channels, that might be the case, but for my channel, you all make the channel great because you take the comments seriously. Every now and then there's a few trolls, but you know, trolls just make things interesting as long as the majority of what's being given is in good faith and honest. So, I didn't even finish answering the question. People are stressed out and racing to deconstruct simply because the agentic God is a loose cannon and full of questionable decisions and tainted values as seen with 2022 eyeballs. You also said in a video and I paraphrase, people don't go to church because they might lose themselves. So to what extent is the impulse to continually deconstruct a symptom of those who are religiously isolated and too exposed, think of Audrey Assad, too exposed to walk into church for fear of losing some kind of personal something? I love Annie Dillard has a wonderful, a wonderful paragraph, I think it's in her book, Teaching Stones to Talk, where she basically says, people saunter into church mindlessly without thinking of what's actually going to happen there. I respect people who fear going to church because at least they take it seriously. And that was very much the dynamic that we saw with the Babylonian Elon Musk. That Elon Musk took the religion of some of the people that were questioning him more seriously than they took it themselves. And I think a lot of that is behind, where are my gifts? I think a lot of that is behind Jacob's gift of this to me because to one degree or another, if I'm wearing street clothes, I can slide. But if I put this on, we're dealing with stuff. And so I don't want to be too dismissive of those who are deconstructing because for many, deconstructing, happy as speaking for the deconstructed. I don't want to be too dismissive because for one thing, who is Jesus? Jesus, the bent reed he does not break, the smoldering wick he does not snuff out. Jesus shows patience and mercy to people that the current culture war of Jesus' day considered should not be shown patience and mercy. But Jesus did. And so there's a point of discipleship, I tried to follow Jesus. However, that compassion, and Peugeot talked about this yesterday in our conversation, that compassion can also go to seed. Jesus was not a quivering mass of availability. When Jesus decided he wanted to speak with strong words against something, oh, he knew how to do it. And you can find those strong words and people skip those strong words. So when we're dealing with something like deconstruction, it's important for us to be compassionate and patient and long-suffering with the smoldering wicks and the bent reeds. At the same time, you can't just evolve into easy compassionism. Now I really have to get back to, I wanna have another conversation about the rise and fall of Mars Hill with Tripp and his uncle-in-law, James, who teaches in Washington and has written some books. I just have to get them on the calendar. But because I think part of the defect of the podcast, the rise and fall of Mars Hill is that it doesn't get the balance right because they spend 95% of the podcast beating up on Mark Driscoll. And Mark Driscoll deserves a beating for a lot of different reasons, don't get me wrong. But then they sort of flip into this other mode of being just easy compassionism. And it's like, hey, wait a minute. Are you really drawing your good guys and bad guys line so much and then taking the line away and says, well, Jesus was just this fount of mercy. Jesus was a fount of mercy. But if you lose the, it's guilty people need mercy. Innocent people give explanations. Guilty people ask for forgiveness. C.S. Lewis made this point. If you're giving explanations, you're saying you're not guilty. The guilty need mercy. You can't deconstruct that. And Jesus doesn't, but we tend to. All right. Leonard, can you talk a bit about the Dutch customs you inherited from your grandparents? Oh, John's ears perked up. Dutch customs, you say? I am not a, see here's, so I'm actually not mostly Dutch. I'm Jewish and Frisian. Yeah, I don't even know what that means. Cause John, give us a little lesson on the difference between the Dutch and the Frisian. The Frisians still hold it against the Dutch that St. Bartholomew came up, or the Frisians killed St. Bartholomew. The Frisians actually are thought to be in Dutch circles barbarians. And then they have their own language, which they speak when they don't want the Dutch to know what they're talking about. So on the other hand, I mean, in all seriousness now, but quite a few people during the war went from Amsterdam to Friesland, or they sent their children there so they would not starve to death from hunger. So yeah, I mean, there are little cultural idiosyncrasies and polarizations. I mean, it happens between any number of towns in Europe where, I think that the, what is that little book that Dr. Seuss has, the half, or the half-pops? The Sneetches, the Starberries, the Belly Sneetches. Yeah, there you go. It's very similar to that. So when my grandmother was getting up in age and she was living in a nursing home and she wanted to say things to my mother that no one else in the nursing home would know, she spoke Frisian to my mother. My mother can't speak Frisian, but she could understand a lot of it. My father knew Dutch, but partly because when my father went to Calvin Seminary in 1957, Dutch language was a seminary requirement because you had to read Boving and Kuyper and most of that stuff hadn't been translated necessarily. And it is a high language. That is, when my grandfather was ministering in Owen Sound, Ontario, you know, after the war, people were coming to Canada because times were very hard in the Netherlands. There were Dutchmen coming and there were Frisian coming. And today we would look at those people and say they're victims of trauma. And they very much were. Pete Vanderbeek, who was on CRC Voices with us, I think elevated a lot of that, a generation that Pete Vanderbeek grew up in. Among Dutch and Frisians, he looked at a lot of the harsh culture that he grew up in and he looks back on it and he says, a lot of those people that left Europe after the war, they were pretty thoroughly traumatized by the war. And that's pretty understandable. So then my grandfather is in Owen Sound, Ontario, and he is delivering sermons in Dutch. But now I know more of the story. My grandfather, of course, was the son of Jews who assimilated into Northern Netherlands, which were heavily Frisian. And so he grew up in Grand Rapids and then the Frisians in the Owen Sound, Ontario would speak Frisian after church in circles, just like John Van Dong said, so that the Dutch wouldn't know what they're saying. But my grandfather was completely fluent in Frisian Dutch and English. And so at one point when they were, the Frisians were saying ungenerous things about my grandfather because apparently he was quite a dull preacher. He then responded to them in perfect Frisian, which led to probably some different dynamics in the congregation from that point because the Frisians couldn't play that game anymore. But my mother's side, Whitensville, Massachusetts, these are almost all Frisians that came to Whitensville. And they first came over with the cows that Mr. Whiten had imported. And then of course they started working in mills. So I, and then my parents raised me in Patterson, New Jersey where I'm not really among Dutchmen in a multi-generational community as many in the Christian Reformed Church my age would have been. I'm mostly in a black community. So I, you know, I sometimes bump into people my age, especially here in California because after the Second World War, there was a lot of Dutch immigration to Canada and to California. Because, and so I know there are a lot of people my age who can speak Dutch, can understand Dutch, have a lot more Dutch culture in them. Even people younger than myself in California have a lot more Dutch culture in them. I have almost none. And I think I understand that now because again, my mother's side was Frisian and my father's side wasn't really Dutch. And so this weird culture that I inherited was, I'm still trying to figure it out. But then again, I was very quickly raised in a black community. And so a lot of the African-American stuff was in me pretty early on too. So it's perhaps more biography than I should share, but there it is, you asked. I don't know, any comments on this, John? All right, let's see, I've got both sides. Now, John, you're not sure, correct? We are not scoring points on the real time text chat. I can assure you of that. What does that mean? It means that Mark and Chad are ragging on us right now. Well, that's what the real time text chat is for. So here we have a Dutchman and a Jew in the room too today. And Jacob actually did some playing around with looking at some of my roots and I should probably return to that. I'd love to get a copy of that genealogy that my father's cousin's son's friend did of us because he was the one that, he was a professional genealogist and he looked around and part of what they do when they do a professional paid for genealogy is they look for some famous person that you're most closely related to and I got the Marx brothers. So I don't know what that means. And apparently your ancestors and my ancestors both got kicked out of Spain at the same time. Because we're sufficiently low in agreeableness? The inquisition, nobody accepts the Spanish inquisition. That's right. So it's genealogies and stories are fun. I wish I knew far more about previous generations but even my father knew very little of our Jewish roots except once during the second world war when my father was a boy and his father, my grandfather said to him, you know if we were in the Netherlands, we might be in some trouble. What? That was about all. So my grandfather knew a lot more of what seemed to have been a definite effort to suppress our Jewish identities in Western Michigan. So I guess I'm a sellout. At least my ancestors were. They didn't hold the line. All right. Hey Paul, where were you a missionary again? The Dominican Republic, why? Bingo. Jared, you're welcome. I'm excited. Those turds. All right. Maybe Leonard plotted this whole thing. He wanted to get to bingo. So gosh, this is so embarrassing. All right, how we doing on time? All right, got about 24 more minutes. Are we going to lunch after this? Tacos. Oh, tacos. Oh, we're going to tacos after this. The Jew is paying. I will pay, you are all my guests. How has your view of the sacraments changed after your internet coming to fame, being exposed to more sacramental views? I've gotten fed up with the standards wingly and view that is so prevalent in low church circles. My change, my, I gotta be careful here. You asked me questions that can get me in theological hot water. I was quite moved and convinced by Brett Sockel's book that the two moments that have, I'd say, upped my resolution, I'll say three moments that have upped my resolution on my own tradition and the embrace of the sacraments were, the first one before my channel was this book by Len Vandezi who's been on my channel a few times, Christ Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Because Len, who was on CRC Voices, who is, I look at Len as a spiritual uncle in many ways. He's a little younger than my father, but older than I am, he's retired now. Sharp mind, great heart, wonderful Christian. On the opposite side of the CRC from me on the fight that the CRC is having, but a man I dearly love. I read this book before I started my channel and opened my eyes to sacraments in a way that I just hadn't thought about them much before. And then it was Mary Cohen when I had made a rather ungenerous comment about Roman Catholic Eucharist and Mary Cohen and a few others, but Mary in particular. Mary's quite a force, basically said, hey, you're straw manning us. Watch a Bishop Baron video on it. And I watched that Bishop Baron video and I was quite persuaded. And then when I read Brett Sockold's book, I thought, wow, this is, and all that is part of, you can throw Kaufman into that. So I have a video that I'm gonna probably post I don't know, it depends if I have time today to post a Monday video. So either the video will come out Saturday as sort of an extra or Monday where it's actually John Van Donk's friend. John Van Donk snuck a rando in outside the system. A film teacher at Biola who majors in documentaries, he wants to start, so think about this. He wants to start a little estuary group around filmmaking and specifically documentary filmmaking. And immediately I thought of Chad the alcoholic who wants to make a documentary. So Chad, you got to jump on this guy because he teaches documentary filmmaking. Anyway, where was I going with that? Oh yeah, he basically wants to develop around him a learning community. And I was talking to my wife about my conversation with him yesterday and I said, what this channel has given me is a learning community. And I can jump, I am so indebted to so many of you. John and Jacob, the two I'll go to lunch with here, and Rick, what I have learned from Rick, what I've learned from the comments section, what I've learned from the Discord, what I've learned from our conversations. You know when Neo and the Matrix, they stick that thing in the back of his head and he just starts to learn? I feel that you all have done that to me in so many ways. Now that's a dangerous business, especially if you're an ordained minister of the word and a confessional denomination. So I have to be, I'm just not, again, back to the, whoops, back to the shirt. I can't just go out and say any old thing I want. They might say, well, that's certainly what you do. Well, not exactly. Because I, you know, this is a collar. Jacob has a collar on happy for a reason. And as an ordained minister, when I put on this collar, I show the world that I am an ebon or a doulos or a slave. I am, Piedberg catechism, I am not my own, but belong to my, in life and in death to my heavenly father. That's what it means to wear a collar, just similar to what it means to wear a ring. Go ahead, John. On a short leash. On a, yeah. On a short leash. The leash of the Christian Reformed Church in these present days is pretty long. There are limits to it, but the leash is pretty long, probably too long in some respects. So, and that's, but that's what communities do. So this, my, oh my goodness. And so then, you know, every time that I've had a chance to shake hands with Jordan Peterson, I've always thanked him because, I mean, did Jordan Peterson teach me everything that I've learned in the last four years? Hardly. I've learned a ton from him. I feel deeply grateful to him for breaking open the world in the way that he did, for being the exorcist that dispelled a whole bunch of spirits the way that he did. But you all have been my teachers and my friends and so when this guy from Biola says, gosh, I want in on this, I think, absolutely, join the fun. But it's gonna take some work and commitment. And, but you all know that because especially you Bridgers, you know, you keep coming to the Discord server or to your estuary group or to the channel or to the comments section or whatever way you're interacting because you're finding things that are making your life better. And when that stops, you stop coming. All right. Hi, Paul, I've got to ask you my first sermon question. In any way, shape or form, could the modern day equivalent of Romans 1, verse 23, and change the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to corruptible man and to birds and to four footed beasts and creeping things be Tony Stark, Falcon, Black Panther and Spider-Man? That's an interesting question. In Romans, you know, so my Sunday school, my adult Sunday school class got paused basically because when Omicron hit the older ladies who make up that class, I knew they're all going to, you know, take shelter for a few weeks until the numbers go down and then they'll all come out. That's, they're basically, these are all women with serious health conditions. And so they know that something that most of us could probably shake off as a cold might kill them. And they're, you know, that's a serious, that's a serious thing for them. So I just had to pause my Sunday school class because I've got nobody else in the room to continue to riff off and I can do this like this, but I like having people in the room. That's far more fun than even doing it like we're doing it right now. So Romans 1, Paul begins by engaging the pagan Roman context. And, you know, read Tom Holland and read ancient primary sources on the cultural world of Rome. I mean, that Tom Holland experience of, the deeper he would get into understanding Roman culture, the more distance he would feel from it. Because basically what we've done, especially in the Renaissance is sort of sanitize it with sort of a Christian veneer. So yeah, Tony Stark, Black Panther, Spider-Man, Falcon. Yeah, I don't worry about that so much. I've seen people degrade themselves far worse. So Roger Marshall, oh, so Roger was on the channel. I hope you all caught my conversation with him. And he prompted me to reread C.S. Lewis Pilgrim's Regress, which I haven't finished it yet. And so I don't wanna talk about it too much until I actually finish it. But I think I read that book, I also have to reread the space trilogy, but I read that book years and years ago and reading it now in all of the philosophical, cultural, culture war stuff. C.S. Lewis wrote that book in the 1930s. And in some ways, it's just as fresh as it is today. Meaning that a lot of this culture war stuff, it's not new. Roger Marshall, a comment made by one of the participants in Friday's Discord server conversation got me thinking. He commented on the compelling beauty of the early morning calls to prayer in the Middle East, comparing them to the church bells from English village church towers. I get that. The same could be said of smells and bells, the multi-sensory traction that accompanies so much of communities religious experience. Whatever the underlying propositions. Is there not a risk of our understanding of a belief systems propositions being deranged by the power that these elements might exercise over our imagination? Always, always a risk. We are, again to quote John Calvin, we are inveterate idol makers. God gives us a world full of good things that we turn into idols. And that gets a little bit into Wesley and Whitefield's question above. God gives us, God, we're amazed at what we're doing with technology, with smartphones and robotics and things like that. But just look at the animal kingdom around us. Astounding, just look at a dog. So Jacob brought his dog and I said, well where's your dog? He said outside, I said bring him in. Jacob's like into the sanctuary. I said, that wouldn't be the first dog in this room. And there's lots of valence about that. But dogs are amazing. They're just amazing. And God gives us such good things. God gives us dogs. There are few better companions to humanity than the dog. I've told this story before. I remember meeting with an older gentleman here in Sacramento. We had some mutual connections. And so I sat down with him for lunch. And back in the days when I had far fewer people who were seeking my attention, sat down for him for lunch and getting his story out of him. I didn't start doing this stuff when I started the channel. Getting his story out of him. He told me about his marriage and his wife and his daughters. He said, yeah, losing my wife was hard. But when my dog died, that was really hard. So you know, country music, songs, there's reason behind them. One point Paul, Jacob has a license plate rim that asks who rescued who. Indeed. My wife was watching, I think it was a Netflix documentary about basically trauma vets and hooking them up with dogs. Amazing. I may be oversharing, but I had very bad agoraphobia as in could not leave my apartment for like a year. And getting a dog and just walking my dog every day, it's what allowed me to leave my apartment. Wow. And now you spent the night in the Living Stones parking lot. Mission accomplished. Yeah, if I ever spent the night in the Living Stones parking lot, see the problem would be everybody'd be knocking on my door. Pastor Paul. Pastor Paul, can you help me with this? That's why I don't live next door to the church. So yeah, lots of things exercise dominion over our imagination. All right, we've got 11 minutes left. Nine digit Eric also had a good conversation on my channel. One of you out there that's tech savvy enough, you should probably put together, I don't know if this would be a good idea actually, but if you had a directory of Rando's videos, someone recently did this search engine for this little court of the internet. Brilliant. Useful. That was wonderful. But so often, so Sherry was on the channel and I remember someone in the comments section that basically had, shoot, I wanna watch all of Sherry's talks with Paul. To have a, maybe you could use the little corner of the internet search engine for that too, but it would be kind of cool to be able to have a little directory maybe on the Discord where these are, someone says, maybe nine digit Eric says, oh, when my conversation with Paul, someone would say, oh, I wanna see that. Well, you can go to the directory and here's Eric and there's a link to his conversation or a link to his conversation. So that could be something fun if someone wanted to do something like that. What do you think of the serpentine path? Do you think that the serpentine path of fallen history is related to the curse of the serpent to slither in its dust? That's an interesting idea. That's one of these symbols that's not in the history and it might seem like kind of an overreach, but it's an interesting idea because you look at, I so loved my conversation with Joseph. We need more, there's a Muslim on Twitter that is now starting to engage with me more. So we do need more people from varied backgrounds of good faith because that's what really energizes these conversations. And it's Joseph and it's Jacob who on one hand are lovely and generous and fun to be with, but on the other hand are honest and will say things like Jacob said about the book of Hebrews. You can't get down to the depths if people are always pulling their punches. And I've heard, I've actually heard that that's going to be the case of both Dutch and Jewish culture. I think, I don't know, John, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think the Netherlands having been sort of a place where refugees of various stripes gathered, maybe that's part of this Dutch tradition of tolerance, but then also along with it, among the Dutch you can have a knockdown, drag out fight over theology or all kinds of things and then walk away from the fight and still have your friendship. I've noticed that among the Dutch. I think the only reason why we noticed that about the Dutch is because we hang around the Dutch. I think there are quite a few cultures where that is true. I have to say there's a culture of fear among Protestants that I had no clue about. And from an outsider's view, I had no idea how, I hate to use the word tyrannical, but tyrannical, the faith creedal thing of we will brand you a heretic and you will no longer be allowed anywhere in this church. You might as well kill someone. Yeah, especially if you're already a group of people that, I mean, and I think the Jews through their history in Europe know this because, think about Spinoza getting, it's good thing Spinoza was in the Netherlands because there's a degree of tolerance there. Because there's a degree of tolerance there. So it's bath confuses and deviates an otherwise more direct path. That's interesting. So it's interesting idea, Eric. Thanks. Let's see. I don't know. Maybe we should mark this one and see if there are any questions from the room or anything someone from the room would like to follow up on. See, this is why I've been playing around with that other room because again, and I know some of you are, my son Jared is sometimes in here and I know that he's working now. And so some of you have jobs where you can sit down and you can do your work and this will be on, but you can't talk. I get that. So. But I also think that it's true that on the Discord server, when we have our cameras on, we relate better. We have better conversations when we see each other. We have skin in the game in a way that we usually don't. We just have each other's attention. All right, well I guess we'll, I'll dive into the next question. Paul, what is your take on Peugeot's hierarchical vision of Christian society? Isn't social hierarchy as such a fallen structure? The reason that one dude is born a king and another a peasant is just the result of dumb luck and indifferent fate. A mere contingency, I don't think so. I don't think so. A mere contingency, I don't think you can say that. That's too far. Now, let's think about hierarchy and why hierarchies are so inevitable. Almost every time you hear, I haven't listened to it yet, but I just heard a little snippet of it. So Jordan Peterson, there's a talk that he's doing about the divine at the Oxford Common. He begins with the observation that to engage in this world, you must reduce it. For Vakie deals with the same issue. This is a realization that came to the fore with the advent of robotics and an attempt to have computers see the world and that developed the frame problem. So the frame problem is related to combinatorial explosiveness. When I walk into this room, there is a near infinite number of objects, aspects, perspectives in this messy little office of mine that I, as a limited creature, do not have the capacity to engage. I would be paralyzed. I could spend, how long will I live in this dispensation? 80 years? I could spend 80 years at the entrance to my office and still not exhausted. Now, if I start opening up the books that are contained in my office, there are thousands, perhaps even millions of years of levels of analysis that are contained in my office. That's how much of a compression engine, existence material, upper and lower register existence is. Because we are limited in time, lifespan, attention, we cannot deal with that much data. How do we manage this world? Hierarchies are necessary. They are inevitable. We are not going to dispel them no matter how much a beautiful vision of equality we possess. That's life. There's no getting around it. Now, there may be many peasants in the kingdom that would be better kings than the king. Inherited kingship is by no means a perfect tradition, but it might be better than average. Why? Because at some point, some individual rose in the ranks by virtue of some quality. Might not be a great quality, might be brute strength, might be cleverness, but there's some quality that brought that individual to the top of a hierarchy. And as Jordan Peterson notes, the way men work especially, men will push each other up the hierarchy. Now that makes no sense in some ways, because we all want to be at the top of the hierarchy. But any reasonably thinking person will recognize that others have qualities superior to my own, and for the sake of the group, that superiority should be elevated. And we practice this regularly every time you recommend a video or a book or a blog post or an individual, you elicit an experience and leverage a hierarchy. And you say for the good of the community, we should have this person do this. It might be a basketball game. This particular person is tall, physically strong, can get rebounds, can dunk. It's gonna be a power forward or a center. This particular person is quick, great ball handler, good distance shooter, great speed to get to the basket and lay something in. They should be a point guard or a shooting guard. There are hierarchies, and for the team to function and win over other teams, we manage those hierarchies with each other. An inherited monarchy, who would have imagined I'd be defending inherited monarchy? Because I have no, I'm not a particular believer in inherited monarchy. But I can understand how even an inherited monarchy has the potential to be better than average in selecting rulers for a nation. Now, as Jacob said before about servants, is exactly what Peugeot says about hierarchy among people. Those on top have a role. And when Jesus says, the greatest among you must be servant of all, he is showing the role of the person on the top of the hierarchy. The person on the top of the hierarchy must be the servant of everyone beneath them, but often as a collective. Whereas if you're a servant further down the hierarchy, you're only a servant to your master and maybe to some other people within which you have a relational network. So inherited monarchy is not the dumbest system because let's say somebody rises, might be a coup, might be choice of a tribe, tribes compete, let's look at David. David rises, you know, what David survives, he starts out at the bottom. In fact, he's so much at the bottom that Jesse doesn't bother calling him in from the sheep. And Samuel sees him and oh, here's the one, but he's at the bottom. And then there's the confrontation with Goliath. And then there's the trauma and intrigue with Saul. And then he lives in the caves. And then he lives with the Philistines. Now, can you think of a better education for someone who is going to handle the Philistine threat? He knows the Philistines in and out, he's been among them. He has their language, he's lived in caves. He knows the court of Israel. I mean, he is the perfect person to lead Israel. All of those qualities are in him by education and by genetics. And he rises to the top to become Israel's greatest king. Insufficient in some ways, but in many respects, Israel's greatest king. It makes sense that his progeny, both by training and by genetics, would be a better than average choice for king of Israel. Now, as many things have pointed out, perhaps being raised in a court is not the best training for kingship. And there are many stories that go into that too. Moses is raised in a court, and then is in exile, like David. So you begin to see these patterns. So, and then when you look at inherited monarchy, you can say, look at this, it's not dumb. And in that way, you see patterns in the world. And now we might say that an elected democratic temporary president is better than an inherited monarchy. And there are some respects in which it is better and some respects in which it is worse. And you have to look at as many variables as you can and come to that conclusion. But hierarchy is inevitable. And most of the structures in the world that have been tried, have been tried and in fact have lasted because they're better than average. That's part of Nassim Tlaib's point about a lot of the books that he writes and the Lindy effect. So, no, social hierarchy, it's simply a reality. And so these dreams of getting rid of it, but now, to go a little bit further, Jesus critiques the hierarchy. You have one master and all of you are brothers. And so what you see Jesus doing all the time is he's not eliminating hierarchy. Jesus never eliminates hierarchy, but he does in many ways qualify it because there is hierarchy and there is equality. And you need both equality and you find that in the Bible as well. God is not a respecter of persons. Well, what does that mean? Jesus is a man after God's own heart. Well, how can you say God is not a respecter of persons and then David is a man after God's own heart? Well, both are true. That in a sense, God does not, you know, when David decides that he is going to take Bathsheba and commit adultery against his servant, and then when in fear of discovery has his servant killed, Nathan can come in and say, God is not a respecter of persons, David. You may be a man after God's own heart. But what you did was not licensed by your place in the hierarchy. Both the status and the equality are functioning properly in a situation like that. And I think, you know, again, part of what Peugeot's profit vocation is is to show the world these perennial dynamics that are built into this world and will not go away. They can be bent, they can be flexed, new contexts come around, but hierarchies are inevitable. And we just have to figure out how to live with them. So there's a little rant about hierarchy. Hasn't the absurd view of a hierarchical relationship between male and female led to the miserable marriages throughout the ages? Peugeot is right that the... Jordan is right when he says, the history of the struggle between men and women is a perennial one, and you can oversell both sides. But even something like this falls subject to the hierarchical inevitability. Now, in some ways, men and women, like David and Uriah, should be considered the same. In other ways, men and women are not the same. And so you have to figure out which is which when. And really, a lot of our jostling and conflict around these issues is all about that. Are men and women the same? What a ridiculous question. Are men and women the same? They should be treated the same at some times, and they should be treated as different at other times. So my wife and I, I've mentioned this before, for various reasons, we've been making our way through all the seasons of Survivor on Paramount Plus. Love the show. When you have certain challenges, the men succeed. And if you look at the structure of the show, a lot of those challenges they make so that the men won't dominate the women. The whole structure of women's athletics recognizes that testosterone has its implications. And men are larger and stronger, generally speaking. Women have other strengths that men don't have. They live longer, less prone to certain diseases. Nail female equality with respect to what? Figuring that out is what the game is about. So David Bentley Hart often stresses, and is precisely, in the inherent contradiction and tension between the gospel message and empire and a loving God and eternal hell that leads Christians to destroying itself in the West. There's a lot of what's leading us to destroy ourselves. That's what we do. All right, Hanshue has a question, but I am going to hold that one for another time. Probably next week. Rick tried to end questions. Yeah, Rick, I didn't get that far. So thank you all for joining us. Too bad everyone in the room today can't join us for tacos. That would be fun. And the tell-offs of so much of what we do is the hope that we can, don't notice how we want this, we can at some point get together in person. So we can see each other, we can embrace. You know, the Peterson-Weinstein-Hying conversation talked about smell. You know, we might not recognize we're smelling each other, but you know, I have this chair that the homeless people abandoned on the church and I have it in my office and by that chair is a smell, but the smell from the chair isn't quite as bad as the smell that comes in from under the door. So I'll have my hierarchy of homeless smells that I'll deal with. So thank you all for watching, listening, for being in the comment section. Paul skipped my question and answered his own. I do that all the time. And that's why I continue to play around with this format and probably depending on what happens with Rick and his job and weeks that he can be here and weeks that he can't be here, I'll probably continue to play around with the impromptu live stream room because when I skip your question, if you have a face in the room, you can say, hey, VanderClay, you idiot, you're not answering my question. This is my question. Oh, oh, I'm sorry. I must've missed it. So here we are. Thank you for being here. All right, Rick, you can end transmission.