https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QrHuLOFtSUc

 Hi, this is Paul, and this is Sunday Leftovers. I was going to sit down right away and do the question and answer from the Douglas Murray and T. Wright conversation, but I have this, I do this sometimes, so I'm, you know, the worship services, we're worshipping and Pete leads, Pete usually plucks the psalm from the revised common lectionary, even if I'm not in the lectionary, I am at this point, and this Sunday's reading was from Psalm 1. Psalm 1 is a beatitude, and of course some of the most famous beatitudes are Jesus' beatitudes in Matthew chapter 5, but whenever I, someone asks me about those beatitudes, I often recommend that they in fact look and check out the beatitudes in the Psalms, because when Jesus gives his beatitudes in Matthew, they should very much be contrasted with the beatitudes in the Psalms. So let's just take a little reading of Psalm 1. It's always difficult to know which translation you want to use, especially for Psalm 1. Maybe I'll just start with the NIV, just because it addresses some things. Blessed is the one. Now if you grew up with the King James Version or the Revised Standard Version, you would have blessed is the man, man being generic man, and of course the NET, the New English Translation, which is a good translation, it's got a lot of great notes, notes that, well, oh happiness of the man is a little bit more literal Hebrew. Blessed is the one. It's a beatitude, and what is a beatitude? A beatitude is a wisdom saying, and wisdom sayings are, we've been talking a lot about wisdom in our little corner of the internet, wisdom sayings guide people in how they should act. They're not laws or rules, but their generalities, their guidance, and they're meant to be given generally, and then particular applications need to be made. Blessed is the one who does not follow the advice of the wicked or stand in the pathway with sinners. Now this is a rather famous phrase, blessed is, this is the RSV, which is basically a mid-20th century updating of the authorized version or the King James Version as, you know, depending on where you want to go with this. Blessed is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked nor stands in the way of sinners. Now you're standing in the way of sinners, and so translations have been trying to get around that, and so the NIV says blessed is the one, because it's trying to avoid when you say, man, I'm not a man, blessed is the one, okay, who does not walk in step with the wicked or stand in the way that sinners take. You see the NIV is trying to make it a little bit more understandable to your average audience reading it today or sit in the company of mockers. Now, now mockers are, is a category of person that you'll find fairly commonly in the book Proverbs, and Twitter might be the company of mockers, because that tends to be what our social media has wrought and brought forward. It's brought forward mockers. Now, mockers are an interesting breed because, and I certainly participate in this sometimes, because it's, you sort of act like you know, but you don't have to actually know or even put up. All you have to do is mock, ridicule the other. So blessed is the one who does not walk in step with the wicked or stand in the way that sinners take or sit in the company of mockers, but whose delight is in the law of the Lord. Okay, well what is the law of the Lord? Well, the law of the Lord, you can find it in the Torah. It's the first five books, the first five books of Moses. This is their delight. That's just a lovely way. Their delight is in the law of the Lord. This is what they delight in. They love keeping this law. They love doing this law. Now remember, blessed is this, is this, it's a McElroy, that's what we often call it in New Testament, because that's the Greek. It's happy is or blessed is. This is what you do if you want to have a good life. Don't walk in step with the wicked. Don't stand, now stand in the way, stand in the road of, don't occupy the path of the sinners, or don't sit among the mockers that are just, you know, mocking people out there that's pointless, it's fruitless, and already we have the wicked, the sinners, and the mockers, but delight is in the law and fulfilling the law and abiding by the law and living by the law of the Lord and who meditates on this law day and night. That person is like a tree planted by streams of water. Here in Sacramento, we have rivers and we have levies on those rivers and it's a perpetual debate whether or not trees should be planted on those levies. Do they strengthen the levies with all of their roots or do they weaken the levies with all of their roots? But trees are planted on the levies and they thrive because they're just take from the Sacramento River and the American River. They just keep drinking up all that water and in a semi-arid Mediterranean climate, which Sacramento and California shares with the, basically the eastern coast of the Mediterranean, water is very precious and so the tree that has access to water all year round just thrives in comparison to the tree that doesn't. Like a tree planted by streams of water which yields its fruit in season and whose leaf does not wither, whatever they do prospers. Now here's a metaphor. This person who delights in the law of the Lord and meditates on it day and night, they prosper. That's flourishing and so clearly the law of the Lord is given for prospering. Not so the wicked. They are like chaff. Now if you take wheat rice, almost any grain kernel, they have a husk on it and brown rice still has the husk on it and white rice has the husk taken off of it and so you would separate the wheat from the chaff and usually by throwing it up into the air or beating it, you would separate the wheat from the chaff and the chaff would blow away. So the wicked are like chaff. They blow away. They don't endure and when I was reading it this week and in the process of our worship service, I was thinking about Jordan Peterson's Darwinian theological knowledge because in a lot of ways that's what Jordan Peterson sort of offers with his Darwinian approach to the world of the Lord. He's a Darwinian approach to religion. That religion is this long-standing conversation by which we try to figure out who are the wicked and who is the righteous. What do wicked do? What do righteous do? What things produce flourishing and what things produce chaff-like living and therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. Mockers aren't even involved. So the wickedness doesn't stand in the righteous judgment. Well, who's judging this rightly? Well, it's the law of the Lord and now this is very, very common in the Hebrew scriptures. This is a very common mindset in the Hebrew scriptures. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked leads to destruction. Now, part of what we'll talk about is personal versus impersonal. Psalm 1 is very personal and it sets up this whole world which is sort of like My Name is Earl, that old sitcom, and karma. Do good, good things, you receive good things. Do bad, you receive bad things. And that's sort of a general rule. Now, Psalm 1 and Psalm 2 are quite closely connected and they're the first Psalms of the Book of Psalms which means that they sort of set the tone for the entire book. In Psalm 2, the application comes down more down into the Seculum via the king. Why do the nations conspire and the people's plot in vain? The kings of the earth rise up and the rulers band together. Now, those of you who are familiar with Handel's Messiah will recognize this immediately. Psalm 2 is a very frequently quoted Psalm in the New Testament with respect to Jesus. Jesus is seen as the fulfillment of this king that is anticipated in Psalm 2. The kings of the earth rise up and the rulers band together against the Lord and his anointed. The Lord's anointed is the king of Israel saying, let us break their chains and throw off their shackles. The one enthroned in heaven laughs. But now, what's the scene here? Well, the the rulers of the earth are under the dominion of the king of Israel. That's sort of the the good, that's sort of the good that is anticipated here. The one enthroned in heaven laughs. The Lord scoffs at them. He rebukes them in his anger. And of course, this terribly troubles modern people because, you know, God shouldn't act like this. He rebukes them in his anger and terrifies them in his wrath saying, I have installed my king on Zion, my holy mountain. I will proclaim the Lord's decree. He said to me, to me who? Well, to David, Psalm of David. Now, this isn't listed as a Psalm of David, but it's an anticipation of all of this. That's the first Psalms in the book are the Psalms of David. This is the Davidic king. This is the king over Israel, Israel who is is primary among the nations. He said to me, you are my son. Today I've become your father. And again, you can read about this in the book of Hebrews, because the book of Hebrews is this extended sermon or series of sermons that that riffs on a lot of this stuff. Ask me and I will make the nations your inheritance, the ends of the earth your possession. You will break them with a rod of iron. You will dash them to pieces like a pottery. Now, now again, and handles Messiah and he will lead his sheep like a shepherd. But that's a kingly metaphor. Therefore, you kings be wise, be warned you rulers of the earth, serve the Lord with fear and celebrate his rule with trembling. Kiss his son or he will be angry because the king is the son of God. And that's really important when you recognize all the language of sonship in around Jesus. The king is the son of God. The king is the son is ruling here below the father that's ruling above. For his wrath can flare up in a moment. Blessed are you who take refuge in him. Okay, so now there's blessed. So now the blessed at the end of Psalm two and the blessed at the beginning of Psalm one create this inclusio as they talk about in exegetical terms, saying this is one thought unit. But now it's in two Psalms and there's the two Psalms are sort of a hinge. And here's the first Psalm which now I'll read them together and you'll get the whole picture. Blessed is the one who does not walk and step with the wicked or stand in the way that sinners take or sit in the company of mockers. But whose delight is in the law of the Lord who meditates on this law day and night. That person is like a tree planted by streams of water which yields its fruit in season. Whose leaf does not wither whatever they do prospers. This is the blessed one. These are the wise ones. The wise ones read the law that the Lord has given through Moses on Sinai. They meditate by them. They live by them and because they do that their life flourishes. Not so the wicked. They are like chaff. They don't endure. They blow away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment. When the judgment comes the wicked will fail because they're wicked. Nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. The righteous will show them out. Left hand. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous but the way of the wicked leads to destruction. Now question that looms over this is really always because many times in the Hebrew prophets you will find Hebrew prophets saying now wait a minute and you'll find it in the Psalms. Why do the wicked prosper? Why do the wicked prosper? The answer is always just give it a little time and in the end you'll see. But these times can go a long time and ends can be a long ways. This vision of Israel never comes to be. Why do the nations conspire and the people's plot in vain? The kings of the earth rise up and the rulers band together against the Lord and his anointed. It's an insurgence saying let us break their chains. Whose chains? The chains of Israel and throw off their shackles. It's a revolution. The one enthroned in heaven laughs. The Lord scoffs at them. He's the one doing the mocking. He rebukes them in his anger and terrifies them in his wrath saying I've installed my king on Zion my holy mountain. The king will come down and the king will administer justice on the earth. It's the job of the king. I will proclaim the Lord's decree. He said to me you are my son. Well who's speaking now? Well it's the king. You are my son. Today I have become your father. Ask me and I will make the nations your inheritance and the ends of the earth your possession. You can see from a New Testament perspective why this so often gets quoted in the New Testament of Jesus because this is Jesus' mission. Now it's amazing that it gets quoted in the New Testament which is written in the first century and because it isn't till the third century that Constantine comes along and in a sense makes it so. And Constantine then becomes the son. You will break them with a rod of iron and you will dash them to pieces like pottery. Therefore you kings be wise because this is about wisdom. Be warned you rulers of the earth. Happy are you if you keep the law of the Lord and meditate on it day and night. Foolish are you if you rise up against him because the king has a rod of iron and he will smash you. Serve the Lord with fear and celebrate his rule with trembling. Kiss his son or he will be angry and your and your way will lead to destruction for his wrath can flare up in a moment. Blessed are all who take refuge in him. Now again this strikes modern readers with a little bit of ambiguity but I was very much thinking about Psalm 1 in the light of well to what degree are those who are right do they win. Those who were right about the 2008 housing collapse. You know we always say things like nobody knows. No some people knew and happy were they who had their money in the right place when the crash came. Happy were they who when they saw Hitler elected left Germany before the problem started. Happy were they who were able to get out of the Soviet Union. I mean we perpetually live in this world where it calls for wisdom and happy are you who can wisely manage your time and money and where you live and what your resources do because you will prosper because of it. That's the general game the world plays but Israel is perpetually in exile and a lot of people say a lot good that law is doing them. Job was the best man in the world and he suffered and then all the way to Jesus the son of God himself crucified like an insurgent. The Romans would say aha what God is laughing now. Now some people on the channel love to bring up natural law. Okay what's the relationship between natural law and wisdom? Well one might say that the wise pay attention to natural law and obey it but notice again that the Psalm the Psalmist is very relational and I think part of the reason people are so excited about natural law is well relationality requires maintenance. It requires sending gifts to the king. It requires giving the king your attention. It requires paying attention and being a part of that network. Law is usually just a little bit um a little bit separated. So well here are the laws and it's law sort of keeps me in the driver's seat and I think this is part of the reason why we like this natural law. I think we also like natural law ideas and formulations because of deism because of part of what has happened from the 16th century on is that increasingly we have managed we have imagined the world to be impersonal not fundamentally personal. That's where you have sort of my ideas about God number one and God number two. Now I think part of what we see in the Psalms and you find very similar ideas among many other religions in the world is what I sort of call natural religion because this is this is the the common project that human beings have been working on for as long as we've had records of human civilization. It's very karmic do the right thing and you'll be blessed do the wrong thing and you'll pay. Now of course if you have a meta-divine realm you look for you look for champions of the gods that you can relationally approach and submit to in hopes that your champion will they'll be your your your patron they'll be your patron and you can be their supplicant and that's how you make life work in the ancient world and those kinds of ideas continue in many places of the world. You know when I lived in the Dominican Republic everybody understood who a patron was and you know in some ways Peter Thiel is the patron of Eric Weinstein. Brett Weinstein lost his patron when he lost his job so now he's sort of out there on his own you know for a while Jordan Peterson was the patron of of Dave Rubin you know Jordan Peterson was the heavy and Dave Rubin sort of cuts his wake behind him you know in some ways Joe Biden Barack Obama was the patron of Joe Biden and now we'll see what happens in the Republican Party where Donald Trump is the patron of a lot of other Republicans that are hoping to make their way up. Having a patron or a patron is a very well established path of making your way up in a relational world among relational creatures. So natural law well what's the relationship between the law of the Lord as is seen in Psalm 1 and natural law? Well one of the big differences is that in Psalm 1 and 2 it's very clear that well being has agency and relationality with respect to that being matters and I think this is actually one of the big dividing lines that lurks beneath a lot of the Christian non-Christian conversations that we have now. I think a lot say well that that relationality tax is really pointless. Going to church is time consuming, worship is time consuming, prayer seems pointless, what really matters is action and yeah action does really matter. You get to the book of Job of course and it throws skepticism on how well we can do the math and what we seldom think of is that well this natural law is embedded within religion. It comes from religion and so all of this attempt that I think we find in modernity to try to strip away the relationality from natural law, it's kind of telling but the book of Job comes along and basically says can you really do the math? Can you really accomplish this? And yet we all need to navigate and so then I think in many ways at least in the secular realm the debate about religion is well what's the relationality tax and how much do I have to pay and is relationality really worth it? Now moderns are squeamish about relationality and you know I haven't had a chance to really go through the Ian McGill-Christ Jordan Peterson conversation but you know this this I come back around to this conversation often I had in 2018 or 19 I had a conversation with John Vervecky about this and this is where I postulated my spirit of finesse versus the spirit of geometry sort of following from Pascal because if you listen to someone like McGill-Christ and Peterson well the modern assumption is that the world is impersonal and so all that religious relationality is sort of wasted effort and but then you listen to these guys and you begin to say well is our world finally personal or impersonal? I think part of the trick that Jordan Peterson sort of played in his in in all of his work is that he keeps divide he keeps bringing those two things together and he basically says well the personal has been around the relational has been around for so long it's actually been built now into our physiology and it's built now into our psychology both the both the hardware and the software that in many ways the answer is unimportant. Now this Peterson who doesn't double down in terms of formal religion although if you listen to him he's very much like a lot of non-churchgoers that I know that say well they're a Christian they believe in God they pray they do all these things but it's sort of a backyard religion. Now backyard religion doesn't get good treatment in the book of judges because in many ways the book of judges is all about backyard religion because everybody has a shrine in their backyard everybody you know you maybe find a priest who can administer things for you and and basically the picture from the book of judges is pretty poor so you know maybe Jordan in his biblical series should pay a little bit more attention to judges and maybe he'll be skeptical about it but the entire approach to the Bible and what what sort of Jordan Peterson's contribution is is that he says you know all of this stuff is really big and we can't really do the math on it very well so you ignore the Bible at your peril and so one might say Jordan you ignore the book of judges at your peril. You know is our world finally impersonal or personal and someone left a really interesting comment in one of my videos that basically made said that this is this is one of these cruxes that Hindu theology has always sort of teetered on they could never make up their mind on it and I would very much understand that to be correct. Now of course Christianity and Judaism doubles down on the personal and finally says blessed are you that relate to the world personally to being personally to the universe personally that ask questions of it and and you do find in fact with Jordan Peterson's backyard religion that he relates to the universe personally. Now of course one of the interesting things about McGillchrist is that he notes that the left brain and the right brain and because I'm dyslexic I've always got problems with with with the left and the right but you know the left brain is sort of grasping and manipulating and and and boiling things down and you really need that but the right brain is open-ended and and you need that too in fact you you always need both in order to manage this world and then of course questions will arise well what can this tell us about being itself about the nature of reality and well it can tell us something to me it goes back to the spirit of finesse over geometry we relate to the world with a posture of relating to things too complex for you to do the math on and as I as the point I made in that video I should probably put a link to it I looked for the thumbnail but I didn't want to spend all kinds of time looking for it is that's that's actually the appropriate way to treat human beings and and it's the appropriate way way to sort of it's sort of been built into the scientific method this sort of posture towards skepticism you you talk to another human being not like you know them through and through but like there's a lot you don't know and so you should treat them with respect and at heart that's a lot of what the spirit of finesse is now this morning I woke up and because of the the difference in in English time and and California time and Tom Holland was active on Twitter while I was sleeping and got into a fun little Twitter conversation about human rights and so a lot to do with his book Dominion human rights aren't objectively true either so he's responding to a tweet okay but my problem with basing human rights on religion is that religion is not actually objectively true so you're building a house on sand now this was a big fat slow pitch I don't know what that means in cricket terms but this this is something that Tom Holland's gonna be all over because Tom Holland's point is that human rights is downstream from Christianity and what I found really interesting about his tweet was he put it on the resurrection human rights aren't objectively true either you don't find human rights look at to my conversation with civilian you don't find human rights you don't dig it up in the backyard and find it in the dirt you don't you know how can you find it it's not something concrete this is where this language of objectivity is really a failure it's not human rights is not a physical thing okay now you might say what's in the information but but once we're into that realm it's very different from a physical thing they derive from profoundly Christian theological presumptions they are quite as culturally contingent as a belief in Christ's resurrection culturally contingent and that's the fear because what if we stop they are in our intersubjective and the question is you know is there moral gravity beyond human culture and the posture of modernity is that you can get away with it you know if you get to like Mao if you get to slide off into the grave to shuffle off this mortal coil and you know you had the benefits of of pop of of ruling with an iron fist the world's largest country population wise Joseph Stalin Adolf Hitler you get away with it now of course Christian narratives say no you don't get away with it because Psalm 2 the Lord will call you to account and now the way that this is manifest is of course in an afterlife that well and that's what Christianity has been promoting all over other religions have promoted very similar things you have the book of the dead in Egypt and so there's all this discussion of an afterlife the only thing we can work on these is by now the only way we can work on these is by thinking about outcomes and that's where you imagine punishment and of course a lot of people are like no no not punishment well punishment's pretty hard to get around whether with natural religion hence you have stories of karma and punishment and consequences so you know either Mao got away with it or he didn't now is Mao suffering in an afterlife for eternity or in eternity you know duration gets a little difficult for us to think about in eternity so that gets into all kinds of other debated topics but this is obviously vitally important for people and again I bring in Miroslav Volf's observation in the deconstruction of Yugoslavia when it was all coming apart he noted that secularists atheists well if there's going to be punishment it's going to happen here and I think this is part of what is fueling the fact that in wokeness there is no forgiveness because you don't have the expanded room that an afterlife affords for nor do you have a judging god that can decree punishment or blessings so blessed is the way you know blessed is the one who ponders on the day of the lord on the ponders on the the law of the lord and meditates on it day and night and you know now in terms of the old testament period shiol was sort of a fuzzy hades was sort of fuzzy but you see and let's say lazarus and the rich man you know some differentiation of course that gets full blown in the book of daniel when you have a resurrection of course and that will continue to develop into christianity so there's a lot going on here now then i'm having a conversation with esther and the common toad now the common toad was on my channel and we had a we had a terrific conversation maybe we should do another one he he interviewed me and and for a while i had it posted on the masthead of my channel was an excellent interview i thought but he asked this question in the context of this conversation would you see a moral difference in a person who owned a slave in ancient rome versus a person living amongst us and amongst us in the united states owning one and right there were asked to do moral math and you know part of what esther had weighed in with two plus two was four and i made the comment you know it seems time is integral in these questions of morality because one would say well in order for your bridge to last you need to use math and so you have math and physics it's very immediate now we see often with shoddy manufacturing or or no building standards that it's not quite so immediate time still makes its point and and has its toll to tell or tell to toll something like that but what if the time reference for moral math is very different now the difficulty you have with a question like this which is what is my answer to him how would you measure such a thing do you measure morality in grams do you measure it in inches do you measure it and we did we can't even quantify suffering we sort of have greater and worse but that's about as far as we can get on what stage and this is on what stage you could you compare them so here you have someone in the roman world owning a slave let's say someone in antebellum america owning a slave and then let's say there was an article not too long ago in the atlantic with a woman thinking about the fact that they had in her home growing up another woman who was functionally a slave and you know living in latin america with a patron often families of you know of poverty will give a son or a daughter to a wealthy family and say here and sort of the agreement is well feed them clothe them maybe educate them maybe treat them like a son but what they do as they're growing up and as where they're living in the house is run around and pick up the laundry and do the dishes and they're not getting paid for that labor directly they're getting clothing and and and so the the question in that particular atlantic article was was this woman a slave and then of course she got older and then needed expensive medical care and the family's kind of like well now we want to switch to the wage system even though you haven't paid her any wage and so you know kick her out on the street and let you know her family or the government or someone else pay for it and and so these things aren't how do you compare these systems they're they're they're they're separated by huge cultural divides such questions are punted to god because presumably only he could do the math and have access to both individuals if there is no god dyslexic if there is on god no if there is no god then what is left of the question interesting intellectual question but so what who cares the romans got away with it the most of the antebellum slave owners got away with it they all get away with it it's the way this world does okay no more getting away with it now yeah and now what tyranny we can decide these matters blessed is the man who does not sit in the council of the wicked or occupy the path live in the path of the sinners or sit in the assembly of the mockers but who delights in the law of the lord well is that like natural law what kind of law are we talking about you see these things have a grip on us together but then you know part of jordan peterson's argument about lobsters and brain chemistry and such is that well they have status well you know enslaving people now it's going to get you in trouble this is sort of tom holland's argument with people wade in and say what about those christians and tom holland's like the measuring stick you use a christian measuring stick to measure the christians and say christianity is invalid then your measuring stick is invalid that's your problem but we don't see it language is always sort of tracking this sort of thing religion has been the longest conversation trying to track it i was just this morning finished up the rest is history as text as you need and you need to struggle to know exactly what the bridge is now this bridge that you needed math and physics to make because it isn't obvious either listen to the aztec episode of the rest is history did you know so the aztecs were famous and saying well the world is going to end and now that's that's questionable now too because of further scholarship but did the aztecs world end when the spanish came depends what you mean by their world for individuals they all have their own separate world my world ended when i got the diagnosis with cancer well what did you mean by the world well this life that i was living free from care not having the pain of chemo having extra income able to do these things my life ended when my city gave up to the roman armies and we all became slaves that's how roman law worked if you became uh if your city lost the battle and you became a slave well guess what your marriage is over it's done why because you're a dead man because you're a non-human too i'm not a dead man because usually if you lose the battle you have a choice either we can kill you or you can be our slave but in either way you're sort of classified as dead and and this is where we get into these these ancient notions of the people and the non-people the um the barbarians the gentiles the the people who aren't people because they're not in our category and therefore can be enslaved and again we use a christian yardstick to measure christians in past eras but you know thanks for the yardstick i'm going to judge you with it judge not lest you be not judged because the yardstick that the measure that you use will be used against you it seems to be exactly what we're doing to each other everyone is trying to save the world but what exactly do we mean with this term and the atheists especially individualistic atheists that they're they're in bigger trouble with these arguments than anyone because for the most part me is just me and and when they put me in the ground and cover me with dirt that's it so a lot of the variables in the way we talk they're all part of this yardstick that we've inherited so then we're down to this question how do i live and if you haven't caught my my conversation with civilla i thought that was a was an outstanding conversation but that's that's what peterson keeps keeps coming back to the skeptics and peterson keeps saying well we sort of live by these rules because we don't have anything better and the measure and the yardstick we're using is also from these rules but you still have to make a choice as you live and the good and the bad what has value of course that's civilla and the Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance percig what is right and wrong this this stuff is built into us so incredibly deeply and so that's where i sit and ponder as we're reading through the psalm of the day that person is like a tree planted by streams of law of water which yields its fruit and season and his leaf does not wither whatever they do prospers not so the wicked they are like chaff that blows away well do you want your life to count what does counting look like well in a lot of ways what human beings have done is well we propagate our genetics gengus khan or we propagate our ideas jesus christ whose system works better gengus khan or jesus christ what three four hundred millions have million people have gengus khan's dna running through their body they didn't know about it they didn't care well billions of people seem to have jesus christ's teaching dna running through their value hierarchies they don't know about it they don't care but how should you live well in a lot of ways it's interesting because the new test the new testament very much posits a judgment and it's always dependent on what we do but that's not all it's always two things it's what we do and our relational network so these relational networks are really enduring and if you you know thinking about this is sunday leftover so i'm thinking about my sermon and my sermon was all about well okay we've got all these different cosmologies with ascension day relationality seems to be the thing that cuts through and that's where i really much i really land on the spirit of finesse what is wisdom relate personally to the universe well the problem with that is and let's bring in some good verveky solvent solvent you know there's a lot of bs that you can do in there and we see it all the time but i don't think finally approaching the universe i don't think finally approaching the universe with the spirit of geometry can cut it i think you have to approach the universe with the spirit of finesse and i think the human tools that do that are in fact the relational tools blessed is the one who does not walk in step with the wicked or stand in the way that sinners take or sit in the company of mockers but whose delight is in the law of the lord who meditates on his law day and night that person is like a tree planted by streams of water which yields its fruit in season whose leaf does not wither whatever they do prospers not so the wicked they're like chaff their genetics they got none or they're uninteresting their ideas these things that we pour into the world they just blow away it's it's it's basically heresy it's the ideas that can't endure it's the ways of being that can't endure it's it's all of this that can't endure therefore the sinner will not stand in the judgment nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous for the lord watch over again relationality for the lord watches over the ways of the righteous but the ways of the wicked lead to destruction why do the nations conspire in the people's plot in vain the kings of the earth rise up and the rulers band together against the lord against his anointed saying let us break their chains and throw off their shackles the one enthroned in heaven laughs the lord scoffs at them he rebukes them in his anger and terrifies them in his wrath saying i have installed my king on zion my holy mountain i will proclaim the lord's decree he said to me you are my son today i am your father ask me and i will make the nations your inheritance the ends of the earth your possession you will break them with a rod of iron you will dash them to pieces like pottery therefore you kings be wise be warned you rulers of the earth serve the lord with fear and celebrate his rule with trembling kiss his son or he will be angry and your way will lead to destruction for his wrath can swear up in a most flare up in a moment blessed are you who take refuge in him