https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=R8U4UYsoiYE

 you you you you you you you you and we're live we are live streaming from the living stones thing lockdown California this is the bridges of meaning discord server if you are catching the live stream on the camera back a little bit the other way if you're catching the live stream on on YouTube I you can you're certainly welcome to chat in the in the chat box but I don't have that in front of me so I'm not answering questions from YouTube one of these days I'll probably do that Rick is just itching to try super chats we've never done any super chats or anything but if you want to participate in the discussion go to the bridges of meaning discord server the link to that is in the notes and in the chat section Rick has put that in yesterday I launched spur of the moment new thing on the discord server I call the Truman show mostly on the discord server the discord server a lot of you don't especially those watching the YouTube don't know what a discord server is it's a basically a chat program that gamers have used it starts out sort of as text chat and you can do voice chat and now you can also do chat chat and you can do voice chat and you can do chat chat as well video sort of zoom fashion and especially now during covid I'm in this building all by my lonesome and others are working at home and I thought it'd be kind of fun just to just to turn the cameras off and I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to do a little bit of a quick video chat and then I'm going to just sort of throw it on and we don't necessarily have to chat you can even mute your microphone and mute your headphones but just sort of work alongside people and then maybe unmute every now and then and make a little comments so we did that yesterday on the server and that was quite cool. And Sallyisjoe who's an artist that was really cool watching her work because she was painting and working on something and she put the camera on her art as she was doing it She mentioned this of like art studios that are open studios where people can come in and watch the artists or the artists and make their art. And so I shared, I couldn't figure out how to share all the things I was working on. I was working on my sermon, but I was sharing my logo screen as I was working on the Book of Isaiah. Others were doing video editing. So it was a fun time. But as I figured would happen, conversations started developing. And so there were, there were new conversations between new people. So yeah, the, we're using the Discord server as a place to, to hang out and to make new friends and to find community even in the midst of a pandemic. And it's been, it's been really cool. So if you want to check it out, Discord servers are not for everyone. I get that. But you can check out the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and you can check out the Truman showroom. Go there, turn on your camera so that people can see you and work from home, but not alone. That's sort of the goal of that. On Friday mornings, we usually do question and answer. Sometimes we do panel discussions. We don't have a special panel this morning. So I'm just going to keep working my way through the questions and answer. And Zurich04 wrote a question on November 26, 2020. If you want to see the questions while Rick is streaming it, it's right there. But again, if you go to the Discord server, you can jump in the room, mute your mic, and then participate in the conversation and the discussion. Part of the reason I like doing my Q&A's on the Discord server is for example, Zurich is already in the room. He was one of the first ones to jump in. So even after I read his question, if I don't get it right or I don't answer what he's trying to address, we can have a little back and forth and we can have some broader discussions with the rest of the people in the room. Last week I got wrong. I didn't know that Eric, Father Big Mac, was already ordained as a priest in the Roman Catholic Church. So congratulations, Eric. And it was fun seeing him in the Truman showroom yesterday. So I've really enjoyed this Discord server and the potential for building a degree of community and figuring stuff out together. So I will start Zurich 04. I'll start with his question. I didn't really get to that one last time, I don't think. So I've been reading the Transcendentalists and Thoreau for English. Zurich is a young man and he's still in school. And this quote struck me. They who know of no pure sources of truth, who have traced up its stream to higher, stream no higher, stand and wisely stand by the Bible and the Constitution. Drink at it there with reverence and humility. But they who behold where it comes trickling into this lake or that pond, gird up their loins once more and continue their pilgrimage towards its fountainhead. This got me thinking on how a Christian integrates the Bible into his or her understanding of truth, especially from a philosophical perspective. This may be a poor way to word the question, but here it goes. Well, better a poorly worded question than not asking it at all. Is the Bible the ultimate truth in the same way that science is Bret Weinstein's ultimate truth? Or is the Bible perhaps an ultimate truth which must be integrated with things like science? Where is the Bible in the hierarchy if not at the top? Yesterday I just watched your sermon on Sola Scriptura, which is, I think I did that January 2018, that one was a while ago. Or it could have been Reformation, could have been the, I don't remember when I did that. I thought understanding that might be helpful for understanding your answer to this. I also watched the Peugeot-Woodford video and your commentary, so there's another link. Okay, the Bible. And I actually sort of paused my series on my church channel on understanding the Bible. I posted some of those on my personal YouTube channel, which is the biggest of the channels, because figuring out the Bible is obviously an important piece of this. Right now there is a lot of debate in some of the Christian channels on Sola Scriptura. I just saw a video on YouTube from an orthodox priest who used to be a Calvinist minister, and I wouldn't be on that channel just because I don't know all the 21 GIs, though I don't know the whole Muslim community in general, I think I'm slocked on that. So, I'm not going to leave that out. The other question has been about scripture, why is Sola Scriptura the source of the problem? Luke likes to say that on the Discord server, me because the Transcendentalists sort of followed, let's see, one way into it would be C.S. Lewis's comments on pantheism because C.S. Lewis notes that one of the recurring moves in a post-Christian world is for people to discover pantheism and to exclaim that they have found a new thing. C.S. Lewis's comment on that is that they have in fact found the oldest thing, that if there is in fact a default human religion, it's pantheism. And the Transcendentalists had a degree of that in them. And I think that's where you can, you know, the Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, these are documents that come out of the Enlightenment, which has its place in the story of Christianity in the West. And so it's interesting where they sort of say the Bible and the Constitution as sort of a lake or a pond. If you live in New England, like I've spent a fair amount of my life in New England, my mother and sister live there, we vacationed in New England almost every year as a child. You just, you realize that so much of the terrain are these successive ponds along rivers or waterfalls. And so then the Transcendentalists, I think, would imagine that, well, here's this pond or lake of Christianity. And then if you go up to it, then you get to some mystical sources whereby Christianity is seen as yet one of the ponds that's coming from the greater higher truth. And that's sort of the way that thing goes. Now, where is the Bible in this whole process? Well, one of the things you might think about is that unlike, let's say, Islam and even, I'll just pick on Islam now, the Bible, the text itself is not divine. It's sacred in the common sense, but the text points to the text points to God, the text points to life in Jesus Christ. Okay, so the Bible is in that sense instrumental. Now the reformational sola scriptura arose because Christianity throughout its history has always had sort of a restorationist impulse. The idea is that Christianity sort of gets gummed up with the accretions of time and history. And in order for it to be seen afresh and anew, you have to sort of scrape all the barnacles off and get down to the core of it itself. Now, there's a helpful aspect to that restorational impulse. And there is a sort of deceptive aspect to that restorational impulse. I've been reading a book on the reformations. The author makes an important point that what we often today in the Protestant world call the Protestant reformation was really one of a whole series of reform efforts and movements that the church has the church has the church participated in. And it's been pretty foundational and formative for Western history. Part of saying the reformations notes that and Tom Holland notes this, I think quite well in his book Dominion, the church has always had this impulse within it. You can hear this impulse in the words of Jesus, when he speaks to his critics, who are pointing to Moses and Jesus says to them, if you really knew Moses, you would know me. In other words, what, well, except Jesus makes some additional comments where he's saying he loved Moses, which was obviously something that could get you killed where he was at. So, but both this returning to the source and trying to instantiate the essence with the contemporary context. And so Christianity lives within that tension. And and Sola Scriptura, the Protestant impulse was to to go back to, well, again, now we're in the transcendentalist throw. In a sense, the Bible is is following the stream uphill. All right. And and the Bible is God's revelation to us, because it reveals Jesus Christ, who is the definitive revelation to us. It is God made man. And so right there in the idea of the incarnation is this entire other idea of the path that each of us must take. I am the way, the truth and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me, Jesus says. And of course, you can you can pull that apart in many different ways. So the Bible functions by revealing Christ to us. John Calvin. Let me back up a little bit. So what Martin Luther does in the in the heyday of let's call it Renaissance humanism, where and this this movement had been happening for a while. I mean, Luther reads Erasmus. Fatal Discord was a book that I read a couple of years ago, a really excellent book that gets into Erasmus and Luther. But but Erasmus is comparing the Vulgate, the Latin Vulgate to because of the because of the Renaissance and because of the printing press. Better and better. What do we mean by better? Better and better copies of ancient texts are available to harass to Erasmus. And so he starts comparing, he basically starts going back over Jerome's footprints and saying, OK, well, Jerome, what was Jerome doing with translation there? What was what was if we compare the Greek to the Latin Vulgate? Which which is true? Is the older true? Is the is the text closest to the autograph to true? Now you find these impulse going round and round and round, even in the history of Christianity, where you have people who basically say, well, the the King James Version, as I bought it at my Bible bookstore, that's the real Bible and the NIV and the NRSV. You know, they're not they're not quite there. So round and around and around we go trying to figure out, OK, how can we get more pure? And so the idea of prioritizing scripture over tradition was the Protestant Reformation attempt to purify our access to revelation. OK, now the Roman Catholics have a point when they come in and say, well, but church interprets scripture. OK, but the Protestant Reformation came back with a point of saying, well, your interpretation of scripture itself has put you over scripture. And and so again, back and forth across these back and forth across these dichotomies you go. Ultimately, so so John Calvin comes in as a second generation reformer, and Luther had hoped that by sort of getting a scraper out and taking off the barnacles. And that was a progressive thing that happened within Luther. He started wanting to tinker and the church got a little tyrannical and Luther got angrier and the whole thing continued to escalate. And Luther's hoping that, well, if we just kind of scrape the barnacles off, then we'll all agree by seeing scripture as it is. That didn't happen. And so you get to John Calvin in the second generation and he talks about the function of the Holy Spirit in terms of the Holy Spirit. We can only read this the scriptures correctly via the Holy Spirit. And so. So we have to. To a sense, lay our hands on the source to drink the surest water. That's a good impulse. But here's a here's a frustrating. Here's a frustrating concept for you. If you have the absolute purest water in the world, however you define water purity, once your lips touch that water, you have contaminated it. What does that mean? It means we don't get beyond the way that we don't get beyond the contamination we bring to the source. OK, which means that when you read the Bible, you can't help but read it from your eyes. And this is this sense validates Calvin's point that. The Bible itself isn't our God. And the situation is not that if we find the purest tool possible, we can work our way up to God by using that tool and wielding that tool. The process of coming to God begins with God bringing us to himself. And he does that through the work of Jesus Christ, through the work of the Holy Spirit, through the work of the Holy Scriptures, through the work of the church, even through other things that are happening in your life that you might consider to be painful or calamitous or difficult. So this again is. Implicit in even the story that the transcendentalists are telling here is fundamentally an activistic, human centered enterprise by which we are improving ourselves or improving this world or somehow saving ourselves and saving this world by following the streams up the river. And maybe if we can get better tools, better revelation, better sources, then we can have more power. OK, but all of that is set within a world that is not of your making and a story that is not of your starting. And even the purest water is contaminated by anyone's lips who touch it. So this then forces us back into the bigger frame, which is that this is God's story. And when Jesus says no one comes to the Father except through me, Jesus is making a point about how God has reached down to us. Now, none of this invalidates our agency or activity or the fact that we should strive and should seek. And it is not a bad thing to seek after purity. But. You know, to get back to one of my favorite Peugeotian state and states, we are patterns seeing patterns and we can't forget that we are involved in this process. So there's probably way too long of an answer, Zurich. I don't know if you're still in the room. Yes, you are. I don't know if I don't know if this is scratching where you're itching, but go ahead. Yeah, I don't know. I don't know if it's really loud because I'm in a break right now, but it's been going through my head that like that the idea of JavaScript has something wrong to it. And like that doesn't make me want to be converting to Pius. But that idea has been rolling around in my head because the idea of source for tour just emphasizes that or. Breaking off the barnacles idea that you were talking about. And it doesn't prioritize the necessity of the Holy Spirit in that. And I feel like the traditions that don't. That aren't source which are able to manage that more effectively. In conjunction with the necessity for tradition as well. That was really why that quote like caught me is that like I've really just been wrestling with yeah what do we ask for in truth out of the Bible and about God and just to go out and live in accordance to his will. So that answer was really good. I'll ask you to listen to it again later, but yeah that's just where I'm coming from. Okay well I think a lot of people are. So what is the sola in terms of sola scriptura? Well again it's framed in the reformational context where they're prioritizing it over tradition. Now if you read much tradition you'll notice how they prioritize scripture themselves often. And so yesterday I was I was working on my sermon and the text for my sermon is in Isaiah. And Isaiah is this book in the Bible which is. Oh it's a long book and if you are trained like I am in sort of the grammatical historical. Method of interpreting scripture it's a it's a fraught book because there are all these questions. Certainly Isaiah was an individual but is the book only from one individual writing and you know. And you know basically before the destruction of the first temple. Because there are all these you know there's some historical references in there. The truth is we don't know a lot about how and why these books were written. And those questions aren't external to the book. If you pay a lot of attention to the book they're internal and I'm not weighing in on how many Isaiah's and I'm not weighing in on that. Because actually when I keep those questions in mind and I read the book closely. Those questions get more complex frankly you know you have you have Isaiah 35 and you have Isaiah 40. And those two chapters are clearly intermingled. But even when you begin reading the book. The multi-vocal aspect of God's condemnation against Israel for her. For her failure to keep the covenant but God's determined. Commitment to Israel even through disaster. This comes through all throughout the book. So very quickly as I was you know sort of working on. The preamble you know okay what exactly is the book of Isaiah. So many of these issues come to the fore. So then in my office you know behind me I have all these commentaries. I have a bunch of them on the floor by my chair where I was working. You know that one of my favorite commentary series are this. This ancient ancient Christian commentary on scripture. That it's fun because it takes a lot of writings from church fathers. And sort of chops them up and puts them. Puts them you know with Bible verses so a hurried pastor can. Even if he's curious what church fathers said about a certain Bible verse. You don't have to sort of dig through all of their old sermons and treaties and things like that. It's just always interesting reading those because. You get a very clear sense that throughout history. We keep approaching the Bible from different directions with hugely different presuppositions. And and the questions that we bring to the text. Deeply impact what we draw from the text and you know this is this is really interesting. This gets into the whole history of the interpretation of the Bible. This gets really interesting when you're reading ancient treatments of the Bible. Because the whole question of what a book is and how it functions in one life. One's life is very different from the the late modernity assumptions we bring to the Bible. And these issues are are are deeply put into. I mean when we're reading reformational documents. You can even the difference between early reformation and late reformational documents. You can begin to feel the the the changing. The changing ground underneath the writers. They're bringing different questions to the text. And what's really amazing is just how vibrant and living the text seems to be. Throughout all these iterations that someone. Someone like Jerome or someone like Augustine or someone like origin. Or someone like Luther or someone like Aquinas. I mean these are all coming to the same text. And with different questions and different agendas. And they are drawing things out of it that downstream from them. The church continues to feed and to grow from and to participate in the ongoing. Strange tale of history and the enduring story of the church. It's it's just an alarming thing to notice. So. Do you want to understand scripture as scripture alone as in. Excluding other books or scripture in terms of priority. Over other books and again the questions we bring to the text. Very much change the priority which hierarchy do you have in mind. The person at the at the end of their day opens there. Or maybe at the beginning of their day opens the Bible for their quiet time. Maybe they're having troubles at work or troubles in the home. Or or or troubles in relationships or questions of a particular thing. And they open the Bible looking for answers to their troubles. While they're bringing a lot into the text. The grammatical historical interpreter is asking. Real fundamental questions about history but being history through a. A modern historicist lens and examining the text in that way. Again when you read church fathers and their treatment of the text. They're bringing wholly different other elements to the Bible. And what's just amazing that the Bible doesn't disappear. In that withering process which speaks a lot to. The reverence that Christians have of Bible. So I you know it's I'd say Zurich keep keep working through these issues. Keep asking these questions keep you know talking to pastors and priests. And listening to their answers and. Because part of what we're in a one video I didn't make this week. I've always got 10 videos in my head for every video that I do. Usually the videos that get made are the ones that sort of came easiest. But one of the videos that I didn't make this week was the great church reset. Because that's what we're in the midst of. And what's really exciting about this moment is that we're gaining. Input from the Orthodox and the Roman Catholics and various traditions along Protestantism. And these are all coming sort of flowing into YouTube and flowing into social media. And flowing into publishing and all of the traditions are disrupted. But each of the traditions are bringing their riches to the conversation. And whereas these kinds of resets are chaotic and destructive and alarming. They are also generative and fruitful and exciting. And we get to live in those times and you're a part of it. So but I would I would hedge all of that as a pastor and say. Do all of this trusting that that Christ is with you. And that his Holy Spirit will lead you. And holding close to the scriptures. Yeah. Holding close in prayer. So go ahead. Nah. Yeah that's and that trust component is really what I took from your great puzzle video. That video was so helpful. But yeah I mean you know where I'm at right now is I just started reading New Christianity. And I just by the product of my upbringing and what was in there right now. And I'm in the hall of the church and I'm stuck there. And I tried to knock on some doors and it doesn't always work out. But I'm getting to the point where I'm sitting in this. This convergence of all of these different traditions and I find myself. Saying that I need to knock on a door and call it home. Yeah. Yeah. So yeah. And what's interesting is that you know with this great church reset the hallway is very busy. It's sort of like passing period right now. And we've got Protestants checking out the Orthodox and you know you've got Orthodox immigrants who are becoming evangelicals. And I mean it's a very busy passing period right now. And I suspect we're going to see new doorways appear. And in Lewis's frame we're going to be seeing new we're going to see new rooms develop. And now I'm a Protestant and that those kinds of things really annoy Orthodox and Catholics. But the Orthodox and Catholics I don't know the Orthodox as well but the Catholics especially. The Catholic door is its own hallway. Because you have all of these orders and traditions and aspects. And I'll get into trouble here but the person that I assume is president-elect right now which is Joe Biden you know he identifies as Roman Catholic. Think about that. That's a very different that's a very different Catholic than you know how many other. You know how many other Catholics we're having conversations with here and now. So the Roman Catholic Church is itself a huge hallway with many doors of its own. And the room is like that. So yeah and I think you know I know I know you're young Zurich and you're just getting started. And so I'm glad you're in with you know this little part of the hallway and maybe some of the lockers that we have here and more is yet to come. And again all of this trusting in God's goodness towards you and his love for you. And the power of his Holy Spirit to do things and bring things into your life. That may be hard things sometimes but will be for your good and for your salvation. So that's a good question. Yeah good question. Thank you thank you. You're welcome. All right. Iron Turtle. Is the Agent Arena dichotomy a dramatized form of the subject-object dichotomy? I think in some ways yes. When I read your question I thought about Jordan Peterson's is the world a forum for action or a place of objects? And so subject-object distinction is sort of a place of objects perspective on that. But arena agent is much more verb-like. If place of objects is noun-like, agent arena is verb-like and so this is an active space. And so yeah yeah I think that's fair. I don't know if Iron Turtle is in the room and wants to follow up at all. Or does anyone you know even with the first question I didn't really give a chance for anyone else to jump in because I know Iron Root was in the the Truman Showroom this morning and he had a chance. He hasn't been on our server much lately. He's been over at the Awakening from the Meaning Crisis Discord server and doing vervecian meditation and been working on that stuff. And he's done some you know he shared with me he's done some very successful sorting out of his life and he's got a sleep schedule and he's not as depressed. And so he's he's very excited about some of the new things that he's found. And I know that this is and this Discord server a very active place for for people finding new things and working out their stuff and finding conversation partners. So anyone else want to jump into the conversation so far or have a question that they didn't get a chance to post? I just wanted to make a comment about your answer about the passing periods. What I felt was really missing there was the concept of an actual coming millennium of actual God's will being done on earth because it's it's cute for people to change from church to church but I think it's just so important to see a progression that actually culminates in the coming of the Messiah and I realize that's me being my messianist self but that's me. But and that's the part you're playing and so so you're the sandwich you're the you're the guy in the hallway with the sandwich board the end is near stop screwing around knocking on doors being religious consumers and that's I Jacob and I had a really wonderful conversation about you guys aren't really you guys aren't really waiting for Jesus the way you say you are and and I took that as as really important important correction and admonition and he's right it's it's just got a that's got a fraught history in American Protestant Christianity given all of the things that it spawned in the end of the 19th century the Millerites and the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Mormons and so no but I'm I'm I'm really happy you bring that up so thank you Jacob. Jacob Jacob Jacob's worried that I'm too nice and I don't I don't I don't adequately account for people's ill motives so so this has been again this has been for me this discord server for me has been just a real treasure and and the treasure are you all and the chance to get to know and and again the the the real the sad thing is that I don't have enough time to get to know more of you better but those that I get to bump into and have conversations with it's a delight so anybody else on on Zurich or the Agent Arena dichotomy? All right I'll go on to Chris the Pack Rat. Chris the Pack Rat writes on November 27, 2020 recently new recently new theist here in the process of learning prayers and Job's been talking a lot about prayers on the server. Found you from the Peugeot Sargon talk as well. The pope has been speaking about political solidarity among countries and that market capitalism failed in the wake of Covid. Yet we don't have market capitalism and is centralized collect and it is centralized collectivist and top-down redistribute redistributive policies that have caused this by stifling individual freedom and trying to confine everyone within walls of lowest common denominator instead of allowing people to flourish in their own way pace and to their own limitation. I was just watching the crown and Margaret Thatcher in the crown has been has been a lot of fun to watch. This centralization seems to cure the free will of others as CS Lewis would say to remove their individual choice good or bad outcomes. The papacy is seemingly in favor of this flying in the face of free will. I know that eventually evil will fail in a Tower of Babel-esque process and that people will learn not to blindly follow authority figures. That we should follow that is right rather than what feels good. We will once again prosper and be free. It just depends on how much blood must be spilled and suffered and suffering must be endured. I'm currently despairing as to how much suffering we will all have to endure in order for people to learn that a tyrant who is the um who has the approval of his conscience is still a tyrant and that there are many who will not learn. What would be what would be best to do with this information as I'm losing sleep over it? Also do you know that the EU Parliament building design is based on the Tower of Babel? I didn't know any of that. Boy, Pope Francis. Like I said the Roman Catholic door is a hallway full of lots of its own rooms and there's a lot of commotion in the Roman Catholic hallway right now as if there isn't always. There are Roman Catholics among us who can who will wade into that with with their own idea. You know it's it's helpful to remember that this pope comes out of Argentina and if you know anything about Argentina or Latin America they have their whole history too and and Roman Catholic the various schools of Roman Catholic thought and economics is complex as well and so if you if you look at these issues you can look at these issues through lots of different lenses and of course we had a little mention of Sargon of Akkad and Joey mentioned yesterday that he really sort of rose out of the gamer gate thing and and Sargon then sort of was a new atheist and now is sort of in the very much in the same stream you are of is he migrating towards theism or is he playing with stoicism you know where where is Sargon going I don't I don't know I think a lot of these things will flow back into Christianity but obviously Christianity contains free will free market culture warriors and quite socialist Roman Catholics and distributists like like Mary Cohen or the distributist and it's a it's a big living vibrant world now what I want to address is the question that comes at the end of it which is your losing sleep and and be of good cheer little flock for the father's good pleasure to to basically give you his kingdom and so the thing that faith can afford you is in many ways what we all want like the thing that faith can afford you is in many ways what we all want like Frodo we all want our cozy hobbit hole and we sit in our little hobbit holes and we might read the paper and curse popes or kings or or presidents or dictators for what's going on in the world out there and you are quite right and the 20th century validates that that these are real issues they have real consequences there are real stakes whole um you know we've had we had the first world war the second world war the cold war lots of other smaller wars who knows that what will come Jesus himself says well you know wars and rumors of wars earthquakes signs in the heavens Jonathan Peugeot if you ask him about these things he's saying well these are sort of end times things and so Jacob's point will be validated that you know you might not look at Peugeot with us as a sandwich board guy but if you listen to him carefully he makes a lot of those noises so on one hand you're living in a very scary time what faith afford you if you believe in the sovereignty of God and the goodness of his management of the universe and a security that even torture and death cannot threaten you in a sense have the best of both worlds you have an exciting chaotic very live context in which to act meaningfully and purposefully and beneath it you have a bedrock of assurance my mind goes to eric little who was that sprinter that the movie chariots of fire was made from and he became a missionary in china and if you know anything about the history of china in the early part of the 20th century the invasion of the japanese there yeah this is that this is after the do little raid where you know after pearl harbor and america was not ready for that war but was going to become astoundingly ready to crush japan but wasn't ready yet they launched the do little raid where they launched these b25s off of the hornet and bombed you know bombed tokyo tried to go after the imperial palace and then they had to land these b25s or ditch them in china the the the japanese army killed over a hundred thousand chinese simply in um simply as a way to punish the population for not coughing up the pilots this is the world we live in and for many of us who live in the developed west we have lived we have lived with a degree of relevance of of of affluence and security that few places or times in the world have ever known and you're exactly right that through our own stupidity we could throw this all away in the 20th century the beginning of the 20th century germany was in many ways the pre the preeminent nation of the west it had the best schools the best thinking the best industry the best science and in the course of two world wars they threw it all away could we do that yeah and whether whether you're coming at this conversation from the right or coming at this conversation from the left yeah and so the issues are real your agency is needed and you have the opportunity to figure out how you can even from your own perspective try to encourage history to move in the right way but if you are a believer there are some other things that you know you know that you may very well be poured out and god uses his most valued tools and we are his tools you know that's what we are we like to think of ourselves as ends in ourselves and he treats us like that because as louis says in screw tape you know we are we are children that he is growing up into his sons and daughters sons in terms of the old framework of but but we are still his tools and he will pour us out in the great drama that we can't fully understand but as a christian i believe this world can take away my life they can take away my money they can take away my freedom they can take away my comfort they can take away all of these things and all of that would be tragic but they cannot take away god's grip on me romans 8 there's no mountain high enough though no valley low enough used to sing this song when i was seminary intern in columbia missouri no mountain high enough to separate me from god nothing can separate us from him so i understand not being able to sleep that night i understand being anxious about the way the world is going and what hopefully this will do is lead you further into your new theism here to take it to take it not just not just as theism but into a living breathing relationship with a living breathing lord that can use you through the storm and bring you out the other end whereas all of the suffering and turmoils can turn you into a saint c.s lewis has some of these amazing images that when god is done with you you will be the kind of creature that if you were to see him or her today you would be tempted to worship but that refining can only be done by fire and so i would say the only way to actually both be effective in terms of changing the world for the better and be able to sleep at night is to move directly into finding god's sovereignty and trusting that his use of you will both change the world for the better and have you growing in in some of these ways where you can you you might you might become the greatest culture warrior there has ever been which is would have to be in the image of jesus christ because he is the greatest culture warrior who has ever been and at the same time you will have the same sort of strange discord between you discord and excellencies where you can denounce you can denounce religious opponents as whitewashed tombs and at the same time die on the cross for their well-being that's who jesus was and that's how jesus rewrote the code of civilization as tom holland has written and on one hand we see jesus sweating drops of blood in the garden of gethsemane over what it would cost him but also being to able to say not my will but yours be done and when the soldiers come to arrest him it says here i am and so you get the both work you get the best best of both worlds with christianity you get the drama of being of of leaving your hobbit hole and you get the security of nothing can separate you from god and that's what i want for you i don't see chris in the any any any other comments on that or follow-ups from those who are gathered in the in the voice chat you you okay max of meaning jordan b peterson and jonathan hate height each teach that individual personality traits say the big five scales openness orderliness map onto differences in political and moral reasoning i think they're right my question to what degree are doctrinal divisions among pro-constant denominations merely capitulations of personality differences which serve as scriptural filters and membership bottleness i think there is truth to that that in again we are legion within in that we have a kind i usually articulate this in terms of our consciousness congress and so there are parts of us that are high in openness and there are parts of us that are low in openness i mean we've got that all within ourselves and we scale up into principalities we voltron where we sort of come together and different protestant traditions will manifest different personality aspects in their history but like us down those of us wrapped in skin here that will be within as well as without in other words i have those personality matrices within me but i express that complexity outwards and can be measured to the degree that a a test can measure it so yes that's that's what goes on in protestant denominations there's a book by richard foster streams of living water which is really a lovely book which goes into some of this where and it doesn't go into it along the lines of personality profiles but it goes into along the lines of certain emphases in different church traditions that probably could be mapped in some ways onto personality profiles i like richard foster's book streams of living water and i also like tim keller's observation that when revival happens all of those streams come together that you find you have a church which is deeply powerful at prayer which is which is deeply attentive to the scriptures which has a a deep heart for justice not not just for i'm i was singing you know we're singing a song at living stones last week and you know justice is a lot in it now with all of the stuff going on you know i sometimes sort of flinch when you hear the word justice because it's been associated with so many different things i'm not going to surrender that word um and i don't want to surrender that word why because it's a the word comes before our current little dust up over this thing or that thing and the word is deeply biblical and we want justice for the world but there's justice and there's mercy and it's and it's all got to come together and so when these moments in human history when god sort of you know puts the church on steroids and you can find those places in little places like there was a revival in new york city in the 19th century and the transformation of of of korea into you know right now the the persecuted church in north korea and the and the churches in south korea there are times and places the great awakenings when when god sort of the church just goes and and all of those things come together and it's it's not unlike what happens in in a saint and a remarkable christian person when they don't lose their aspects of personality they're still high in openness or low in openness they're still high in neuroticism or low in neuroticism but but but somehow god uses that to make from them an extraordinary human being and and we see this in in protest denominations or in all denominations i think you know what we're seeing right now in north america is the the a flourishing of the orthodox church i think that's a even as a dutch calvinist and from a struggling denomination i celebrate that flourishing with them because that means that some of the treasures that god has placed in orthodoxy will now be available to to those who are not in the church and and the church overall will will grow as a as a as a result of that protestant churches have had their days in the sun so yeah the personalities map onto politics map onto i mean that's that's why humanity is so complex oh we got a little bit more about calvinism here's an example to play with is calvinism versus armenian is a temperamental difference disguised as scriptural interpretive difference is limited atonement secretly about orderliness oh that's good that's good defining the boundaries of the elect and the not elect yeah that's a great question and i think there there definitely is something to that i i think you know i get a lot of questions about well paul you're not really a calvinist because calvinists look like that and they usually point to a lot of uh presbyterian usually um uh young restless and reformed types and i i always put people to richard mueller he taught um the the graduate program at calvin seminary he was uh nathan jacobs who has been on my channel nathan jacobs was that did his doctoral work at calvin seminary and went on to orthodoxy but but speaks very highly of richard mueller richard mueller has a delightful paper that you can google and find was calvin a calvinist and what he does in that paper is is is help as a richard mueller is a historian helps sort of piece together the complexities of this tradition part of the reason i think we saw the the the tensions that get expressed in documents like the the cannons of dork and and reasons some of those tensions got expressed in the young restless and reformed movement that tended to accentuate what the english reformers would call the doctrines of grace some of these aspects that people look at to to sort of identify calvinism is because these are philosophical these are philosophical tensions in the culture that are getting played out now the fact that these things will map onto personalities so if you want to really take a look at the question of we like to think about these personality traits within what frame you know psychology started imagining oh we're mapping homo sapien okay what is a human being and so they did all of this work only to a number of years ago horrified discover that you know to the to the post-modernist delight well you're doing all this testing on young american college students and you are extrapolating this universally about human beings the category human being is also nested within a philosophical assumptions and so all of this all of this supposed science of your psychology is nested within time and space so these personality scales if you if you could test them 2000 years ago would you find the same distributions well you say well i can't do that because i can't go back 2000 years ago right will they still be valid 100 years from now maybe we can't answer these questions so what i'm saying is that these the the personality tests traits temperaments it's all part of one big huge stream and it's all interconnected and so that that you that you will find mappings between temperance and theological traditions shouldn't surprise us at all and so finding these links and finding these tendencies but then we'd say okay so so so what conclusion do we discover that the orderliness of limited atonement is somehow conditioned by genetic tendencies probably but something like limited atonement functions in different ways also within different times and places and different traditions so part of what we can't help but do as modernists is always try to elevate ourselves above the terrain act as if we have a monarchical vision and pass judgment on all the little earthlings beneath us that's just the modernist tendency and okay that's what we do but you don't live your life way up there in the clouds looking down below and if you try it's not a terribly satisfying place to to live either so we we live in the midst of this maelstrom and we navigate within it so yeah i think it's i think it's a great point and anybody else want to chime in on this before we move on or you have another question you want to get in i don't know how many questions we got today let's see if you've been added quiet room today rick all right can i can i follow up on that yes yes go right ahead sorry i i got a call right as i was about to speak i know a lot of you are working so that's why i started the truman showroom so and again i i saw max of meaning yesterday and i see these names on the discord server but once i have a face to connect to the name well now it's now it's just it's it's easier and more meaningful so we'll let max do his job uh grim grizz lots of good if you haven't listened oh go ahead can you hear me now yep yeah i guess just just to put that question um you know i've been a big fan of scott adams and and you know and peterson and jonathan height in illuminating how the personality differences play out especially in the political sphere and i guess i'm just trying to make some sort of connection between the political pattern disruption and a potential religious pattern disruption or how much of polarization and say american politics is people not being awakened to the fact that our personality differences are being weaponized against each other and i'm wondering if and i'm wondering how much of division amongst churches might fall into a pattern like that yeah yeah that's a really good point so so the meaning crisis proceeds when we we discover just how chaotic and complex the universe is and we discover just how hackable people are what we do in a democracy is we elevate people once you elevate people you elevate the inset you elevate the incentive to weaponize people and you know this is this is this is an old game and and at the beginning of the 20th century you know bern i'm going to be talking to bern again next week um you know bern has done a lot of talk about propaganda well with mass media it was relatively easy to propagandize the populace and so if you listen to hardcore history you know the rape of belgium mobilizes the the british empire to get involved in keeping germany from eating france now obviously in the second world war germany succeeded in eating france and um and england got a reason why well in the first world war it was their best in their best interest to not let germany grow too large so but but propaganda when you have relatively few sources of information yeah you you weaponize it and and you you change everybody's minds and you weaponize the people the we have had the i mean it came in stages we had when i was growing up we had limited networks and they all seemed to say the same thing and then we had cable tv and now we have the internet surprise surprise we're all over the place surprise the prize we can't we can't get um massive coalitions every election is is like you know 47 53 or 49 51 and the senate is almost evenly divided we've gotten better and better and better and better and both sides are are raising their level of excellence and competency at weaponizing the populace and getting people to go along with their ideas and framing the world in their way and we we look at and mock non-player characters and then we are non-player characters and we don't know when we're being programmed by paul vander clay or scott adams or cnn or fox news or or or bright bart or a russian bot or you know on and on and on and on and on yeah we're uh we're in the middle of this and anybody who's going to figure out the button to play whether that's being therapeutic or being a fear monger or you know create taking uh taking some political ideas and turning them into an ideology in order to have the masses feel meaning as they march in the streets either to protect america from the other side or rewrite american history according to some script weaponizing grievances against some other group yeah this is a very dangerous game and i can understand losing sleep but you know oh we're so excited about learning how human beings really operate oh and more powerful players aren't going to figure out how to do this for financial and political ends all part of the all part of the game well it's a good question grim grizz a great conversation with grim grizz if you haven't watched it um you know we'll have to talk again he's he's incredibly fun to talk to fun fun guy hey paul which discord room is most appropriate for other channels to lure your discordant sheep to their shows you can come to the truman showroom um i don't know you you'll have to ask uh you'll have to you know there's a number of you who are who are far better at the discord than i am and and you're in many there's the discord has grown and there's many different spaces and cubby holes in it to find your niche and find your little community so that's a good thing all right as they would say in the thriving metropolis of rip in california amand tree uh writes spiritual kingdoms oh boy this is a long one joey's joey's gotta have a fit i've been looking at the spirit of kingdoms through the scriptures the scriptures as there is a heavenly jerusalem it makes sense to me that there would be a heavenly version of these kingdoms that still exist that is an interesting idea babalon probably here's the thing preachers have been doing this forever the jezebel spirit dare to be a daniel we have been principalizing we you know this this is again this is how you hack people you hack people with stories um babalon pride self-exalting of the man that the proud the book of isaiah has the proud city and the humble city uh assyria affliction oppression persecution egypt flesh materialism tire the flow and transfer of wealth and merchandise the heavenly merchant city possibly something like a wall street or stocks or the gold standard you know all of who is the prince of persia in the book daniel is the principality of a population it's very much like you're talking about now here's your question is the does the does the earthly instantiation create the principality or has the principality created the earthly instantiation or does it go back and forth that's if you think about it that way you can see you can understand the polls when rationality rules talks to jonathan peugeot and understand verveckian ideas of of middle things of back and forth even though vervecki is a physicalist a non-theist so these are this is the stuff we're talking about what are your thoughts on this this is the stuff we're talking about i am also having trouble trying to grasp the spirit of older kingdoms before the books of the prophets such as canaanites jebusites philistines yeah we have and this is where you know the grammatical historical approach to scripture has fallen on hard times and perhaps deservedly so it's a product of modernity in some ways and it's it's receding but the the basic idea of the the the you know the the effort at archaeology discovery and modernist style history to dig into the past you know why what why does the bible have this posture towards the canaanites it has a you know uh in some cases a genocidal posture towards this civilization what's with that and of course people today look at and say via via contemporary humanism oh i can't i can't believe the bible because of that posture and it's like well you get your humanism from the bible and you turn that around and say you can't believe it at some point you might cut off the you might cut off the limb you're sitting on but anyway jebusites are described as lame and blind which makes me think of complacency maybe but you know recognize what we're doing sort of projecting into the past on very little information um i think the philistines lived along the coast lands and they they worship the the god daegon which um which was a big fish you think the philistines correspond to the kingdom of tyre in some way yeah probably they're they're swimming in the same cultural things but that's that's highly low resolution you know it's important remember we don't know a lot about a lot of this and much of what we've learned has just been in the last couple of hundred years with some archaeology and some broader studies as we have more and more information available to us but we don't know much tyre is described as a merchant city the harlot of the sea which makes me think of the siren song of money we seem to use similar terms when we call people big fish in the air okay see this is this is both the power and the this this is this is so so symbolism fell on hard times for a reason and symbolism is enjoying a renaissance for a reason you push almost anything too far and it gets decadent and it loses its value and then the other side sort of comes up and and so ideally you want to both understand symbolism and appreciate sort of the dramatic historical approach as well i was just wondering your thoughts on this and if you have any understanding of the older kingdoms listed in scripture like in joshua to second samuel also wondering if you have any insight on on the spirit behind kingdoms such as edam moab and amon yeah and and again it's the bible links these things and so so not only in terms of let's say the prince of edam or the prince of moab or the prince of amon now pay attention the prince of persia arises in the book of daniel which is which is really part of the transition from a hebru perspective on the world into the perspective that we will find inhabiting the first century you know the the the first century and and the the end of second temple judaism and so there's there's that stuff moving in it as well when think about it this way i i just recently found it somebody in the comments section pointed me to the the useful charts channel on youtube which which i found fascinating he does genealogies on these charts and it's it's pretty cool stuff now looking at seems sort of like a typical progressive late modernist that our culture has majored in producing but his charts are really cool and he's doing some some nice good spade work in terms of okay these are the people in the bible this is what the bible's saying about them so that's all really useful in daniel you find the prince of persia when you are reading about iam and moab and amen in the old testament hebrew scriptures you're reading them in the light of the book of genesis and so whereas in sort of hellenistic intertestamental ish fashion in the book of daniel and in the biblical notice notice the conceptualization of the spiritual compare that to the familial conceptualization of the book of genesis moab and ben amin are sons of lot edam is the brother of jacob so in other words in a genesis conceptualization their family it's fundamentally a relational a horizontal relational conceptualization the prince of persia is more is more vertical we're richer for having both conceptualizations but it's helpful to notice that all of these cultures are in continuity with each other and and then of course you have jesus talk jesus exercising demons and and talking as he does and then you have the continuing development of that in the in the patristic period so there's tons going on in in the video that i made commenting on the adam friended jonathan peugeot conversation you know i was i was you know sam sam on the server sam adams you know they mentioned justin martyr a couple of weeks ago and it stuck in my head and i had a little extra time thought i want to pull out some justin martyr and start reading them and so i was reading justin martyr and doing a little about justin martyr how he's a samaritan basically in that area um you know a middle middle second century dating so very early you know you could read him and let's say clement together at the same time but when you read justin martyr you're reading someone very different from let's say the book of james in the bible who you know perhaps comes from james the just who you know a lot of a lot of people believe that that was jesus brother james and james the just becomes the ship of jerusalem becomes a pretty big wheel he's mentioned in in first corinthians 15 and if you read the book of james and you read justin martyr you know the book of james is a deeply jewish book you know the book of james is a deeply jewish book luther didn't like it it's a deeply jewish book and and i'd really love to hear uh jacob's take on the book of james um now you read justin martyr this is someone that is that is obviously a product of helenism just his conceptualization his engagement with philosophy all of that okay now where do we put the apostle paul in that picture so here then not a lot of time at least to us looking back you've got radically different cultural canvases upon which christianity is painted you see the deeper you dive into these things the more complex it all gets yet it's it's it's of a whole it's of a whole nobody in the you know in the circles that in the orthodox or the roman catholic or the christian reform church are going to throw out the book of james and and none of them are going to despise justin martyr but they're from radically different cultures so so yeah spiritual kingdoms what do you mean by spiritual where is that located is it located in the heavenlies is it located relationally in terms of our past in sort of the edam moab amon genesis configuration or in the book of daniel prince of persia configuration i mean this stuff this stuff goes lots of different ways and places oh we've got more from amon tree i'm not sure if i get two questions all right let's see let me see if you're in the room you're not okay i'm not sure if i get two questions nope no more questions but this one shorter okay have you ever seen game of thrones i think i saw some of one episode so no if so well i haven't so yeah two questions but i can only answer one because i don't really know anything about game of thrones um prophet zacharias the holy woken empire is rising out of the ashes of christendom and modernity yes indeed that's clever with all the nonsense coming out of the of academia amending the the hippocratic oath to reflect social justice criteria for example do you think the christians who burned the library at alexandria were hot to burn the library i am unfamiliar with the the group who burned the library of alexandria or what was in it um but as a dutch calvinist i can't wholly cleanse myself from from from from a history of burning uh artifacts so i don't know i don't know i don't know much much of anything about that let's see if uh let's see if the prophet is in the room he is not anybody else want to weigh in on any of these last two questions okay clepa clepa heidegger with the roles of giftings of pastor and teacher being different so i haven't posted yet but um got sank stock has posted on his channel the conversation that we had this week and actually guy and i go a lot into this pastoring stuff and i go into some of my own history with the roles of gifting of pastor and teacher being different although intersecting why do you think the teacher side has won out so prevalently and is what many think of when thinking of what a pastor is okay i'm gonna make i'm gonna make a point here that i've made a number of times recently about medium discord youtube voice and video are the mediums or medium the plural of mediums is media are the media through which we are attempting to engage and illuminate this vast reality that we are a part of the old statement the medium is the message points to the fact that every medium illuminates and distorts at the same time part of the reason teacher is forefronted on youtube in print on youtube and in print and in audio podcasts is a function of the distortion of the medium of the media because that's what can be conveyed through the medium because that's what can be conveyed in that way see now i'm always you know i remain a dutch calvinist but i want to give the other traditions there do sola scriptura forefronts what the medium of writing equips sola scriptura is not so much in competition with tradition as it is with apostolic succession what is apostolic succession apostolic succession is the idea that peter had a disciple and those who follow peter in his office have learned something from peter and so you sort of have a daisy chaining through history of people in an office now this type of communication is susceptible to the telephone game that ten generations after peter is the office the still say is still the same thing and that's where something like text is really valuable because it transmits in a way that apostolic succession can get fuzzy with but then you have the other problem that a thousand years later if i'm reading an ancient text text i might not really have any idea whether i'm following play dough or this text and that's obviously where the whole idea of john calvin of the holy spirit comes in because calvin recognizes that there these were renaissance humanists who paid a paid a a lot of attention to ancient texts and if you do that you are going to bump into the fact that you reading them is not the same as a contemporary reading them so well how does that get into the roles of pastor and teacher most pastoring except on my channel um most pastoring has no has no one else that's not exactly true a lot of pastoring does not have other people watching it's private conversations it's one-to-one relationships it's personal relationships so um someone in my church i maybe i went to lunch with them it isn't on zoom i didn't post it on youtube they share something with me about their life they they share they share something that they're not going to share on youtube or with another person because there's a there's a confidence of of confidentiality that's part of my vow even u.s legal code recognizes it and and so that's part of what we do and that's always there if you one of the things that is emphasized in seminary training is that your teaching and your pastoral care reinforce each other when i preach a sermon it's not just here's the you know in a modernist way elevating myself outside of history saying this is what the bible says read the bible yourself i am contextualizing the bible to the people and all teaching is like that and so while different they intersect and this is where sizes of church matter because if you're the pastor of a local mega church of thousands of people you've got to get your signals from somewhere now what on earth has happened to me in my job description you know i don't know because on one hand i'm the pastor of a tiny little covid church where we can hardly meet and where i can't make hospital visits and where i'm reluctant to make home visits because of everything going on but i have lots of interest interaction on discord and zoom and youtube and email and twitter so i'm getting all those signals but i'm i'm also so what what is so so iron root came into the truman show room this morning and i hadn't seen him for a while and so we chatted because he's been over in the verveky area doing meditation and learning some other things and talking to mary cohen and you know he's been he's been swimming in this little court on the internet and i a lot of you know iron root better than i do because you've spent more time on the on the discord server than i have but you know got this little little bit of a conversation with him and so all of that floods into my teaching as well and so let's see where's the question here um why do you think the teacher side has one out because of the medium well i don't know that it's one out i can thousands of people can watch a youtube video of me i only have 24 hours in a day in which i need to eat and sleep and maintain a marriage and be a father and run a little church and climb up on ladders with rick and put light diffusers in and move a sofa and get gas and do the grocery shopping and get my sermons done and so my ability to engage in interpersonal relationships is limited but you see the teaching and is is what um and is what many think of when they're thinking of what a pastor is this is part of the reason i you know i opened up the truman showroom on the discord server because uh all the time throughout my whole career you get jokes pastors only work one day a week yeah because you see us on sunday and what really do pastors do what do you do during the week people will ask well so here's a little window you can see what i do during the week you can see me fixing my computer or reading a book or talking to someone on the phone i keep the mic off and the sound off because the conversation i'm having with someone on the phone isn't for you hopefully you're not reading lips you know we'll have to do like the nfl guys um so yeah this is but it's all of a whole and that's really important for the teaching because if the teaching is going to be relevant and transformational and life-changing it's going to have to connect with the individual somehow um i said some slasher fudge yeah there's always slash and fudge context i just got to the part of your discussion with guy when you're discussing the grandfather and the question hatched yeah and so i go into that conversation with guy where you know trying to understand myself and my grandfather was you know according to according to many my grandfather was a very dull preacher and congregations chafed at that my grandfather at before meals would say it would offer the prayer and it would go on and my grandmother who was far less patient would sigh why in the middle of the prayer like why is he taking so long the food's gonna be cold but you know she also was raised in a tradition where she was going to be submissive so she was mostly submissive but she couldn't stop herself from sighing and the rest of the family hearing her sigh and on and on and on and then my father was quite a bit better of a preacher than my grandfather i suspect um but also had a pastoral heart and i you know received from them what what i have and so that's the weird thing that generations pile on each other so yeah preaching i can put a i can put a sermon on youtube but and part of the reason i started playing around with with discord and zoom and all of this was that's an attempt to try to at least put something of a relationship on youtube and and what i i didn't even this wasn't the plan i was just kind of doing stuff and stuff happened if a but but but it did happen because job starts having conversations on discord the way i'm having conversations on zoom he picked up something and then he and then he i modeled it and he repeated it and so you know sometimes we can despair the non-player character aspect of human beings but that's that's in many ways our great power so any any follow up on that anyone want to comment on that dynamic nathan woods what's up with airplane food i don't know i don't know the last time i got fed i can probably guess the last time i got fed on an airplane but most of the time don't even feed you anymore all right grim gris again my favorite internet pastor said you can pull that apart in many different ways in reference to jesus saying i am the way the truth and the life could you please pull apart i am the way part well you can pull that apart a lot of different ways too jesus and again i i love i love so much i so value jacob's presence on this discord server because he brings stuff here that nobody else does because of his knowledge of um his story so it's so funny listening to jacob because you know for all of his issues with paul of tarsus he he really can connect with jesus and and he can connect with jesus because he recognizes some of this stuff jesus how did jesus change the world jesus didn't write a book think about that he didn't write a book jesus didn't say oh here's here's what the world really needs to know what do you mean no i mean we're gonna we're gonna write this stuff down and we're gonna get transmitted now okay well i'm protestant his words did get transmitted by his disciples in other words we're getting the class notes we're not even getting the class notes we're getting the memories well why because there was a tradition of master and disciple of teacher and disciple and jesus only to the degree that we know did this gig for three years that's an astoundingly short amount of time i've been on youtube now for three years and quite frankly accomplished far less by virtue of the fact that nobody's put me on a cross yet so you know that's what jonathan was i'm not i'm not disclosing jonathan was frustrated that he couldn't express himself well and i said well jonathan i said you know the son of man came and expressed himself for three years and got crucified for it so be careful what you ask for but jesus what jesus did was and this also sort of gets into caleppa's point jesus poured himself into his disciples in a visual tangible face-to-face non-mediated way for three years and that plus the holy spirit rewrote the code of human history in an astoundingly profound way to the degree that we're only starting to recognize it after christendom continues to decline that's what jesus did those disciples of jesus could recognize his smell what does that mean well if you're around people you get to sense that different people have different smells i can just the other day i was i smelled a smell that reminded me of the house of another family in our church in paterson and northside and and every now and then i'll catch a smell that was the smell of my kindergarten building that was the smell of my grandma's house different people are associated with different smells and smells are really close to memory jesus disciples knew his smell and you know they weren't living in some boxified world like we are so let's say me and rick and john vandonk and jobe go on a road trip you know um you know if if me and rick or me and jobe or heaven forbid me and john vandonk gotta share a double bed oh boy you know i you can ask jobe about how i woke him up one morning at john vandonk's house um when you live and you know these people live together they slept together they um they ate together they you know had to take care of their other bodily necessities together they were on boats together they walked together in part of the real fun of the of the of the trip that kovac cut short of the the myself and john vandonk and jobe and rod hughin was the car time together and the jokes and the and and it's through this that jesus jesus filled his disciples lives even judas who betrayed him and and you you don't know hate until you know love and and that's how jesus changed the world in just three years without writing a book now you might say well how can jesus be the way well if jesus was so powerful as to change the world through these disciples that again if you read the gospels are complete idiots sometimes you know he's the master and peter dares to to to contradict him and when jesus says uh we're gonna go to jerusalem and i'm gonna be turned over into the hands of gentiles and crucified and then they stop hearing and peter's like we're not gonna let that happen jesus and jesus says get behind me satan jesus is the way well what does that mean how how can we follow jesus so i talked to nick this week and again if you i know that not not near as many people watch the conversations watch some of the monologues and i totally get that but my conversation with nick this week was just precious because you know here's a guy here's a young good-looking talented man who gets cancer and his life has been through the wringer trying to save it and he learns that the you know the institution that is saving him is also killing him and and and what what has grown i talked to i looked it up i talked to nick you know a year my last conversation we posted was october of 20 maybe two years 2018 i just talking to him this time i could just sense the growth in him that the the the formation of christ in him and he's reading he's reading russians who who endured you know catastrophe and he's learning the way of christ through this chain of christians on through history so that is the way and to to go back to the earlier question about you know the the anxiety christ the the pack rat the anxiety about what's going on in the world and in politics and economics and and and the fear of the rise of tyranny and and all of that jesus knew his engagement in his culture war was going to cost him his life and that wasn't we shouldn't get docetic or or overly theoretical with that jesus jesus understood what crucifixion meant far better than we did because he saw it he saw romans crucifying people he knew they would strip him bare now jesus got double treatment because he was both flogged and crucified usually they did one or the other because why would you want to take why would you want to take away the sport of crucifixion by weakening someone with flogging so jesus knew exactly what was coming his way and his loss and his suffering was real and he had the kind of power and spirit to walk into that and and we see other stories of that sometimes i mean soldiers know that soldiers go into the teeth of death because because their friends are going to and so jesus says i am the way or the way to what well the way to everything i am it is my way if you live my way and you know one of the things that nick said was you know he's been reading dallas willard and if you've read dallas willard and knowing what nick's life is like i'm not surprised he's reading dallas willard because part of dallas willard's focus even though dallas willard was a professor of philosophy at university of southern california and a an expert on on husserl on phenomenology and all of these things there's a there's a biography out about dallas willard now and i always enjoy biographies about some of the people that that i've i've read and appreciated dallas willard majored in okay can we discover the way of jesus can we live the way of jesus and that's what a disciple is that's what a christian is supposed to be someone who is being discipled by jesus and what that means in our culture war is yeah you're not really going to avoid the culture war jesus didn't avoid his culture war jesus went right into the teeth of it in such a way that he annoyed both sides so much they both wanted him dead it's the only thing they could agree on but in the midst of that culture war he changed the world do you want that kind of power you know i see eric and brett weinstein you know wanting to change the world and save it jesus says if you want to save your life you're going to lose it well start pondering that statement and jesus says well anyone who would you know gain his life must lose it and take up your cross and follow me what does follow mean it means jesus is the way he is the model you are the disciple you might say well i'm not living in the first century no you're not and so all of that translation what does that mean for you here and now what does that mean with all of the particularities that are built into you how can you be his disciple today what does that look like and if you look throughout the history of the christian church at people like people like saint francis of assisi how can he be jesus' disciple and and that in the midst of your personality profile in the midst of your spiritual gifts and the absences and the weaknesses that you have in your heart and your life all of that flows into discipleship and to be a disciple of jesus is to not only be transformed from the inside out but to rewrite the code of human history after you that's what a christian is now you might say well we've only know the names of certain astounding christians who have done incredible things and every one of the things that those astounding christians have have done themselves is is limited and flawed in one way or another but at the same time nobody might ever know your name you know you might say well here paul's on a youtube right now and talking and people are listening and yada yada yada a year from now i might be forgotten a hundred years from now i almost assuredly will be forgotten but we are impacting each other now all of this is in play now and we really don't know the part that god will do with what we do maybe it's being a mother maybe it's being a maybe it's working in an office someplace we don't know but god knows and and he will do it and and he will do it where does that start with jesus being the way of learning how to be a disciple of jesus what does that mean well where do i start well you know read dallas willard start you know he writes a lot about that but it's all over the place that's what the the business of the church should be disciple making if not i'm wondering if not having a cata catechesis that's that's the formation of a disciple for converts just baptized and attended seems weakens overall protestant faith yeah you know again read dallas willards and willard in that dallas willard was dallas willard grew up southern baptist and was you know really upset by aspects of his tradition that the church was not making disciples of jesus now that's a very live conversation because for some people making disciples of jesus is being really woke and being really activistic and and being out there on the front lines for against the patriarchy and against racism and yada yada yada some people are seeing it that way and other people are no being disciple of jesus is you know being really into symbolism and icons and and the divine liturgy and and supporting the growth of your of your orthodox church and so so yeah there's this plenty going on in that too but don't think that that wasn't going on in jesus day because remember some of jesus disciples started with john the baptist a guy who from prison sends a messenger and says to jesus um you know i all that stuff i said about behold the lamb of god and the baptism and the sandals untying but like i'm watching you and you're running around with your disciples and you're like healing on the sabbath and your disciples are munching on grain that they gather on the sabbath and and i'm a little confused i'm a little skeptical that you know i i was sort of expecting you know the clouds to part and the lord to come down and something at the end of infinity wars you know when there's a big battle and that's that's what i was looking for and jesus says hey look around the blind see the deaf hear the lame dance dead are getting raised from the dead into life again the good news is preached to the poor there's your answer but what does messiah mean um john of course will be killed jesus will be killed the disciples of jesus say they saw him he ate a fish they say he ascended into heaven and is ruling from heaven now everybody in the ancient world would have understood what that means we just think what's above is like nothing and you need a spacesuit and maybe a space station so that's all of the translation we have to do but christians say what's the path they point to jesus and say that's the way okay and well that's really complicated so okay i'll break it down what? trust in jesus more than you trust in yourself how do i do that well i then the thing i would say is you need to find some people around you who are doing that and who however god is calling you and whatever group of people around you to do that with so i think that's a good way to wrap it up today what do you think rick rick says okay all right he's amiable so um cool cool so any any last comments anyone wants to make before i shut it down before we go to the after party rick says no nope we are broadcasting right rick yes we are okay although nancy said last sunday that she didn't get the the livingstone stream on facebook i knew that would get that reaction out of rick anyway thank you all for gathering and we'll have rick end the live stream and then we'll have our after party but i'm sitting here sipping on tea and i gotta um anyway so and and maybe yeah maybe rick and i will drop in the room or we'll figure out what to do so and rick and i have to put uh bathing caps on lights up at the ceiling of the living stones world center so um that's what's on tap for this afternoon so thanks for joining us thanks for listening and um yeah sorry if i didn't get to your question yet but probably next week i'll just i'll mark i'll mark as far as i got so i can remember next week all right thanks rick you can take us away