https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=oz0zCIlN8JY

 Good morning everyone and welcome to this Friday livestream. I didn't do last week I did the bridges of meaning question and answer. So I didn't do a week in review. So I'll be looking at some of the other videos from the week before. Why do I do this? It lends itself because of the process of my channel and I know some people grab a headline or a thumbnail or a title and they jump in and then they're sort of shocked at what they find that this guy won't get to the point and he sort of rambles. Well the channel I in fact do use to think out loud and you can tell Jeff from who started Rando's United was in town yesterday and we had a little chat and he asked me about ADHD and I think yeah I'm very ADHD. If you want to know at least a tenth of what is rolling through my head you can watch my channel because it's probably about the correct proportion and for every video I make I could make nine more. I just don't have the time to make nine more and I doubt even this channel would bear the making of 10 times as many videos as I already make which is quite frankly too much if I wanted to be a successful YouTuber. But here we are. What happens then is after I make a video as with the video I released today, Beasts and Swarms of the Sea Vying to Colonize Your Soul, I hadn't completely finished the Megan Phelps-Roper Oxford interview. I'm currently actually listening to the Sam Harris Making Sense interview with Megan Phelps-Roper and I hadn't finished the Elon Musk interview. I found a copy of it in its entirety which was super helpful to sort of gain perspective on and so I always have the videos that I make are for the most part sort of a dipping into my mental process and giving you just a taste of what I'm thinking about in that moment and often what happens is it's the end of the day and I think I've got enough time to make a video and so I will sit down and I'll think of all of the things rolling through my head over the last 24 to 48 hours, what seems most salient and then I'll just pick something and there's usually three or four or five different ideas. Some of sometimes those ideas will stay with me a number of days and they'll get a little bit more ripe and then they'll become a video. Sometimes those ideas will sort of pass and then months or weeks or months later they'll sort of crop up again and I'll make a video about them again. So what I'm doing with sort of these week in reviews is to sort of go back over to maybe it's a, maybe that's what I'll have to put a thumbnail on. This is a cow chewing its cut. I'm ruminating on the videos that I've made over the last couple of weeks and give you some upcoming thoughts. Now I've got the comment section on in my stream yard so if you have a question I'd say ask the question about the video I'm talking about and just put question in all caps. Obviously some people use super chats which is fine. Superchaps gets my attention very easily. Yes, yes, Andrea, I just started this. I had to stop midway through the Benjamin Boyce conversation to jump into the live stream. Sorry, Eric. Yeah, and I won't, I'm sure I'll talk a little bit about the Benjamin Boyce conversation with Peugeot and Wockel because that was a big thing that happened this week and this was a very rich week. This was a very rich week. Actually the last two weeks were quite rich. So when I talked to Jonathan Peugeot with the Benjamin Boyce thing, I know that he had been doing a ton of traveling and while I really enjoy traveling, I also really enjoy not traveling because not traveling allows me to travel via podcasts and YouTubes and books and to let me make videos. And so traveling means I can't make so many videos. And usually the events, so we have an event coming up in May in Southern California with John Verbecky and Jonathan Peugeot. And then there is an event at the end of July in Washington, D.C. with Mark from More Christ and Joe from Gist of Joe and Spencer Claven and Michael the Sofiologist. And so I really have to, I've had one conversation with Michael. I haven't had any conversations with Spencer Claven, so I really have to sort of track him down and see if I can bring him in for a Rando's conversation because there's probably a lot to talk about. So let's jump in. Can't stay, but good morning. Good morning. Michael Martin. Thank you, Mark. Thank you, Mark. So let's let's jump into the week. Where's my mouse? Here's my mouse. Let's jump into let's see how big can we get this? All right. Is this? Yeah, there we go. Let's let's jump into a couple of weeks in review. A couple of weeks ago, the Monday video was a so my situation with the Exodus series, I know there are a number of people out there that say, Paul, what you really need to do is focus on the Exodus series and do the commentary on the Exodus series. Again, the difficulty with that is I do not have permission to do with the currently do with the Exodus series like I did with the Genesis series. I think the Exodus seminar is worthy of that kind of attention. I have been going through it. I have gone through episode 12. I'm currently working on episode 13. Episode 14 just dropped this week. So once I finished with 13, I'll look at 14 and I've got tons and tons of thoughts about it. I think the series is full of really good insights and content. And I think, again, for those who are just trying to figure out what to think about Jordan Peterson, I think in a lot of ways, Jordan Peterson is at his best in a seminar like that. That shouldn't come as any surprise given his long history of seminars in the university. And he's got a great group of people around him. I'm going to say this. And so but here it is. I don't think Ben Shapiro helps the process. There are already a lot of guys around the table and Ben Shapiro talks a lot. And I haven't found his contributions better in any remarkable way than anyone else's contributions. And I think actually in episode, I think he jumped in in episode 12. His were sort of the bottom of the barrel and he tends to sort of it's just Ben Shapiro and how he talks. It's not his area. And he can't he tends to turn a conversation that already leans towards the political more to the political. So yeah, I hope Ben doesn't doesn't become a regular in there. There's already a lot of interesting people. And and in fact, as I've noted before, as the series went on, part of me like the fact that there isn't a biblical scholar there, but there are moments when they really could use a biblical scholar because they just there's often moments when even a fairly a fairly fact based question in terms of biblical scholarship, the two theologians that are there aren't biblical scholars. And so there are moments when even I could have answered a question that it's just a it's just a fairly simple question in terms of the technique in terms of technical aspects of biblical scholarship. And Dennis Prager is not a biblical scholar. He clearly knows grew up with learning Hebrew. And he's got I've really grown to enjoy Dennis Prager through this series. And I appreciate a lot of what he says and does, but he's not a biblical scholar. He does have some insight into the text because he has studied it closely. But that technical aspect he doesn't have. So the video itself, God's Elohim question erupts beneath the thinning modernist dualisms of Exodus. Yeah, that's a crazy title. It really touches on what Susan Black Roberts now, Susan Black, on she's part of the Ruder Hoff Group Plow magazine. I did a thing on their treatment of of Jesus and John Wayne. Great publication. Great podcast. Great people. She not too long ago married Alistair Roberts, making that whole community even greater. She asked on Twitter this morning, this is a really interesting way to understand Manichaeanism and Peterson as Manichaean. Anyone who's read more Jordan Peterson than I have, does this sound correct? And the tweet she's responded to is Manichaeanism or Star Wars metaphysics for short, as long plagued Catholicism and Augustine is perhaps is perhaps its greatest critic. But Peterson's pseudoscience requires it because he frames reality and history as an epic battle between being and meaning. I don't think that's I don't think that gets at it at all. But where this video sort of emerged, I this video is a response video to a pretty meaty 10 minute clip that Peterson that Peterson posted. So a lot of the if you go to my blog, you can and you search like Jordan Peterson, I have listed all of the clips that have surfaced on Peterson's channel and the clips channel, at least all the clips that I've found. And I have thoughts of if the Exodus seminar does not begin to creep out onto open YouTube this April, which Jordan commented it would, but it hasn't yet. I think one man's Odyssey gets it right there reading Joseph Campbell. Now I've come to realize that Peterson is doing for Christianity and possibly Judaism, what Campbell did for Buddhism, framing it in a Jungian light. I think that's right. But the earlier clips and teasers that were put out early in the Exodus seminar tended to be four, three, four, five, six minutes in the later episodes. So the first one through eight is sort of the first session and eight and nine through I don't know how many they're going to go to 16 perhaps is the second. And those teasers and clips are eight, 10 minutes longer. So that gives me a little bit more something to work with. So I. It's really cool in episode 10. A big piece of what is beneath. The conversation of this little corner. And what gives this little corner energy? Is and I could bring Luke into this conversation, I could bring Nate into this conversation. A lot of what gives this little corner energy is, in fact, what I get at a little bit when I talk about God, number one and God, number two. There is there are all sorts of persistent dualisms in the long history of Christianity and Judaism and Islam. And. There I think the Bible holds some of these dualisms intention. One of the chief ones is the the the creator creature distinction. Now, I am not going to. In fact, the creator creature distinction is perhaps the chief. Contribution. In a in about the one of the biggest frames imaginable to speculating on philosophy. That that the world has known and the Jews get credit, not the Jews, but the the Hebrew, the Hebrew, the Hebrew Bible, I'll say it that way, because the Jews saying the Jews is sort of an anarchism, because it's it's an anachronism, because Jews, of course, come later. But the creator creature distinction and the kinds of stuff that Kaufman writes about. So you have that dualism and that dualism has to remain. Yet there's tension within it. And that's where you get it. God, number one and God, number two. You get at it with the divine passive in scripture. There's many, many ways in which the Bible very much understands that dualism and that tension. And so much of what happens in this little corner is. Working through into higher resolution, the tensions of that dualism. And and this dualism gets played out. It really gets accentuated in modernity, and that dualism tends to propagate all sorts of sub dualisms that we're struggling with, like the natural supernatural. Sort of Cartesian dualism. And when you look at what. Look at what Peterson, Peugeot, Vervecky are doing differently, but each of them are trying to. Work the tension of that dualism into a more. Into a more united perspective. Peterson does that, as Peugeot rightly points out from working from the bottom up. John Vervecky is working at it from the perspective increasingly of neo Platonism. Part of the reason people look at Christianity and say that's Platonism for the masses is because, of course, Plato. Had his own dualism. It's OK. So if you can give us credit, Plato has his own dualism. Obviously, with respect to the forms and the allegory of the cave and all of that. It's was not surprising. To see that break out in it's amazing that it took. Up until episode 10 of the Exodus seminar for it to really come out. And one of the English scholars, the only one that was there can't think of him right now. He really put his finger on it right there. He says, you know, I think we've been just skirting around that and he's right. So all of. All of these talks about where is all of these talks about natural law. All of this stuff is getting at this this tension. Within. Within Christianity and within the Hebrew Bible, I think I often look to Isaiah six. The beginning with the declaration of the angels in the temple to Isaiah as a real nice poetic formulation of it. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. There's a dualism. Holy, holy, holy, separate, separate, separate is the Lord God Almighty. The whole earth is full of his glory. It's right there. It's it's that it's it's the creation of the dualism and the tension with which that dualism is. So this is part of the reason why this little corner has been so. Friendly to a whole variety of. Religious traditions and sub traditions is that so many of the differences. Within these major religious traditions have to do with how the dualism is managed. How the dualism is managed. And so and one of the one of the elements that this comes out and I mentioned Michael Heiser a number of times. I know some people are big fans of Michael Heiser. Other people are critics of Heiser. I've read some Heiser and every time I go back to reading him, I don't find him terribly interesting. I think he's pointing out something that is there and you can you can see it if you just. Work with the whole question of what on earth do we mean by God or gods or Elohim or the heavenly council? And in other words, all of those things were. All of those things were. Are are part of the way that the the Hebrew scriptures work this tension. That and and you find it in narrative ways you find at the beginning of the book of Job, for example, where's this heavenly court and that's sort of the. The the first introduction in the Bible of the accuser and and of course you've got the the serpent, which is you know very much a. A chaos creature says John Walton. John Walton, but of course the serpent in the garden will get connected to the the great serpent and the beast in the book of Revelation. So I mean this the Bible is continually working through these tensions and. And I think the Bible really tries to hold these things. In tension and so many of the. Of the conversations around so pantheism. Tends to collapse the tension into a particular monism. Panentheism tends to there you go, Luke. I said the word panentheism tends to give a little bit more space. And but but Christianity has been obviously working on those things and then. In modernity, you have again what Missyologist looked at in terms of the excluded middle. All of this stuff as we just continue to work on these questions and that's really the area that Peterson has been has been working in. I see the comments have have have gone into hagel. That's right, good evil. I've been reading Chesterton. This is why I love his writing on the book of Job. It touches on all these ideas of God's judgment on good evil. Ideologies created by people to explain reality. So yeah, that was that was the first. So that was on episode 10 of the Exodus seminar and then after that I thought, well, I should there's a lot in all of those seminars that I really want to talk about. And so I decided to just go back and grab a clip and they had the clip about the Hebrew midwives. And again, that was sort of following in the conversation of the God. God's Elohim question erupts because. Right away you can see the tension already in episode one with respect to are those midwives Hebrew or Egyptian and the point was made in that little clip is far shorter clip nicely that they are God fears. And so again, you can see this tension. In the Hebrew scriptures, you can see this tension in the New Testament. You know, the God fears are sort of these Hellenistic, not totally converted Jews that are worshiping in the synagogues. And then you find in the book of acts all of these noble Romans and. On and on and on. So these tensions are all over the Bible and you bump into it. And once you're aware of this tension, you're going to see it all over the place. And I think in many ways, a lot of what gives the conversations in this little corner, their power is because of these tensions and these tensions are. They just run through the entire history of religion and religious conversation in the world. All right, then the next video. Now, let's say I'm going to mute this. The next video I did was. Oh, it's so it's so. To describe how I make videos. It's so tortured because I get an idea. I wanted to talk a little bit more about this, this whole idea in my Sunday school class about about law and Roman seven. And for a very long time, I've wanted to do more with John Brevecky's conversation with Lex Fridman because I thought. That was really, that was a really good platform for John. Because I thought John, I thought John articulated John is getting better and better and better as hopefully we all are better and better at bringing his ideas to a general audience. And part of what has made Peterson so popular is Peterson has a real gift for bringing difficult things to a general audience. And John, John is a great teacher, but I think John's just got so much there in order to sort of whittle it down to this and then this and then this and then this and then this and with nice little illustrations. It's basically the preacher problem and and I thought John really did well with Lex in there and I wanted to touch on that. Of this idea that. In certain polling, the particular religious tribe doesn't impact. Let's say the efficacy of the religion, and so I talked about that in my adult Sunday school class, so I wanted to touch on that. Let's say the efficacy of the religion, and so I talked about that in my adult Sunday school class, so I wanted to talk about that with. With the with the Lex Fridman thing, so I set that video up with the Lex Fridman conversation. I was able to get that in. And then I added the adult Sunday school class portion and then I found this really interesting conversation between. Between John and a Jungian therapist, Brooke Sproal, and those are really nice talks and she seems like an absolutely delightful person and she said a number of things that sort of. Got me thinking about this quest for a spiritual home because one of the things again that Peterson really brought to the table is he's a practitioner. Jonathan Peugeot. A big part of the reason I think Jonathan Peugeot. Had to get so clear on a lot of the stuff that he's sharing with us now is because it's always in the application of something that you really have to make all of those choices and get specific. And there's there are very few things that require as much application as let's say carving or painting or or or doing art. Because once you once you bring something into existence. You, you have to know it down to a very real level, and so I thought I thought John's conversation with Brooke Sproal was was a really interesting one and a good one. And her story, of course, and I might come back to this next week because I'm really sort of continuing to chew on the Megan. The Megan Phelps Roper story just finished listening to the Oxford interview very interesting very interesting talk she gave at Oxford. The Oxford Union. And so Megan Megan Spur or Brooks Spur left a more conservative Christianity and she's sort of and I don't want to get her wrong and so, if she. If she wants to send me a message and come on for a chat because if I sort of use you this way on the Internet, you know you certainly do have a right to come on my channel and correct me. But but she seems to have left sort of a stricter narrower evangelical position and gone over to more of a. New Age posture and less sectarian I want to be it's you got to be really careful when you try to describe this kind of transition, which is which is not uncommon. And so you know she talks about people who make these journeys, whatever the rest of us think of their journeys they usually don't make them unless they, for one reason or another, are experiencing some upgrade or tangible benefit because of it and so. That's getting warm sacramentos winter is finally ending I can take off this fleece that you see in almost every video can actually see a colored shirt underneath it. And so she was really interesting to to to process and then, of course, Megan fell trooper through the. I was just letting you know that I was I was listening to the JK Rowling's it's again it's an exceptional podcast you know you really got something when me and Sam Harris can agree that this is a this is a much listened podcast so. So I thought that was a good conversation and then I I started. I mentioned before that I. I mentioned before that I. Melissa dowardy so one of the things that had been rolling around in my head was the JP sears. Finding God got God T shirt he had a straightforward video about God and religion and a number of you mentioned very helpfully that he's you know he sort of moved from California to the Bible belt and that'll do it for you and. And so, then I found a commentary on her channel and I knew nothing about her and then Karen Wong, this is where feedback from all of you in the comments section and emails and even though emails are I don't always I miss a lot of emails. But comment section and dms and Twitter and such Karen Wong had said oh you know Megan or Melissa dowardy you know this was this was very. This is very pertinent to her journey because and it's like I didn't know anything about her so that I went to her, then I went to her page and at least then on her page was. From new age to Jesus my story out of deception and it was such a lovely testimony it was such a beautiful story she was so honest she was so sincere. It was so heartfelt and and what that did was just set up for me the the tensions that were really going to feel that are always here in this corner because we've got some people who are sort of breaking out of. A restrictive or tyrannical or abusive or unsatisfying religious religious milieu and going to another some of those people are leaving. Traditions much more like my own that tend to be conservative Christian. Or the smaller orthodox churches and going into more new age stuff and other people are leaving new age stuff and going the other way, and hence the so often. The titles of my videos happen after I make the video because, like I said when I started this I think out loud in all of these videos and so I don't know what the video is about until I finished making the video and and so by the end of the video I began to realize that you guys still fighting about hagel in the comments. I realized that you know that's that's really a tension in this quest for the spiritual home and it's a big part of. That's a big part of this little corner and so a bunch of the oh geez in this little corner like like Luke you know Luke went to John Piper's church and I can be pretty free with Luke story because he's free with his own story and and we've got a bunch of people who are going to be. You know, Luke went to John Piper's church and I can be pretty free with Luke story because he's free with his own story and and we've got others who have become orthodox and Roman Catholic and so we've got in this little corner we've got people sort of going both ways and part of what makes this little community remarkable. Is that. We are actually striving to have a culture where people going both ways on these continuums can continue to talk and compare notes. And I think that is nothing but better now, of course, all of us have our. Our positions our beliefs our postures our tribal loyalties all of us have those things okay but to. But to not have those things get so in the way, while at the same time not losing them that we can have productive conversations with each other and learn from each other that's really what this little corner is about it's really what this is about, in my opinion, so. yeah that's where that's where that video came from and then, of course, in the next one I start getting into the JK Rowling's. podcast. it's it's an excellent podcast and I one of the things that I noted was that in so many ways, if you listen to that podcast. Harry Potter is sort of a horcrux question oh question I hope I didn't. This any other questions, thank you Jacob Thank you for using all caps. Thank you, Jacob Thank you for using all caps. Was the leaker. Being a discord ortho bro symbolism or just inevitable reality. I don't know what leaker. I don't know what leaker Jacob so. So yeah, and I hope to and again I you I don't know if it'll come to fruition just by virtue of the way I make videos, but I hope to. Do more on this podcast I always go after this stuff with a little bit of trepidation Biden leaks. gosh I I used to be a political junkie. I gave it up in. I gave it up in 2015 when I watched the. The fool the increasing level of foolishness of what was happening and. If you if you want to see what has become of professional journalism just watch the full musk Elon Musk. Bbc interview. The fact that the BBC would let this guy would send this guy talk to Elon Musk. Whoever made that decision should be fired. Just unbelievable. So yeah so then I get into the Harry Potter stuff. So yeah so then I get into the Harry Potter stuff. And do or are we all the Mary hurricane conversation that was such a lovely that was such a lovely time you know I should talk a little bit about good Friday and Easter. Now today is good Friday, I suppose, for the Orthodox and Sunday will be pasqua for the Orthodox and. You know, I know. You could just you could just look at the views and both of these rough drafts for good Friday and Easter were better than were better than average but. There there's a real connection between what I do during the week and what I do in my rough drafts sometimes it's more clear than others. It was just it was just really good for me going through the parables of Jesus in Matthew as a part of lent this year and getting a sense for the value of apocalypse in in good Friday and and it's in that it's in that. It's in that. It's in that. It's in that. Question let's let's hit the question. Where do you think the Harry Potter LARPers will end up seems like the fall of JK Rowling's could end the fandom liturgy I don't know because apparently HBO is going to make a new series. That in and of itself is going to be very interesting to watch because. If you can, if you want to learn anything about human beings watch them as they do their religion. Can you make a series, can you make a new series. Do you really or do you really have to wait 30 or 40 years until the people who grew up with the old series are now sort of out of the. Out of the conversation because they're they're too old to be listened to by the young so yeah it won't last though it won't last. Yeah, there was a great tweet on that that I that I tweeted one of the things that I picked up is a better scanner so I can take paper stuff and bring it onto the channel better. Anyway. My zoomer kid that's interesting it's a millennial thing my zoomer kids are mostly Harry Potter ignorant wow. Wow, can you make a new series as the writers of the New Testament. BBC follows the orders of the CIA oh oh I i've gotten emails you know bad bad the band the band the secular Quranism there are there are nuisance but yeah yeah you guys know me i'm a sucker for an outlier and. i've got i've got a few things to say about about that too we'll see if I say them today. So yeah Easter. And. The Easter making an Easter sermon is always sort of difficult. So you never know who's going to be in the room. And actually we had. Like zero visitors this Easter, which was a surprise because we had a lot of people the two previous Sundays to Easter and then Easter attendance was a little low. It's kind of took me by surprise, but you never know what you're going to get with a real thing like a church. A lot of a lot of what I may say in Chino is in this sermon. The whole question of the quest for a spiritual home our hungry hearts. Augustine which which john cited in the in the conversation leading up to the conference so Easter sermons are places to sort of. Show how you can lay out the gospel. Through the resurrection to as broad an audience, as you can so and that of course isn't reflected in the demographics of a of a fairly nerdy channel here I. Can forget that i'm doing this all right so. Easter and Good Friday, of course, we have the Freddie and Paul show with Easter. Rick. We have the drama and the Freddie and Paul show over the hourglass. It was a few Sundays ago that Rick had had enough of a show with the Freddie and Paul show. It was a few Sundays ago that Rick had had enough because when nancy's there. Oh great nate's coming to Chino with his wife that's awesome i'm trying to talk my wife into coming to Chino we'll see if that happens. I think my wife is a little scared about the whole thing because it's just it's just going to be a lot. But. Where was it oh yeah the Freddie and Paul show so. When when Nancy has her Nancy sermon reports are getting longer and longer and they're they're they're rapping and singing more songs and then more guests and so Rick finally laid down the law that we need a we need an hourglass. And and then before the show Freddie and Nancy were trying to negotiate away from the hourglass well maybe we'll start the hourglass after we start the song. No, I don't I don't I don't exercise a lot of say over what we put in the show, but yeah initially when I did it, I wanted between five and seven minutes so. Yeah, the Freddie and Paul show. Well, oh yes, the pope and Disney. I'm still waiting for this hulu and kirkagard I'm still waiting the pope thing was sort of what got me going towards this and I didn't talk about the pope on Disney or hulu too much in in the show because we haven't seen the pope. In the show because we haven't seen it. And kale kale sent me that article by Larry chap which had the links to the Vatican thing I for me what's interesting for me about this is. Is is the question of. Someone someone said it someone said it very well in a comment which. It was no it was on Twitter and I kept the tweet because they used I think it was a story from kirkagard of there's a there's a carnival or a circus outside of town and it's burning. And so the clown with his makeup goes into the town and tries to convince the people of the town that they need to they need to heed the call of the clown and makeup and everybody keeps laughing at them. And that is in some ways a window into the challenge of preachers of the pope and and you know, especially there with the pope because you know hey i'm not wearing i'm not wearing vestments why not. Jacob bought me a nice shirt my wife didn't really quite have the correct size my neck is a little bigger but. But. Should I wear a clerical collar when I make these videos is that sort of like the clown coming into the town. And and first so, of course, the papacy so so, then you kind of have the pope who is dressed in. In some ways in medieval vestments and part of the reason i've been reading Vatican one and Vatican two and spending a lot of time thinking about the pope. It doesn't I know for a lot of the Catholics and the fight going on among the Catholics about the pope, this is a. The sort of fuels it, but for me, the whole the whole question is of if you are to have a papacy. What on earth does it mean what on earth, are you to do with it and how on earth is the pope supposed to be in the world. Because what this does is this takes all this energy and focuses it to one point and that's an extremely difficult place to be. yeah should have bought a size larger Jacob. it's an extremely difficult place to be, and so, when you take the pope and I saw a correction on Twitter to they weren't in the Vatican, they were in another little Italian town and. They spoke Spanish and it was just basically a hodgepodge and so, on one hand. I deeply appreciate that I think the pope should be in a place like that, and I think it's okay for the pope to be filmed in a place like that. But the entire thing is just so overwhelmingly fraught and so much of this is within the evangelical winsome wars. Because, on one hand, that these tensions actually are tensions between Vatican one and Vatican two. Vatican one in order to try to fight modernity and democracy and all of these massive movements that have changed Europe and we're changing Europe in the 19th century. ultra mountain ism sort of raises the pope up above the clouds. And invests the pope with tremendous power and authority and and and so Vatican one in a sense is sort of like Pacific rim where the. Where these giant human robots are going out to fight the beasts that come out of the sea and that is sort of a shorthand way of me understanding. Ultra mountain ism where you you take the pope and you know you make him into a giant robot that can go out there and do battle with the beast of modernity that's Vatican one. Vatican to they realize jazz in the story of Pacific rim the beasts are only getting bigger and, in fact, you have the Second World War where. You know you weren't you weren't fighting against the French Revolution or democracy, you are fighting against hitler and Stalin. And and and nazism and communism and suddenly democracy is like oh yeah I think we should side with the allies. Because one way to look at that war is sort of democracy versus these totalitarian governments and praise God democracy wins and and maybe democracy always had to win but. democracy one so Vatican two comes and Vatican two wants to sort of stop with making the pope into a giant robot and now the pope is going to be a cuddly toy. And and so, then you bring him in you put him into the room with these kids and and and now I get critiqued and criticized for that sometimes to i'm too nice to Claire call i'm too nice to Jacob i'm too nice to to. Nobody says i'm too nice to chat because everybody loves Chad that's why he's Pope right Chris. I'm too nice to grail country to Nate and i'm too nice to john vervecky and i'm too nice to the orthodox and i'm too nice to the Catholics and i'm too nice to Doug Wilson and i'm too you know i'm too nice to everyone i'm i'm the squishy toy guy. Or am I so it's this diverse excellencies that we wrestle with and. that's right but but kale you say Voltron but in some ways. The pope is supposed to you know be Voltron always assembled so. So it and I find this issue tremendously interesting and so are really happy to to look at the contributions of Christopher Mastro Pietro got a chance to meet Chris and Thunder Bay. Some of you might remember my conversation with Chris I mean the dude opens his mouth and poetry comes out and which is why he's such a good partner with john. You know not to take anything against away from john but john is technical and scientific and accurate and and all of these things and Christopher just comes out and you know. You know brings brings a lot of brings a lot of. Beauty and fluency and and and poetry to the conversation so and and, of course, the challenge with kirk a guard kirk a guard is the strange strange man. I don't remember the name the title of the biography of kirk a guard that I read, but it was a. It was a profoundly moving book when you look at the strange strange man he's just the absolute misfit you know he would have been he would have in some ways fit into this little corner. Because this is little corner is the island of misfit toys and kirk a guard was the king of misfits. And and he was low in agreeableness and he's fighting this and he's making he's writing this this obscure obscure stuff with all of these pseudonyms and he's in love with this woman and she loves him, but they can't make it work, because of course who on earth could manage a relationship with someone like here could. And but yeah he's wrestling with not with the papacy but with a Protestant version of it, where you know this is where I get into sort of the swarm and the beast if. If something like the BBC is a beast because it's a structured hierarchy with a mind and with a head and with all of that. Twitter is more like a store a swarm and there are there are strengths and weaknesses to both sides and so, in many ways with ultra mountain ism the the papacy sort of becomes beast like and that well now they're more like the BBC. And Protestantism is more swarm like and and so we're watching these things go on so. The whole papal conversation for me is super interesting. Even Kierkegaard would have been a challenge for the TLC I think you're right Sam question isn't the problem with the pope that he's supposed to be first among equals does the pope is the head of the church work without the church's patriarch to keep him in check, well, this is the. This is the big question of the Vatican one book by john O'Malley because and and and so Vatican one basically settled on the big beast. And Vatican too so so in some ways. Various forms of authoritarianism are in fact that big beast and part of the irony of. At the same time, the church is reaching for ultra mountain ism which is sort of making the big massive pope whereas before you know and Kel's Eldon can talk about this. This in much better ways than I can whereas before the pope was supposed to be the mouthpiece of the church. But the church was sort of the bishops and you know that this this body and the pope was to be the mouthpiece that in Vatican one you see this tension where now the pope is the author. Of in other words it's coming from God down out now I think that as a result of the. Of the tensions that are within the swarm that we want to hear God speak and so Douglas Wilson's. The teaser clip for his conversation with john Anderson it's basically Douglas Wilson says you know it's it's basically a monarchical thing, and this is a Protestant doing it so it's. Yeah it's all scrambled so that's the tension Eric that that's in a lot of that. Kate James what does make you angry what's your relationship with anger and rage has there been any interactions with those forces with me personally I get angry. I have learned to. Be careful with my public expressions of anger because. One is so prone to sin with them. But anger is important and. Again what I always say about emotions. There are two there there are two. Two big sins with emotions that people often make one is to divinize your emotions. And the other is to. Not listen to them so what makes me angry I get angry when. Children are hurt. I get angry when people are unfairly treated I get angry when. So I want to talk more about the whole transgender thing but it's really hard. It's interesting Sam Harris at the beginning of his making sense podcast when he talks to Megan Phelps Roper about the podcast goes into has to have this big disclaimer statement about transgender the difficulty with so many of these. These groups right now is that when you say transgender it you sound like you're talking about one thing, but there are a myriad of things that you can't even. You know, when you say it's a big disclaimer it you sound like you're talking about one thing, but there are a myriad of things beneath it. There are myriad of causes for this. Attempt to cross over Peterson said in his conversation with. The doctor Grossman is it Miriam Grossman. I was a good conversation I'm glad Peterson sort of cleaned up his act within about the first 10 minutes. And sort of shut up and let her talk more, but you know Peterson made the point and I think he's right that I mean this male female thing, this is a. This is a really big deal in human beings and it's a really big deal throughout history it's a really big deal and to sort of say it's not a big deal. When you deny reality at a level like that. it's going to be tough and yet there are people who, for a whole variety of reasons. find it easier to live. straddling across that line i'll say it that way. So Justin wells has been doing great work on his channel his channels tiny I want to bring some of his stuff on I want to do a live stream with him. About story he's the he's the he teaches documentary at biola and he's a Hollywood camera cameraman. And he's been doing a lot of really cool videos about story and different forms of story. And he has one good video about sort of these borderline characters and borderline characters are really important, I, in some ways, i'm a borderline character function in a lot of different ways. I know some people get very frustrated with me because i'm not. i'm as borderline as I am. Maybe they really don't understand. We need borderline people and I think Peugeot is right that. In this world you're going to have ideals. And you're going to have you cannot eliminate the fringes. And Peugeot talks about that in terms of Old Testament laws about gleaning talks about that in terms of gargoyles and I think Peugeot is right, and so I think to sort of. Try to eliminate that fringes and that's the way I think it is. Talks about that in terms of gargoyles and I think Peugeot is right, and so I think to sort of try to eliminate. The category of transgender is used to be transsexual whatever it is we're pointing out I don't think you're going to eliminate the category it's going to be there and in some ways it serves a purpose. But. And I think Peterson said this well in his conversation with Vivek Peterson talked about it well in his conversation with Grossman Peugeot talks about it well when you the fringes have fringes. And when you sort of eliminate the structure it blesses no one, and so the real challenge is to continue to try to keep a healthy cult a healthy structure. And a healthy culture that allows the diversity, while still allowing hierarchy and. And normativity because normativity gives fringes there. gives fringes their reason for being, because once once you make everything normative then nothing is normative so. All right. Oh, and then. Khalid sephir coming in and talking to Sam that was that was fun too, it was totally cool learning about a religious tradition that I knew nothing about, and then I, I have a friend at living stones, who is I got a lot of Persians in my life, but they're all really different so you know Jacob. You know for Jacob from Iran, and then another friend of mine from living stones he's not on the channel I won't mention him but he grew up in Iran came to the United States. His parents I think his is basically when the Shaw went out of favor, bunches of people had to leave Iran and so his family left Iran and he was. He was a tiny little boy and then he grew up and his parents didn't like the public school options, so they sent him to Christian school and they sent him to Christian school and he became a Christian and so. he's a he's a member of my church he doesn't come that often because he doesn't live real close, but I asked him about this and he's saying yeah if you want to look at. If Christians feel persecuted in America. They should look at. Sex heretical to Islam and places like Iran and Iraq, they get persecuted, they get persecuted hard, so that the fact that they're popping up in places like the UK should be no surprise. And this is what this is what so so anybody any of you, so I do read the comments and I. Again, I wish I wish I had time to talk to all of you because Vivian be. Vivian be a Christian and I think that's the only thing I can say is that. I wish I had time to talk to all of you because Vivian be. Vivian be I I I develop in my mind a framework of who you are so when I talk to you usually that framework is broken broken down to a degree. But this is what makes life so interesting because, on one hand Vivian be often comes in with a perspective, which is a little bit more. gosh. I can't say. You know she's she's rather sensitive to the criticism of women, etc etc and and here she. Makes this comment about trans woman and again the problem is that there is not just one source or type of trans woman and I know. Some of these people personally, and they have shared their stories with me, and if you listen to their stories, sometimes you can say. I understand why you are the way you are and why you want to be the way you want to be, and I think for a lot of people Peterson said this right away in 2016 and 17 and 18 to. What what's going on in our public conversation about. Transgenders or trans women and trans men it's just got to be absolutely painful for a lot of the trans people out there, because so many of them. They are they are trying to pass, they are trying to they are trying to live this way and all of this attention is not what they're looking for yet now all of their. All of their. God help me if I ever have allies, because if these are the allies of trans people. These these these these beasts that are coming up in the zeitgeist of this culture right now man man man man man man man unbelievable that's right you're a feminist I yep yep that's who Vivian is and so i'm glad Vivian Vivian is here and i'm glad she makes her comments and. This is, this is why I like this little corner because again i'm high in openness and I want to talk to people, I want to talk to people. All right, here we go okay where where what are we up to week in review. Are we to this week yet so we need the Pope oh yeah the collapse of unstable religious formation of modern fandoms and that's where I get more into JK Rowling's and you know kale kale and I do a lot of conversing on Twitter and in DMS and I gotta have. If if I ever have more time to do things I want to have more more standing conversations with people like kale and Sam because. You know people like kale and Sam. Jacob I couldn't have said it better myself. Jacob is my ally. Yes, he really is all right so um collapse of fandoms yeah yeah. There's so many people out there who are like oh my god I'm so happy to be here. Jacob is my ally. Yes, he really is all right so um collapse of fandoms yeah yeah. There's so much here that's such a good podcast it's so well made there's so much to it, I could make dozens of dozens of dozens of shows just on this one and and and part of Paul and lightner made a Paul and lightner made a podcast. And lightner made a comment on Twitter which I actually put in today's video about all of the religions that are going on and. That that's a part of what we're struggling with is that we have so much worldview shaping. Propaganda that we're immersed in and so you know Trekkies and Harry Potter rights. All over the place so and and it's just it's just fascinating the degree to which JK Rowling's is is God and the author of the Bible of this whole community and. And then it's this deconstruction because you have all of these little Potter rights out there and they're deconstructing and they're they're divorcing their God. Just JK Rowling it's just it's just insane what's happening so yeah let me scan for questions here all right. All right let's see how we doing on time 11 o'clock could be worse oh okay yeah. This conversation it kind of had a slow start. And I think partly because hierarchies bind and blind and so John Verbeke has. Obviously been busy with after Socrates all the voices with Verbeke and you might notice the. The better production values that John has John at least as of Thunder Bay so Jordan was working with a couple of guys I won't mention them that were kind of helping us to get to the bottom of the line. And they were helping to manage and promote Jordan stuff and then Jordan basically left them for daily wire and these guys then started working with John and which has been a huge help for John because I've I do all my technical stuff myself with the exception of what Rick does which is immense and incredible but. So John couldn't have done after Socrates without that team and John of course continues to John's been on some very big podcasts and platforms and of course he continues to have his day job which is in academics and he continues to write books and so John is he's very generous with his time but he's also increasingly in demand and he's working on. And he's working on you know looking at the psychology of practices and talking to guys like Guy Sengstock and Rafe Kelly and Greg Enriquez and a bunch of the people on his channel and of course those those groups are always getting larger. Poor Johnathan Pujo. I went to last Friday I went to my first mass actually and some of you will be surprised by that. I went to my first mass and it was a mass for a mother of a church member and so and that's where I took some pictures on Twitter and for me I go to a service of another religion or another Christian group and I'm just it's just it's like a kid in a candy I just can't get enough of everything that's going on you know looking at the culture looking at the architecture looking at the vestments looking at the practice looking at the kneeling listening to the words and so it was just a tremendous thing and I tweeted out I wish you know I want a pocket version of Kale Zeldin so that I can get a little bit of a sense of what it is. I'm Kale Zeldin so that I can I could go to a place like this and Kale would say well there's this and there's this and this and this is where it came from. This is this is where it came from that's right. Am I am I in trouble for booting Claire? No, you are not Chad. And in fact I didn't take any wrenches away. I found the place that I could and I looked at everybody who had wrenches and I was happy with that and so I've distributed power and with great power comes great responsibility so use your responsibility well. So yeah so you know Kale is just such a you know you find you find some people sometime and Kale and I can sort of get on the same page pretty quickly. We've got probably enough in common in terms of what we're doing so and I was there and I was thinking yeah I just wish I had Kale with me because we could talk about this and talk about that and when I visited Kale in Rhode Island he gave me a tour of where he teaches and it was just fascinating. It was just absolutely fascinating. But Jordan Peterson has all of this money and he's able to dispense all this opportunity and so you know poor Jonathan Peugeot is getting dragged around the world. You know he's in Rome, he's in Jerusalem, he's in Florida doing the Exodus thing so I hope this is all working well for Jonathan's career. But yeah boy Jonathan's got a lot on his plate. They just updated the symbolic world website and it's really interesting for me how they're sort of pulling that all sort of under one thing. So instead of having Patreon and you know all of that stuff and Peterson's sort of done that with Daily Wire too but Jonathan's sort of bringing it all together. Let me let me start some questions here because I don't want to miss them. Go off the screen. And yeah so that's so yeah Jonathan's had his world you know had his world shaken but I hope it's the question of I have it easy in the sense that I'm a minister in the Christian Reformed Church so I don't have to mind that shop. I have to mind the Living Stone shop and you know dealing with I wish I had a guy like Chad who lived in Sacramento because you know I'd have Chad helping me with all of the physical plant stuff here. I love watching Chad do his tile work. You know Ethan comes down from Reading and so we're going to have another Ethan we're going to have probably some chainsaw days where we attack all this stuff so I'll let you know when that comes. Ethan drove down from from Reading from Reading from from Reno three Saturdays in a row to help us put up the fence. So you know I have gotten a lot of help but yeah but Jordan has Jonathan and poor Jonathan. I shouldn't say poor Jonathan I think Jonathan's been having a ball but it's a lot it's a lot and then to manage a whole website and a community and to do all of that it's a it's a big deal. So let me let me answer. So let me answer Philip's question here. What does using quest change the conversation, well, John, when we. So John Van Donk and I first proposed a topic of religious. What did we say religious history, history, baggage or resource something to that degree, and Jonathan and John didn't like it and so then we we worked some more on it. And then we arrived at the quest for a spiritual home and John really, you know, hammered in that quest because quest quest has a sense of their sort of a religious The Thurian, you know, the quest for the Holy Grail and you don't quite know where the quest takes you. So it's not just a search because searches like I'm going to search for the street address and once I find this and once I have the street quest is sort of you're not quite sure exactly what you're looking for and this very much has that. Part of my sort of CS Lewis and again you can go back to my Easter sermon with this. I don't know that we will finally, I don't know that we can finally find satisfaction in this world. And I think john gets at that when he talks about something being horizontal. That that home is we're looking for, we're moving towards a horizon and again quest. Peterson of course famously there's no, you know how to get through the cornfield there's many different ways to get through the cornfield so I think quest is actually a pretty pretty important word in that. The conversation started slow and I was getting a little anxious about it. I mean is this thing going to click? Is it going to, you know, how, I mean Catherine was very much in the mix in Thunder Bay because she organized that and okay, figuring out how does John then fit into the mix? How does this go? And then at one point the conversation just starts taking off and John and Jonathan very much sort of get in sync with each other and off it goes. And John has quite clearly a ton of ideas and a ton of good language and I think once this conversation really got going I really had a sense that May is going to be a lot of fun. And I think it's going to be great. I think it's going to be great. And the conversation is there. So the next day actually I did the Benjamin Boyce conversation, which I think I really enjoyed doing. I had a lot of fun with it. Four is a lot for a conversation like that. Now Benjamin Boyce is a good listener and so he actually hosts more than he interjects too often in something like that. But I'm a talker, Jonathan's a talker, Wocle is a talker, so yeah it's a challenge to get your, to manage a conversation like that. I keep forgetting I'm not sharing the screen. All right, how are we doing on time? We're doing all right. Yep, and then this, this was, you know, I was doing a little bit of preparation for the, my conversation with Wocle and Boyce. And I thought Wocle's sort of walking through, you know, the strawberries and this question of the real. I thought that was really good. So when I'd watched this video, which, which Boyce had posted on Twitter, so now one of the things I learned from Elon Musk in that conversation is Twitter, you can post videos up to two hours on Twitter now. It's like, wow, I don't know if you have to be a Blue Check member, but this video was on Twitter and I had to sort of figure out how to harvest it from Twitter. And so I put it up on Vanderclips. And, and I thought it was, I thought it was a really good video. And then of course I brought in some Tom Holland, Vianneiro, this whole question of real has been with us for a very long time. And I haven't finished this, the conversation with Nate and Sherry and Paul Kingsnorth, but it sure starts out strong. And so that's also on the list to finish and maybe to do more work on. You know, Kingsnorth again is one of these people out there that is on a quest. And he doesn't always know where it takes him. And he's got some, you know, he's got his own unique story. And that's what's, that's what's, that's what's coming about here. Let's see if I missed any questions. I don't see any questions. Good. So, yep, that was, that was a fun video. And then this morning's video. Yeah, I had, you know, I had seen, I had seen the, I'd seen little bits of the, of the, of the Elon BBC thing. I'm not a big Elon follower. So, it didn't really grab my interest that much. And then, And then I saw John Campbell basically doing a commentary on that video and I thought, Oh, well, this is interesting. And because John Campbell's, Dr. John Campbell's journey, I followed his journey through COVID. I found his channel very early on during the pandemic. And there was a while I watched him every day because he was giving, I thought, some of the best news about COVID. And, and he was, you know, he's got, he's got some expertise, he's got background and his channel obviously has blown up to, you know, almost 3 million subs on YouTube. And it's just been very interesting watching John go through, in some ways, the deconstruction of the, of the dominant modernist paradigm. And, you know, it's, it's, you know, Brett Weinstein is obviously another controversial figure, but You can, you can, Jesus says, Do not judge lest you be judged by the same measure you used. And that's something I take seriously. And so, and maybe I've been too hard on Sam Harris. I feel a little bad about that sometimes. And then Mark will come in and say, No, you're not too hard on Sam Harris. There's a lot to be gained by withholding condemnation because you always have to use discernment. But Keep an open mind with people, you know, don't ban them too quickly. Don't dismiss them too quickly. You know, one of the things that I've been noting too is we've had a lot of interesting conversation around Jordan Pierce on Twitter. But, you know, I follow some of you on Twitter and I know you both on and off Twitter. And you know what? Twitter changes you too, at least my perception of you via Twitter. And so, you know, it's really easy to sort of dismiss people because of the way they're on Twitter. Elon Musk makes a comment in that hour long thing where, you know, don't tweet after 3 a.m. Don't tweet when you're drunk. You know, Elon Musk has some of his own Twitter rules that he tries to follow and each of us could probably benefit from some Twitter rules. I have my own Twitter rules. But So watching Dr. John with this video was really interesting and that really sent me into taking a deeper dive into the video. Someone in the comments section had mentioned the Mark Zuckerberg, Lex Fridman interview in the very end where he talks about God. And it's interesting where Zuckerberg talks about the virtual and the physical, which I think isn't a great way of saying it. But and then, of course, yeah, it was a great book recommendation. Someone I get a lot of book recommendations and video recommendations and I can't possibly read or take in all of it. Yeah, this is this is one whoops. Bern really wanted me to listen to Nick Cave on Unheard and I started listening to it. The thing is, I don't know Nick Cave that well. But anyway, I get a lot of book recommendations. And when when Nate said, oh, you really got to read Tradition and Apocalypse, just the title. And I've read David Bentley Hart before, so I knew what I was getting into. But just the title was very much on my mind when I was working through my Lenten series. So when when you try to colonize me, you're going to find this in the rough draft for Sunday that comes through because I'm I talk quite openly in the Sunday sermon about colonizing. Because I'm dealing with Matthew 28 this week. But it's we're all in a sense trying to colonize each other. And let's say big me a little that we're all trying to colonize each other. And as I said in the video today, just sending a book, that's probably not going to do it. And what what does it is a relationship. And that's again, part of the reason why I'm really glad my channel isn't bigger than it is. It's really in some ways too big already. Because again, the truth is, I would love to have much bigger, deeper relationships with pretty much all of you. I mean, there's nobody there's nobody in here. What's there? There's nobody in here that I don't want to know better. Hasidic tales of the Holocaust. Wow. And Jacob's been as Jacob's been as successful in colonizing me as almost anyone. But in all fairness, Jacob's put in the work. Jacob's put in the work. He's got some advantages. He lives in the state and he's come up to Sacramento a couple of times. So, yeah, colonizing is a colonizing is a very difficult thing. But it's a very worthwhile thing. So like I was about to say, I can't think of almost anybody that I've met in the last five years that I wouldn't like to have. More of a relationship with. But I can't. And so and there's often the case that there often isn't a book that I get a taste of that I think, well, I'd like to read that. And I don't. And I can't because of time and space. And so this is part of my ontological argument for the existence of a blessed afterlife where we will actually get a chance to read all the books and improve them and have the relationships with the people. And have the relationships and go deeper and and and and so. All right. Kate has a question. Do you believe in fate or destiny? Or is it what you call God's plan? All fate and destiny. Those are very Greek terms. Those are pagan terms. I think. I think God very much does have have a plan, but. Unlike fate or destiny. God's plan is. Interactive with us. In other words, God's plan does not destroy our freedom. In a way that fate and destiny kind of do. You know, I'm a Calvinist, so I believe in Providence and but but Providence is a very is a very interesting thing. And, you know, this gets into the whole question of prayer. Does God answer prayer? Yes. Does God move us to pray? Yes. So the difficult and this very much gets into the whole thing I was talking about in terms of these dualities. So. I don't know that we with our little brains can ever think this through deeply enough, but. Yeah, I believe in Providence. All right. Yeah, today's video was fun. We're glad I did it. So the way my Friday goes, I will have. I'll make my rough draft today. I will do some other odds and ends. We have a congregational meeting on Sunday. So I have to get ready for Sunday. Lots of things to do. Let's drop the. Drop the link in. Pin the link. Any questions you have, you can just put questions. It's NPVK any books because my wife still gets mad at me when I buy too many theological books. Yeah, I have an office, Sam. And so my wife doesn't see a lot of the theological books I buy. My wife, when she comes into my office, she just shakes her head. Just she just she just shakes her head. So. All right. So if anybody wants to come into the room and talk a little bit again, the rule is I'm on if your camera isn't done, I'm not going to let you in. And the reason for that is we we treat each other better if we see each other's faces. So there he is. There he is. My greatest ally. We have to talk about the leaker. We have to talk about what's what's a leaker. I have no idea what you're talking about. OK, so this 21 year old young man in the Massachusetts Air National Guard is working in I.T. This is the official story as far as we know, is working in I.T. And has access to a lot of very important, highly classified things about Ukraine and Russia. He belongs to a small discord server. And apparently he's one of these ortho bros, Eastern Orthodox gamer guys. And he they're having discussions about the Ukraine Russia situation. And he leaks. A bunch of highly classified things that end up in Ukrainian social media and then in Russian social media and then all over the world and the New York Times and Washington Post helped the FBI track this guy down. And he got arrested yesterday. That's it. There's a reason they classify things. We I think we all understand it. I'm not now they are they classify too much. But who knows what it is. What does that what does that have to do with us, Jacob? Exactly. I don't care about the classified information so much. It's I think we at least in this corner, we I don't know if you saw in Bridges of Meaning there was there were two channels that were dedicated. To the Ukraine Russia conflict and the schism in the Eastern Orthodox Church between the ecumenical patriarch and the the patriarch of Moscow. The interrelation like religion and how these spirits are physically manifesting in the United States and the Ukraine and Russia. This this is very very pertinent to everything we're talking about in this little corner. It may be but I don't know enough about it to connect the dots. So Kale has opinions I'm sure Kale has opinions Kale has no opinions. Kale has no opinions at all. No I have a few. I hope nobody else does. Anyway, all right all right so you all jumped onto the channel. Chad's doing his thing. What do you guys want to bring up? So Jacob wanted to bring up the leaker. Well I wanted I wanted to bring up if you if you start I don't know if you got to this because I was lagging behind in the stream. But if you want to start your own symbolic world or something like that and production team hit me up man. We can make it happen. It'll be still shoddy but it'll be pretty good. I don't I don't want to run a website and I think my contribution is about as eclectic as possible. I would rather spend my time motivating people to have in real life events which is basically what I'm doing through estuary and then through these events that are happening. So that's that's really where I want to put my priorities instead of I mean Jacob's or Jonathan's project is just different from mine. So I think that much more fits what he's doing. Did you see the chat GTPs GPT story time thing I made. I did. Well I did one where screw tape letters. I did a screw tape letter which was crazy and then crazy. And then I did one. I tried to get it to tell a story. It doesn't really do it didn't really do a story. It did like a summary of a story. It didn't really do any scenes. It doesn't didn't do dialogue. It's not really as smart as you might think. Well one of the things that I'm learning with the with these AI tools are you have to really know what you're doing in order to sort of set them up to get the kind of output you want. So my sister my sister is my sister is a lot like me but she works in areas that are very different than I do. And she's been playing around a lot with making art using AI. And so she's actually going to she told me she wanted to make a video sort of teaching me how to do it or teaching people how to do it. So I'm interested in that because I like the Grimm's already playing around with that with thumbnails. So I kind of wanted to do that. But when I when I listened to her and talked to her about this I it was immediately apparent that I use AI to sort of be a easier search engine like give me the list of you know a list of something and blah blah blah blah blah blah. So it's actually not terribly accurate but it's easier than a search engine if you're looking for certain kinds of things that you know enough about so you can catch the errors. But if you really want to have it produce something impressive figuring out exactly what to say to it. It's almost like programming language. So yeah in a sense I mean like with the storytelling you might as well just write the dang story. Yeah you might be able to you know throw a bunch of stuff in there and like a summary of a plot and it might be able to help organize things but it just isn't like I described it to Gavin like it's like a piece of paper can't create art even if you inspire it to you know. And so like you I was listening I've been like on this Nick Cave rabbit hole because of this Nick Cave conversation I listened to which is fascinating. But like listening to his like more recent music it's like there's no way that AI could ever even come up with this stuff because it's so seemingly random and personal like you know so in a sense we probably shouldn't be that afraid of it. Besides my job isn't going to go anywhere. I don't see no GPT doing it but I don't. All right I'm going to chat. I'm going to hop out though I just want to say thank you and toodles. All right Chad. Mr. Kale. Yeah. I touched on a lot of stuff I know probably ringing your bell. Yeah a bunch of stuff I mean I this morning I was listening to your conversation in which you were I think you were playing back and commenting on a Kings North discussion and you mentioned that you took an interim class one of those interim session classes on Mumford City and history and just really intrigued by that it's something I did as an undergrad too I have the big thick book right back here when I was in your office. Yeah, yeah and it's funny how often so you know that book has a couple the chapter on Rome is really probably the chapter you know that we should all kind of read now because I think we are in you know I know this is a little bit of a tired comparison but I think in the Mumford sense we are we're living in the necropolis right and what's interesting to me is that Mumford talks about Rome as this hellscape and we seem all of our dystopian projected fantasies are kind of Neo Roman in their sort of mean complexity or something like that. And I wonder what how do you see you seem to suggest that that that the machine is is is old right and we tend to think of the machine as something as sort of internet you know post internet. And I just sort of wonder when I was listening this morning and I hit you with up with the DM I said you know this is like Britain and loggers in in that hideous strength you know this idea that there are these sort of these two sort of overlapping tensions in civilization between you know pulls toward loggers and you know pulled towards the enchanted and pulls toward the machine and I was wondering if this had any further thoughts on that. Yeah, yeah. No further thoughts but I, you're right. There are so many tensions we're working on right now. Because the machine is fundamentally sort of a an automatic thing. I mean, you know there was you know early website mechanic mechanical Turk where you'd. You just have it something you just you just go and manage this thing for me and the and what we're sort of delegating out to machines is getting more and more complex. But yeah, the basic principle is the same and so when things North said, you know following month for that we've been making machines, we just use slaves as machines. Right. And I think that's well, well, it's interesting from the Christian standpoint, you know, Muffin talks about this and I think techniques and civilization, if I'm, if I'm remembering, but the thing is, you know, I think that's the thing that's interesting. I'm remembering, but that so much of the early technology in the West was was created by the monasteries and like, you know, early clocks were invented so that they could learn how to pray on time. So there's this really interesting kind of Christian version of order, right, sort of Christian almost a kind of, you know, monastic left hemispheric tendency, you know, that was sort of, you know, and you said something last week like, you know, religion. I tweeted something out about it that I was sparked from something you said, but like religion is is in certain respects sort of built out because of the unpredictability of spirit. Right. You know, there's like this is straight I sort of said structure and community tosses sort of the binds but I don't know if that makes any sense. Well, that's sort of, you know, Peterson in the Exodus seminar, as he's done in other places keeps quoting this sort of young joke about, you know, religious basically religious institutions were invented to keep people from religious experience. Right, right, right. And that's that's sort of true. It's sort of, I mean, to manage religious experience. I mean, think about the fact that if someone wants to, someone's like, well, I really want to I really need to pay attention to my subconscious and so I'm going to pay attention to dream And so the first thing, okay, well then keep a notepad by your bed even the last chapter of Peterson's 12 rules for life is all about the light pen, you know, yeah, that's right. That's right. So start writing down your dreams. Well, you know what, the minute you write down your dreams. They are no longer a dream. They are they are another thing, and they are they are your first step towards what we would call a religion instead of just an experience. Right. Yeah. So that's an interesting connection between, you know, what he'll equip later on that young says that we're that we're always dreaming right you know that that even consciousness is a sort of form of shared dream, but I mean that's what the artist does and this is something that Shakespeare rips on all the time. And I think that's a really interesting connection between the And it seems like we worship storytellers because they afford a space in which we can both dream together or all 10 of us can dream together something like that. And these psycho technologies in worship so I think a lot about so you know when I went to the Catholic mass is the architecture and again Protestant Church is often pretty plain Catholic Church, they're expressing something it might not be great depending on where it is but they're obviously They're expressing something and there's way more attention given to decor. It was really interesting because there was a guy there playing an electronic keyboard, singing mostly sort of evangelical songs from the 60s and 70s I'm like, well that's interesting and then you've got the priest and the priests meditation, you know he's doing a lot of talk about CS Lewis, so I'm just watching this. And I think that's a really interesting connection between thinking about the psycho technologies of a Roman mass versus let's say the psycho technologies of an evangelical or Pentecostal worship service. That's a definite psycho technology to provoke a specific religious experience. You know, this is what we're doing. Yeah, that was like when I when I, you know, I went to Rome to study when I was a sophomore, sophomore in college, and it was a semester in Rome. And, you know, up until that point I had, you know, I think I had been the St. Patrick's Cathedral and like that was the only like, when I would just say like a real church that I'd been to everything else was sort of, you know, like the church that I grew up in was they literally built the gym, and they housed the church in the gym until they could raise enough money to build the church and they never wound up, you know, because that could do happen. But, you know, so when you go to Rome, and you see, and this is something I'm sure Pagio talks about all the time, but like the buildings, you know, the whole thing is a technology formed with with repeating patterns, symbols, you know, ordering, you know, whatever the mind, the body in all the different ways. And it's all out of the apocalypse. I mean, all the iconography is out of the apocalypse. And, and so that there's this sort of this deep embodied instruction, at least in theory. Now, you know, a lot of that gets, you know, decluttered, you know, so. Well, if you look at if you look at the tradition of English hymnody, right, it's, it's almost all from the apocalypse as well. Right, right. And in other words, you have this transformation of architecture into music. Yeah, I love that. Yeah, I love that. And, and hymnody, if you look at this sort of the golden age of English hymnody when in England, they were writing hymns in order to teach the masses doctrine and theology and to catechize them. It's this, you know, it's this massive movement, this just him after him after him after him and it just it just changes England. And of course, that of course will all come to America and will found American evangelicalism in many ways. All right, well, we should bring in Eric. Eric, what's up, everybody? Hey, I actually wanted to bring the conversation back to the conversation we're having about ideology and bring up the conversation about Joe a little bit. I posted a comment on one of your videos earlier this week about how Slavoj Zizek think that's how you pronounce his name, but he had a really good clip and he actually had a lot of other things on the book of Job as a critique of ideology and how, you know, the book of Job kind of starts this this change in how how people see success and failure in the world and how, you know, previously to this point, you know, you were blessed by the gods if you did, you know, something good or you're cursed by them. And that's kind of what these these three friends of Job said every time, you know, they would come to company, you know, try and talk to him while he was going through his thing. But Slavoj really makes the point that at the end, God says that there there was no reason for you didn't do anything wrong. This was a, you know, a bet essentially between him and Satan and that this kind of starts this whole I think Chesterton also brings this up where that this starts this critique of ideology. It starts this. I don't know where I'm going with this, but I don't know if you had a chance to think about that at all. Well, I think the book the book of Job is So in some ways, the book of Job is a powerful I talked a little bit about these these dualisms and God number one and God number two. The book of Job just takes God number one dogma and puts it back on its heels because the heart of sort of God number oneness is is karma do good things good things happen. And it's sort of karma plus rationality to say, okay, so if you know you have a syllogism so do good things good things happen. Therefore, if bad things are happening, it must be because you have done bad things. I mean, that's essentially the argument of Job's friends and and the book of Job says no, no, and the whole framing of it says you little man, which is basically what God says to Job at the end of the book you little man. What do you really know? What do you really know? And can you sort of take God number one theology and figure out the world and the answer is no. So that that alone begins to critique and deconstruct all sorts of rationalities and ways that we proceed. And you know, Zizek, Vivian Vivian notes that she took a class with Zizek back in the 90s and he hasn't changed a bit. I think that's probably true. Also, you know, there's a there's a whole little corner in the corner with with Sherry and so there's a there's a there's a there's a very vibrant group of people around here that would love to do nothing better than to talk hours with you about the book of Job. So I haven't read Chesterton on Job, but Chesterton is always insightful. Yeah, definitely. I think that's kind of maybe why I brought this up is talking about the trans debate recently and that kind of the the main problem is that we have, you know, people who are clearly suffering some sort of discouragement from the book of Job. And this ideology is what actually has emerged recently that is trying to give them reasons and answers and and labels for their internal feelings and leading them down towards, you know, past that might be more harmful to them than, you know, their natural past. And so I think that's maybe why I'm thinking on this subject that, you know, we're living in a time period where ideologies are everywhere and and you know, they're becoming so harmful to certain people that we really need to be very, very careful and critique the any kind of belief system that we have. And so I think that's maybe why I'm thinking on this subject that, you know, we're living in a time period where ideologies are everywhere and and you know, they're becoming so harmful to certain people that we really need to be very, very careful and critique any kind of belief system or any kind of new idea that it's emerged recently. And so I think that's maybe why I'm thinking on this subject that, you know, we're living in a time period where ideologies are everywhere and and you know, they're becoming so harmful to certain people that we really need to be very, very careful and critique any kind of belief system or any kind of new idea that's emerging right now. There's in the in the the witch trial of JK Rowling in one of the episodes, they talked to Contrapoints, but then they also talked to someone named Noah, who transitions at a very young age and the person, you know, it's a lovely interview and the person sounds quite together. But I just can't help thinking at their age when I think about and any older person sort of mentally remembers themselves that in past ages and thinks, oh boy, oh boy. And when you do something like the something as dramatic as significantly altering your physiology and your body chemistry, I fear that decades from now we are going to have a population of people that are going to be really angry. So yeah, I agree. I think that's good people want that to happen. I think that Paul, did you notice? I mean, so because of you, I went and listened to Contrapoints talk about the podcast, and I was talking about on that podcast, and it was precisely what you and both vocal and Benjamin Boyce and Pajol were talking about this idea of I have no power like Contrapoints is like, no, I have zero power. Yeah, totally. Totally. Yeah. Yeah, you're the darling of an enormous number of people and you. Yeah, but you know, I wonder if I could just put in here. I mean, I know why we're all laughing because all of the sort of the cultural momentum is flowing in that direction. But, you know, is it possible sort of this is maybe me being a little bit Kings Northian here, but I mean, is it possible that that's an incredible statement on a statement, you know that if I have no control. I mean, I would argue, you know, in my sort of most, you know, honest Christian way that that they're very much under something, some other control, and we would call that a spirit, and I have got no problem saying that, you know, and, and, you know, that of course is never going to break the, you know, the real fourth wall. Of a rolling pot of the rolling podcast, you know, for obvious reasons, but I mean, that's what I think it is. And, you know, maybe that's a sort of a moment of honesty. Yeah. Well, she definitely she definitely thinks she has no power. There's no question about right so but vocal I think it was vocal was saying or maybe it was Lindsay asked or whatever so it's somewhere but you know that that it's absolutely vital that they always understand themselves as always being the beset upon, you know, fringe operator right. But, you know, so so I get it on an ideological level but if you're sort of whatever doing the kind of level up thing and in terms really look at what's going on here, it would appear that it's true on that other level too. All right, Mark, your time in the spotlight you jumped in. Yes. Yeah, like I just want to talk about navigating patterns. Well, I, I've always wanted to talk about navigating. We're going to do. Since you brought it up, we're going to do judgment on the live stream at 7pm Eastern. We did discernment judgment. The last one's going to be action in that series. Hopefully I can explain it. And that's why I like all this talk about, about ideology. And the segues into I really like what Eric was saying, by the way, it was really, really good stuff. Your video where you mentioned, jk Rowling and equated that with religion. Half as long, more of it. But the discussion really needs to be around ideology versus religion versus cult. These things need to be discerned by people, right? Because they don't understand. And then you can extend it. You could say, well, what makes a good religion versus a bad religion? And of course, navigating patterns. I have a video called religious patterns. If you haven't seen it, you should check it out. It's really good. But but it's important to realize this because a lot of what say Eric was talking about that you were sort of leaning into would be which John Brevicki would call a perennial problem. We're stupid when we're young. We don't feel right. Well, no kidding. You're growing up because you don't fit anywhere. You don't even fit the same clothes week to week when you're young. Like, right. But we don't we're not accounting for that anymore. Right. So we really need that conversation and that discernment around what's a cult, what's an ideology, what's a religion, what's parasitic? Because, yeah, that's what Eric was really talking about is, oh, some some parasite came in with a solution to a perennial problem. And I would argue that actually, as much as I love John, he's wrong. They're not perennial problems because they don't have solutions. They can't be problems that they don't have solutions. Right. It's more like patterns in life that happen. Right. They're inevitable. You know, you maybe know all inevitable in the course of your life. But across the course of life for people, these problems are inevitable. Like almost everybody suffers from grief at some point. But then to John's point, there's no solution to grief. And therefore, grief is not a perennial problem. It's just a thing. Yeah. Yeah. That's a good point. That's a good point, Mark. Thanks. So, yeah, more more discernment, more talking about ideology versus cult versus religion. And I would argue that religion is more around something you can live within and that holds the entirety of your life and not just your life in the moment. Because a lot of these things. And I think this is what Eric was pointing to, whether you realize it or not. Right. Your life in the moment as a teenager who's confused with hormones and changes and growing and learning about new things. Yeah, you can have a solution to that by just changing one thing. But you're not going to be that teenager all the time. And that's where those ideologies fail. That's where a cult would fail. That's where that's where a better or worse religion would handle that better or worse in the fullness of the cycle of life. Accounting for babies, accounting for children, accounting for teenagers, accounting for adults, accounting for older adults. All of this stuff is wrapped up in that. It's another thing I really liked about Mary Harrington talking about the three stages in the divine feminine. Right. And that in that archetype. So I just want to say more of that, please. Please. All right. I want to I want to agree with you because I've had the same thought. And thank you for elaborating on what I was saying. But part of the problem we have is we need some sort of education on what is a cult and what's a religion. Because in America you have freedom of religion. But does that mean you have freedom of cults too? Like you can you can make your own cult and you can harm people because cults slide under the radar as religions for decades, centuries before their true harm is exposed. And then what do you do with all the people that were harmed by them? It's the same thing with this new trans ideology. You know, you can point out a number of different cults that that do the exact same thing. Yeah. Yep. I want to I want to I want to highlight one of Raj's points here. Do religion add religions advocate for discernment, whereas ideologies and cults do not? I think that's a big piece of religions have a degree of of of humility and liberty about them. Go ahead. I mean, my you know, my good friend Steve, you know, Scodic, you know, the sort of the the trad deconstruction guy from one Peter five, his primary critique with tratted tradism in the Roman Catholic Church or that variety is precisely that. That it sort of required you to sort of not ask questions about certain things. I don't know if I agree with him 100 percent about that in the specifics, but I totally get what he means. And I think that Raj is probably onto something. I mean, my when I took him out on ideologies, of course, that was always my teacher always that was that was the point. And, you know, he would always say, look, if if if if a system, you know, requires that you ignore something and then specifically says, don't ask that question, then it's an ideology. And, you know, and so we would spend, you know, so we went through all the various iterations of modern ideologies and we would find the spot, you know, where Mark says explicitly, you know, don't ask that question, you know, and you could sort of do that with all of them. And so we were taught, you know, for you know, and that that's why I reference Justin Martyr way back in the day. And I think that's what I think is important, Paul, you know, that that if it's true, it's Christian, you know, in other words, Christianity for it to be true has to be completely unafraid and fearless about that. And as soon as it puts cultists or whatever in front of truth, then that's where problems rise. And that's what corruption is about. Right. Yeah. And all of its varieties. Robert, you've been waiting a while. Hey, everybody is the New England estuary beginning. It's we don't have any dates yet. We don't we don't have a venue. We're looking for a venue. Wendy is going through the protocol and I'll join. I'll do that probably this week or I'll jump in one of the calls. I didn't mention it, but me and him had a two hour conversation at Starbucks the other day. That wasn't a short video mark that we had. There was a long video. We didn't film it. It could have been a long. But yeah, it was good. I. What did we talk about, Mark? All kinds of things. This little corner, we talked about all the different aspects, some of the T.D. underbelly stuff that nobody knows about. Some of the more overt stuff that everybody misunderstands. It was all good. So I was telling Mark about. So I'm also I also have camera equipment and stuff like this. And Justin was on the art group last week, and that was really cool. I got to talk to him a little bit, and he told us about his check out his YouTube channel. It's really great. Really great. Great stuff with his channel. Yeah. If you want to learn about filmmaking and especially the documentary parts, he teaches this book. Well, it's a guy called Bill Nichols wrote a book and Justin is teaching that book in his class and goes over the different types of documentaries that are you can categorize. And I was telling Mark that I think what this corner needs is it's called cinema verite style. Sort of which is like you kind of it's modified. There's there's different ways you can do it. But I think it's like through the characters of this corner, you get to know the corner the best. And I would say that Mark is like one of the characters. It's definitely one of the characters. And of course, you know, there's a lot of characters and other things I want to see is is what is it like when Paul goes to White and Zill? What's what's that? What does it look like when that happens? I think that would be good. That would be some good verite. All in Massachusetts. Is it the same as Paul in California? Well, tune in. Find out. There may be less homeless people, but I don't know. There's probably a lot of differences. Yeah. Yeah. No, White and Zill is in a time of year. So I mostly just hang out with my mom and White and Zill when I'm when I'm there. You know, you could I don't know if the location works well, but you could talk to the pastors in White and Zill. I think they would give you space. They are interested. They are interested in starting an estuary. It's just that they, like many other pastors of real things, are cautious about guarding their their time. Right. I think a once a month kind of thing that I would because it's about an hour and 10 away from me. Which for that's a once a month, I could do that. I mean, I could do it more than that, but it's just sort of gets impractical a little bit. No, and then plus White White and Zill is kind of out of the way for a lot of people. Yeah, it is out of the way. It's a small town that's out of the way. It you could I do have a brother in law who is at Park Street right in the Boston Common. And I don't know. He's not a he's not an elder or pastor or anything like that. But, you know, I if I put in a good word for you, he would listen to me. He's my brother in law. So I don't know how flexible Park Street is with that kind of thing. Park Street's fairly conservative. So but I wish I had more Boston resources for you. There's just tons of stuff in Boston. Boston Public Library would do it. Oh, yeah. Some groups have met in libraries. So I forget which which sure was meeting in a library. So we did it and we did it up in Nevada City. We had we had a group in Nevada City. So we just lost him. All right, John, what do you what do you want to say? You think I you think I thought this was the old man called group. Well, look at look at. Yeah. So that's right. I'm called. So I thought this was like a bald man group. Except for that guy. That guy is that guy's a heretic right in the bottom there. He's a guy right now. Right. Right now. Look at your hair. Repent. Repent. Look at all that hair. Repent of your head of hair. We got plenty of hair. No hair on my head. All right. Did you have a question, John? I yeah. So obviously, thank you for having me up again. You guys are talking about like the function of religion as opposed to function of cults. And I could maybe chime in with my my viewpoint on this and that a religion is obviously it's a Latin word for relic are like the whole together. So basically, it's a you know, it's something that you're supposed to hold together in times of, you know, peace and in times of turbulence. Whereas a cult would be something like maybe a reactionary kind of group that forms, you know, either on the Internet or in real life or whatever. And I've I've seen this with like definite cults. It seems like most people in cults, though, they're in denial that they're in a cult. But, you know, when they're when they're afraid to leave, like they're afraid to leave because they're afraid that they won't be able to make new friends or build new networks. So they're dependent upon that cult. So it almost comes like an unhealthy codependency. Whereas, I guess, a religion actually empowers people, gives them a direct way towards God and spirituality. And it actually empowers people to be better citizens, dare I say that word, and and more healthy for the nation as well. Any comments on that? I would say cults. Yeah, most people fall into cults. I find it. I'm like, what the fuck? Yeah, sorry. They find a call. I'm sorry. So like, they're not really just like sticking there for their friend group is because the cult has offered them solutions to all, you know, whatever problem they thought they had. The cult has given them an answer that is simpler than what reality is. And so they've gone all in on that that one. And it usually isn't until they're they're forced to wake up by something in their life, the cult fails them in some way. That's when they they you know, they realize the scales fall from their eyes and they're like, wait, what have I been doing for the last 10, 20, 30 years? And and then, you know, that's the hard process of making sure the person doesn't double down at that point and be like, no, no, no, no, I just got to, you know, I have my faith is weak. I just got to read, you know, re educate myself. But then, you know, taking those little moments to wake a person up, be like, that doesn't make sense, does it? And then, you know, you can slowly have the dominoes fall. One of the one of the one of the things I watched the HBO, the HBO documentary on NXIVM and Mark Regari, is that his name? And that NXIVM cult was very interesting. There's there's there's some interesting documentaries on cults. I think I think, Eric, you said it very well. They they have a sort of this and religions can do this, too. I've seen religions do this where, you know, Jesus is the answer for the world today. OK, is Jesus the answer for hair loss? There's there's a sense in which the you sort of constrict the world so that it fits your answer and and cults manage to use all sorts of manipulation to sort of keep people in that idea. And and then at some point, at some point, hopefully the the the Oxford Union appearance of Megan Phelps Roper. Oh, is there? I'm really tempted to do more work on that because it's a it's a classic example. And, you know, like and there's all sorts of oddities such as she was a huge Harry Potter fan and her Westboro Baptist Church had no problem with Harry Potter, which everyone would think would be no Westboro Baptist. You know, these low resolution pictures of others, they should be totally against Harry Potter back when Christians were sort of attacking J.K. Rowling for wizardry and magic. But Westboro Baptist, they're actually a very tiny church, a very hot, very smart, mostly lawyers who just had a particular matrix of this is the matrix. And they went at it with a with a lot of effectiveness, even though it was all rather cruel. Sam, would you say that cults are idolatrous in some way? Or like a definite way? Can I take a step because this definition of cult thing? Yeah, go ahead. Yeah. I feel like most of the time the word cult should probably not be used by people because it's often meant to dehumanize as much as it's ever really used accurately. I mean, I've been accused of being in a cult more times than I can possibly repeat. And oftentimes it's for the purpose of we don't need to listen to what he says because he's basically not a human agent. He's being controlled by something bigger than him. He's brainwashed. He's diluted. He is not thinking for himself. And therefore we can put him in the category of outside needing to be engaged with, respectively. And that's a very cruel thing to do to somebody. And it never works the way that you think. It doesn't have the effect that you think of except for protecting yourself from whatever it is that you think that they're saying that you don't like. But that doesn't mean that I don't think there are such things as cults. I think that but even then it's blurry. Your mileage will vary. I mean, Jehovah's Witnesses, which is perhaps like the thing that most people would mostly agree is a cult. It benefits a lot of people that are in it. And they're not really a cult, though. I wouldn't call it cult. Well, fair enough. I find that using the word cult for them either. Even though that they can be relatively controlling and that when people leave, they often have to sacrifice lots of their relationships, including with their own family members. And that's one of those signs of cultish behavior. But like, honestly, by almost any definition of cult, it would be virtually impossible to argue that early Christianity was not a that. Oh, yeah. Go ahead. People have said before I'm sorry to interrupt, but people have said before and they do this with like early teachings of Christianity, early teachings of Islam. You know, they would have called that a cult. But then when they realized it was all about empowerment and instead of this codependency, right, how we know of is called and everyone basically adopted. I mean, if you want to talk about spiritual, like if you want if you want to differentiate between religion and cult, that would be the you know, the differentiation between the two. Whereas I think it's obviously. I'm just saying, would a cult be something that, you know, calls you to intentionally harm someone close to you for your beliefs? Would you, you know, like if you say, you know, that's definitely, that's definitely a cult. Definitely, that's definitely like if somebody who's outside of that cult is a definite infidel in your leader's mind and your leader is the embodiment of truth, faith and holiness. And so in the Book of Acts, when two people are withholding money from the financial giving to the church, so the Apostle Peter, with the power of God strikes them dead. That's right there in the beginning of the New Testament as a story within the first year or two of Christianity. I've never heard of any cult that has the power to strike people dead with a word. Well, the Jehovah's Witnesses do. Transparency. So one of the things that they get accused, specifically Jehovah's Witnesses for being a cult, is because of like the blood transfusion thing. So they will tell you that you are supposed to let your child die if they are, you know, they need a blood transfusion, and that is forbidden. You would rather have your kids die and get resurrected in the paradise than to have a life saving procedure. Yeah, so I think that Jehovah's Witnesses are right in that a blood transfusion would cause you to get the life from some other organism and exclude you from the kingdom of God in eternity. None of us know for certain that they're wrong about that, so they're doing that for a reason of love. Well, they're doing it because you say don't eat blood. The reason says that in the Old Testament, one of the laws was you're not supposed to consume blood, and their definition of it. Yeah, but that's like the sub reason. The final reason is that they want their members to enjoy life eternal and that they worry that accepting blood transfusions puts that at risk. So in a certain sense, they're taking the long view on that one. And this is what I mean. I think at the end of the day, the distinction between a cult and a not cult is that a cult benefits the leadership at the expense of its members, whereas a healthy religion benefits all of the people, is benefiting the members at the benefit of the organization simultaneously. Sort of parasite versus symbiote. But even then, your mileage will vary. There are people in healthy organizations that have been severely harmed by them, and there are people in cults who have had their lives turned around for the better. Like Jehovah's Witnesses tends to often attract people from the lower socioeconomic rungs of society. And oftentimes people with perhaps drug or alcohol or various sorts of disordered lives, and it gives them super strict rules. And it gives them a very strong community that enforces behavior along those rules. And I bet it's strained out the lives of many, many people because of that. And that there are many people who are living lives of complete disorder, drug-fueled chaos that are now the better because of Jehovah's Witnesses. I agree. But then growing your children up in that organization can be far more damaging to a child who doesn't choose it. If you're a druggie on the street and your life is messed up and they come to you and you do a 180, of course, that's great. But if you are born into it and you were raised under those rules and you're not told that there is another way to live or another way to interpret anything that they say, that seems cult-y to me. But that's perfectionism. That's part of the problem. This universality is perfectionism. This individualism where, oh, how did I only know? That's nonsense. It's not a state you can inhabit. So, yeah, sure. From a third-party perspective, with hindsight, we could work these things out in the past. But you can't do any of that in the present. And you can't do it for the future because these things aren't perfect. And that sucks. But also, too bad. That's what we're born into. Sam, did you have anything else? You just want to weigh in on the cult thing? I guess I would just always recommend that you treat people like they're human beings, even if you're worried that they're... Chad, Chad, I'm muted. Okay. And that it's particularly pernicious to take someone's sense of agency away by labeling them as a member of a cult because that's what we're born into. Because that's actually very seldom the case that someone is under some completely weird mind control thing. Most of the people in a cult believe it because they're actually a human being who believes in what their cult teaches. And they're happy to tell you so. So that's just my final piece, I guess. All right. Look who's here. Sam, before you go. Oh, go ahead. Hey, Sam, before you go, I would just like to take issue with what you said about early Christianity being a cult. Because by one definition, sociological definition that seems to be somewhat accepted these days, what they would call a cult is it doesn't have to do with the specifics of religious belief and the It doesn't have to do with the specifics of religious belief. It doesn't have to do whether or not we think that religious beliefs are good or bad or acceptable or not acceptable. It really gets down to controlling and manipulative behavior. And so from a sociological definition of the term cult, it's effectively describing a systematic set of control techniques. Right. And also, just to point out, somebody in the comments said, I think it was Ari said in the comments, like a cult is when you can't leave. Right. Or you can't leave without being disconnected from your family or without having, you know, there's certain types of things. And I guess, and I know, like we've talked about the Plymouth Brethren and stuff like that before. But, you know, and some of these and I just look at it this way. Right. Some of these are present inside of Christianity, because these are easy ways, we think, right. To try and get people to behave the right way. Right. And now, ultimately, I think it doesn't work on the long term, but it can earn short term benefits. Yeah. And I think that most cults don't can't last very long if they are intergenerationally harmful. And I actually I have a decent number of friends who are former Jehovah's Witnesses. You know, the Unitarianism has it does a relatively good job of helping those sorts of people find a home for all the obvious theological reasons. And it's interesting that I think Jehovah's Witnesses has gotten a lot worse in the last couple of decades. That I think that in the early history of the organization, a lot of its peculiar theology was there. And they were always very end times focus. But it's really under certain leadership in the recent past that it's kind of turned into the very controlling and emotionally manipulative manipulative thing that a lot of us recognize. And, you know, not that long ago, if you were to leave Catholicism, you would often be sacrificing your family to do so. My mom left Catholicism in the 70s, and it was very hard for her and her family. And, you know, it's healed and gotten better since then. But not that long in the distant past, you to leave Catholicism, you would have sacrificed basically all of your family ties. And so I don't it's I want to, you know, be a little bit fair that some of these religions that are actually healthy in the long run do have a lot of these tactics that keep people in them. And they think they're the only true one. That's like almost every religion thinks that at some level, really. Even the Unitarian Universalists have their weird cryptic way of thinking they're actually secretly the only right ones. And that I think that part of this is that from our very modern individualistic lens, we're very suspicious of any group or leadership that has any sort of authority or control over the people within it. And that's actually just been very normal and a healthy part of human history for a long time. And we just view that with suspicion now. And it looks very weird in our modern day and age. And so I'm not saying that there aren't such a thing as cults. Like when you watch that documentary about what is a wild, wild country of that thing in Oregon that had like those that guru guy and the guru lady. I'm like, OK, yeah, that's a cult. That one's a cult. The Heaven's Gate cult. The Heaven's Gate cult too is pretty, pretty terrible. I'm wondering if a cult, has there ever been a cult whose primary aim was to be of service to people outside of its community? There are cults that certainly had some element to that. But it's I mean, even any any group is going to have a balance between feeding the group itself and and benefiting outside the group. I mean, churches are always navigating that. I've seen churches that are so focused to helping everyone else. The church just sort of disappears because you have to, you know, it's it's sort of like the caretaker has to pay their own clergy salary. They don't pay other churches clergy salary. They maintain their own parking lot. They don't maintain everyone else's parking lot. So or else it wouldn't it just dissolves for the same reason that your family buys your own groceries for your own family. Maybe do a little bit of charity. But I want to get I want to get to some of the questions here. Then we'll land the plane at the half hour here. This is from Chad the alcoholic. Don't know where this guy's coming from, but he says, any thoughts on Jonathan saying that Grim is the self-proclaimed Holy Fool? I'm not sure it was charitable. I don't think Jonathan was being uncharitable. I think I think Grim. In fact, it's not that I think I know Grim makes people nervous. And when when you're talking about getting up on a cross and a jockstrap and a paintball for Jesus and having and having people shoot at you, you know, people people do care about their sacred. Oh, look at those goats. Oh, man. That is cute. People people care about this stuff. And so I wasn't surprised that that you know when you put when you put together a conference like this, it's always in this little corner. So rave rave with these kinds of questions. When do we where do we draw our lines? And so when you have someone like Grim Grizz, who is very much a fringe character in some ways, and he's not you know I've called him that in many times, but yet he's also a very, he's sort of a stakeholder too, because he's one of the, you know, he's got one of the more active communities going. How do you balance those tensions? And what we're trying to do in this little corner is just so full of trying to navigate those navigate those tensions and we've got many people in the comments section who have sensibilities and sensitivities that we trip, and then they say, I'm out of here. I'm out of here. I can't take for a vacay or I can't take Vanderkley or I can't take Peugeot or Peterson or what have you. And so, you know, when he jotted in Peugeot runs a channel called the symbolic world if you're playing, if you give them the sense that you're playing sort of free and loose with some of their sacred symbols. Yeah, people will push back. It's just what happens. I think it was an insult though because he says we're living, Jonathan always points out that we're living in the upside down and so the Holy School would be exactly what you need in an upside down world right. Yeah, yeah, no I don't I don't think he meant it insulting or dismissive he, you know, for, you know, and I've noticed this, I mean, people take their sacred things seriously, and the Orthodox have things they take very seriously so what what he said to you, Paul was I would be against anything that was in the direction of D sec or the secularization and that and and that when he was like the paintball for Jesus thing like sort of like how liberal churches and even evangelical churches with some painting switch evangelism thing, they get some mileage out of taking a holy thing, stepping it down a little bit so that it's a slightly transgressive thing to do. And that like, ooh, like I'm doing, you know, we're slightly desacralizing something and I get to be a part of that. But they use that as train a hope that eventually will move in the direction of secularization again. And, and I think that that's what has pageo. It was interesting to hear like, sometimes you get a sense that Jonathan Pedro really has very strong moral taste buds. He does. A lot of the times he's pretty easy going but then like sometimes you hear very, I don't know, red liney pageo. And, and like that that came out in him in a way that I didn't expect when you're talking. Yeah, no, I wasn't surprised at all by that. And some of that red lineiness, people, yeah, people manage where and when they, they show that red lineiness in them. So, no, that's, that's true. Well, and that's, I wanted to point to that again, as part of the problem that, you know, clearly exhibited all over the place, although again, it's not really a problem because it's not a solution. If you try to interpret yourself, if you try to do the judgment yourself, a perfectly innocent statement sounds like an attack. And that's, that's the issue. That's why I'm talking about judgment tonight at 7pm on Navigating Patterns. So sometimes it's appropriate to do that, to, to say, oh, what did he really mean? Right. But often we can't know. So I was out to dinner with my friend and we came back to this house and she asked me, she said, are they home? And I'm like, that what I know. I've been with you this whole time. I, I don't, why, why would you ask me that? She asked me such a question. I couldn't possibly have the information. I'm not in the house. I don't know if they're, they weren't home, by the way. I didn't know that. I was like, why are you asking me this question? Why are you asking me to judge? I had no idea. Well, I have to definitely get in CW's Super Chat. And it's a shame that Kale left before I got the Super Chat in. Thoughts on the legacy of Harold Bloom and the overall health and ongoing viability of the Western canon. He follows this up to, with Kale. We'll have an, Kale will have an opinion on my Super Chat question. But I'd also like to hear from others on the notion of Western canon of literature. That's classical liberalism. This is, I corrected, I actually caused a problem for poor James Lindsay. I corrected James Lindsay about liberalism. I said, you can't use liberalism. You have to use classical liberalism. That's what the liberalism is grounded in. And that's what constrains it. And then it works. Like when Jordan Peterson says, I'm a classical liberal, and maybe he doesn't even realize this, he's saying something very profound and important. The liberalism aspect is grounded in the classics. It's grounded in this. Yeah, yeah. And that changes it. Because if you have constraints for the liberalism, then it's not anything goes, safety religion, race religion, climate religion, whatever other religion we want to come up with this week. That's liberalism. Because it's pure. It's untainted in some way. And so the Western canon is the thing that lays down the groundwork, that historical grounding for the constraints that keep the liberalism in check such that it doesn't just spread out and universalize across the world and then vanish because there's no difference between anything and now killing people and not killing people is the same. Well, and it's helpful to mention the Roman Catholic Erasmus, because in many ways, it was Erasmus in the late Renaissance period, early Reformation period. Erasmus redid classical education, and this Erasmian process permeated all the way up until, you know, much more modernistic education that emerged in the 20th century. And so even though a lot of people love a lot of Orthodox and Catholics like pointing fingers at Protestants, Erasmus was actually deeply foundational in this project of... And the Renaissance broadly was also very much into breaking out of the Christian canon into the Western canon, and the Renaissance was mostly a Catholic affair. I guess my two cents, CW is an awesome person. I think that it's sort of part of the desaclarization, I need to learn how to say that word of English, of theology departments and English departments. And Paul, you talk about that a lot. How English departments took over the theology department. And so, okay, so we needed a new canon that wasn't the New Testament canon or the Christian canon. But it's very hard to justify what that is. It was hard enough for Christians to come up with a Christian canon. It's virtually impossible to defend a Western canon. And the postmodernists and the campus activists have had a heck of an easy time shooting that apart. And I don't necessarily agree with those critiques, but, you know, they have a point in that it does seem arbitrary, and that you need something to explain why it's not arbitrary. And you're going to have a really difficult time doing that without something transcendent to point to to defend it. And so I don't think it's a I think it's an untenable middle ground to just have something like a Western canon. I'm not saying don't read Plato. I like reading Plato too. But I think that a Christian can defend reading Plato better than a humanist can. Yeah, yeah. It was interesting in the Megan Phelps Roper talk at Oxford Union, she was asked, Are you still religious? And she basically said, Well, literature is sort of, you know, she basically said literature is sort of my Bible. And I thought that's too, she moved, she made that move. It was very interesting. All right, four minutes left. All right. I guess maybe I have a little bit of maybe I lost a little bit of a train of my thought. But now, when you say classical liberalism, what does that mean exactly? And how has that taken over Christianity in some way? I think classic liberalism is best seen in New England. New England has a history and that's basically the hub of classical liberalism. Right, Mark? Didn't we talk about that? Yes, we did talk about that. Mark, can I read on that? What would be the definition of classical liberalism? Based in the Western canon. Like John Locke. No, you can't narrow it down to enlightenment at all. Because the enlightenment is informed by Plato. The enlightenment is the rediscovery of the Greek and Roman texts. The enlightenment doesn't work without that. It doesn't make sense. I think that's the point of Plato because when you read Plato's Republic, it is not, Plato's Republic is not an enlightenment political organ. It's not political at all. And we anachronistically put it in a political frame. I'm pissed actually now that I'm reading it because I'm like, I knew everybody misunderstood this book. There's no politics in it at all. The whole chapter two makes it clear. The purpose of coming up with the city is to solve a specific set of problems around scalability and children. Right? And so it states Gnosticism very clearly and it states in order to understand justice. That's the only goal. One goal, justice. Justice is not sufficient for a city. So it can't be political. It can't be. It is not possible that he's talking about politics in the book anywhere. Not possible. It's ruled out. You should write a book about this, Mark. That's wrong. He's talking about justice. He's not talking about anything else explicitly. I think what's happening. There's a book club that we do on the Texas Wisdom community YouTube channel. You can see more of my thoughts on this there. We'll be doing more book club resuming next next Saturday, not this Saturday. Go ahead, Eric. I was just saying what I think is happening why, you know, the conversation of classical liberal and what is the classics and what are we basing all, you know, Western literature on is a symptom of a larger trend that's honestly been going on probably for decades now where there's like this archaic revival. Is that we've gotten to a point in our culture, society that we don't know who we are, where we're going. And it seems like we've reached a dead end and no one has a vision for the future anymore. So everybody is trying to go back in time to a period where the world made sense. And if you are raised religious, you're going back to some sort of religious condemnation. If you're a liberal or educated in some sort of way, you're going back to the classics and trying to find what is in our past that made the world make sense and where along this timeline did everything go so haywire. And and there's also a reason why I think psychedelics and shamanism are resurgent too, because that's as far back as you can go. You can't go back further than, you know, people in the woods taking drugs and there was no writing and just singing songs and, you know, being a tiny community. And the people are searching for something in our past that can give us stability today, whether it's classical liberalism, whether it's psychedelics, whether it's Christianity, Islam, something has to be giving us that foundation. Because if we continue where we're at, it's just a cliff. That's the problem of progressivism, right? Which video on a navigating patterns. But yeah, you can't think that he says we can't go back. But that's wrong. We have to go back to a point where we had a base so we could stand somewhere to see the future. And the Renaissance was going back. Right. The arguments around where that's going to happen, because even he says we can't go back and then says Neoplatonism. I'm like, I don't know what to tell you, John. His awakening from the meeting crisis was going back to the very beginning. If you started episode one and do all 50, he literally goes back as far as you can go back. So like he's doing the same thing. He's trying to find something in our past to give us stability. I'm going to say something controversial possibly. Is it the possibility that we have social decay right now and people lack direction in our life and all areas of society? Is that because of the sexual liberation and the growing number of single parent households? No, nobody ever says that. No, I think what like you're right. But we have done something. Right. That's a serious question, though, because because there's a lot of everybody saying like there's no disagreement on that. OK, OK. The question is what caused that? That's right. I guess. OK, that's not controversial. But the question is how do you even in yourself and others? Because sexual sexual desire is a you know, I remember reading the I think it was Sidhartha Gautama and you know, he's achieving enlightenment. He says something to the if I had any other desire stronger than sexuality, I probably wouldn't have made it because it's like sex is a powerful thing. And you know, hey, happily so. We're still here. Oh, yeah, I'm not I'm not I'm not trying to like be a puritan or anything like that. I'm just saying because of the lack of sexual morality, I guess, or lack of repentance for people committing adultery and ending no fault divorce and that you had the the breakdown of a family and the family unit. And basically only single mothers are raising well, not only single mothers. Over 50 percent in America right now are being raised by single mothers and they're not, you know, the next generation is not being revived like they're supposed to do with a traditional structure. And so basically like maybe one of the reasons why we lack direction in our life because our all of our structures that that help the industrial civilization together are falling apart. And it's almost moral chaos at this point. And so people are kind of scrambling on where to go from here. So I was wondering what your thoughts. Absolutely. Nobody is saying that. Not a one. Nobody out there is talking about the destruction of the family. Certainly not James Obson 20 years ago. Certainly not. I mean, people have been talking about that forever. And partly because I think the harder questions are number one, what are the best tools to help people achieve? Because actually, chastity, let's call it to use that as a short term. Chastity is an achievement. How can you help people achieve it? I mean, you can you can, you know, try all kinds of ways to sort of cut off people's ability to enact things, but then it squishes out into all other ways. And so, you know, one of the videos I'm really tempted to do is one on this question of law, because, you know, can we as a society let's outlaw let's outlaw adultery. Yeah, outlawing adultery has never been tried. Oh, outlawing fornication has never been tried. Oh, all of these things have been tried. And now part of what happens in in the kind of society we have is that people have way more options of doing things. And so it's a much more complex thing and to stand up and say, y'all can't keep it in your pants. Well, yeah, they can't. Why? How can we help them? That's that's I think a better conversation. So maybe dressing modestly. Okay. I could probably be dressing modestly. But the thing is dressing modest. I'm not even kidding. What? No, no, but like not having your black and you know, yeah, you no longer see me. Now everybody gets geeked about ankles and eyes because eyes are the sexiest part of the body. Actually, that's if you want to see if you want to see two people make contact, it's it's eyes. So you can. Okay. I mean, just like the body parts, you know what I mean? Like the breast and especially in women, right? Like they wear revealing things. So I'm just saying, like, don't wear such revealing legislation telling women not to go topless in the street. Gosh, that'd be a new idea. It's all been tried and it all hasn't worked. Like this is uncontroversial. And it's not that there's nothing that's not that there's no place for legislation or law. It's just that, you know, yelling about it. I mean, I could stand up in front of church and say, you're all doing bad and you got to stop. Just stop it. It's like it's not very helpful. Anyway, I want to land the plane here. So thank you for coming on, everyone. Thank you guys. And take care. See you. Bye.