https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2uBzO3zjQLw

 all the racist contamination of European dead white guys. Well, that entire idea is a product of all of that European white guy-ness, and it's all the other people around the world who don't have any problem at all believing that Jesus will save their soul and usher them into an eternal afterlife. So the project itself doesn't stand up to its own scrutiny. And I see that so many of the people that are promoting critical theory now, D'Angelo, are you recording, Rick? Oh, we're recording, oh boy. I can start over, we can edit. Yeah. Yeah. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha. So there we go, we got that recorded. But it's true. And it's something that I find so annoyingly hilarious when people are promoting an ideology that is supposed to be somehow anti-racist, and the entire backdrop of the ideology comes through some of the most racist periods of Western history. And the pre-modern theology, which many of the people embrace, and the pre-modern assumptions before colonialism, before all that nasty stuff, before disenchantment, well, that's sort of what the unreconstructive conservative is bringing to the world. Now, part of the weakness of the unreconstructed conservative is in preaching to the people who are in fact downstream of colonialism and the enlightenment and modernity and all of the fights that have gone along the way. Pentecostalism in many ways, comes from the Azusa Street Mission and is sort of a denial of the entire project of modernity. But people who have passed through modernity and now into post-modernity, we can't undo what we already know. And so that's where you get this, even people who are new traditionalists, they're reconstructed. And the reconstruction is a little bit different from the pre-deconstruction. So that's just sort of the nature of human cognition and culture. So yet at the same time, I was reading in a book this morning in the Elizabethan period of England, all of the complaint about the atheists then. And I thought, well, that sounds pretty fresh and contemporary even though even that book was written in the 1950s. So yeah. All right, so apparently we're recording. So go ahead, Kevin. Well, maybe I'll give a little introduction that this is the Bridges of Meaning Discord question and answer that I do every week. And we've got a fancy, I can look into the camera and say this, even though none of you can see it. We've got a fancy rig set up this week thanks to Rick who's been playing around with this. Rick here at Living Stones is our technology muse in many ways and he's always playing with things. And so bit by bit, we're making some things better and more interesting. So we do this Friday at 10 o'clock, maybe next week we'll do something different. I don't know, but if you wanna be part of it, be at the Bridges of Meaning Discord server Friday, Pacific time, 10 a.m. and a whole bunch of us are here and we do fun things. So that's what we're at. Kevin has volunteered to MC this morning. So take it away, Kevin. All right. So the looks like the highest voted question is on 12th. Did Jesus have a sense of humor and what kind or flavor do you think? Jesus is typically painted as stoic and I read his snappy insults to the Pharisees or giving his disciples corny nicknames, the Rock, Sons of Thunder. Jesus comes across as someone with a sharp wit. Likewise, he hung out with the riff raff. From my experience, you have to at least have some wit and humor to be accepted in that clan or even pre-incarnation, making a donkey speak to his master. Strange to me that this side of Jesus slash God is airbrushed. Yeah, we like to airbrush Jesus. Jesus is almost always, we project back upon him and that projection sifts through the parts of him that are inconvenient and it prioritizes the parts of him we prefer. I think you can't read the gospels. I don't think someone could be as effective a communicator as Jesus was and not have a sharp wit. Sense of humor is a funny thing because it's highly contextual and highly cultural. There's a really interesting video, Joe Rogan and Bill Maher talking about humor. It's about 10 minutes into the conversation and Bill Maher makes the observation quite rightly that humor is a funny thing because it sort of gets around our filters. And where was it recently? Someone, I don't know, might've even been Jeff here, but someone talked about humor and, or no, it was laughter. Was it for Vakey? I don't remember. Someone had some comments about what laughter is. Laughter and humor. I don't remember what video that was in, but you know, so yes, the Rock, Sons of Thunder, I always heard that, wondered, you know, these guys are living together for about three years and so as is the case of people who live together, you're going to have humor about all sorts of bodily things. And no, it's, the Bible is full of humor and we might not get all of Jesus jokes because of the cultural divide. One of the really miraculous things about Jesus and the gospels and the Bible is just how trans-cultural it is for so many people. So did Jesus have a sense of humor? Absolutely. What kind of flavor? I don't know. It's so hard because, you know, if you regularly bump into people of different cultures and you have a experiential understanding of cultural divides, the cultural divide between our world and the time and place Jesus walked around in, it's an enormous divide. The language divide. If you've ever gone to a country where you don't know the language and you realize just how inept and powerless you feel. So, and then if you're living in that country and you begin to realize how, you know, sometimes they're telling jokes that are just drop dead funny to them and you don't get it and your handle on language isn't enough to really tell a joke or you say something wrong and it just busts them out laughing. So yeah, it's all those cultural layers, but Jesus, yeah, of course he had a sense of humor. And yeah, Jesus gets airbrushed all the time. I brought up before we started recording, there's a book called No More Christian, Nice Guy. That is a non airbrushed version if you'd like to read that. All right, our next question is from the seventh. It's a reposting from last week. I guess you didn't get to it. When discussing the Declaration of Independence, my US history professor at Sac City this week said, people have tried to explain or we get our rights from something other than God. And none of those have ever proved to be credible or acceptable. So we've always returned back to God. I'm sure you saw Bishop Barron's recent video on the topic as well. Do you think this is something to emphasize or start with when evangelizing? I think I did talk about it a bit last week. Yeah, it's a common move made by apologists. And I think it's a correct move. Many, many people are asking the question if you can maintain human rights, even if the underpinning of human rights, which is the religious underpinning goes away. I think if you push that a bit further and ask some deeper questions about how our moral, our moral reflexes are formed and developed. I think about Pearson's ideas about how the Bible in the biblical series, how the Bible comes about. We know that children, and Peterson again, talks about this quite a bit. Children have to be socialized at a fairly young age. And Peterson says that if the child really isn't socialized by four or five or six, you've missed the window. And so we don't, you know, once you pay attention to the fact that our moral assumptions about respecting, and sometimes the costly respecting of other human lives, it's an aspirational goal that these are shaped by successive generations. And I think that's a very important point. And deep religious formation, it's, you know, I think it's a great and obvious point whether someone else feels that point. I haven't found that to be, you know, what I see most often is people say, no, this assumption of human rights is not part of Christianity. This is the part of the Greeks. And, you know, of course they will say, historians like Tom Holland will say, that's a load of rubbish, but we're not, we're not the kinds of creatures that simply can reprogram ourselves because here's an idea that we decide is right. And in that way, again, Peterson is correct. We're not transparent to ourselves. And that's why I always laugh at that one video in Rebel Wisdom where Bret Weinstein suggests that we're assassin robots and we simply wake up to the fact that we're assassin robots and decide not to be that anymore. Okay, well, why don't you just wake up to the fact that you have a bad habit and stop doing it. And this bears, this brings us to Peterson's observation that he got from others that it's often a religious conversion that changes people deeply. In my conversation, which I just posted this morning with Rudy Gonzalez, you know, I enjoyed kind of going through his story because he talked about the, his experience of religious conversion. And it was a very interesting story because it was, you know, he had grown up in a border town in Texas and Roman Catholicism was sort of assumed in the family. His mother was, you know, a bit more into folk religion and quite open to religious things. And then he goes off to, as a young man, he starts seeing himself get into pot smoking and drinking and looking around the village, knowing that this is a trap and you can fall into this trap and get stuck in it and never get out of it. So he decides to join the Air Force. And in the Air Force, he learns that there's drinking and pot smoking there too. And he's feeling homesick for church and not good about himself. And he bumps into some Christians and Pentecostals and then has a conversion experience. And it's a great story. I mean, part of the reason I do these conversations with someone like Rudy is there are nuggets in the story that touch on so many things. And people do not wake up one day and say, oh, I should exercise and eat better and lose 20 pounds. Well, they do get up and say that, but then they don't do it. Well, why not? Because again, we're not masters of ourselves. And so even if you make a devastating logical point in apologetics, in some ways, that whole arguing apologetics game is a bit futile, which many, many people know and observe too, because even if Sam Harris would right there on stage say, I believe there is a God. Yeah, how much of his life will change? Maybe he'll wake up the next morning and say, what was I thinking? Are we still here? Did we drop out? Did I lose it? I can hear you. Oh, okay, okay. Where'd Kevin go? Can you not hear me? Oh, no, I couldn't hear you. Oh, I'm sorry. Okay, we can edit that. Hi, Kevin. Hi, I'm Sam Harris. I'm not. Hi, Paul, are you familiar with the work of James K.A. Smith? I'm reading his new book on- We saw that one last week too. Oh, okay. Yeah. You can start with August 12th. I think we covered everything last week. All right. Let's see. I've read the long version of this, so I'm gonna read the medium part. What do you believe is the most important takeaway from, or what are the most important takeaways from the screw-tape letters that have applicability, not only Christian way of life, but to individuals regardless of faith, or lack of faith, or lack of faith in the Christian way of life? Or lack thereof? I'll sneak a second question in. While devils for Christians may look like various sins indicated in the Bible, devils for people of other faiths might appear at least somewhat differently. Though the devils may appear different, perhaps even occasionally swapping sin and righteousness, would the takeaway from the screw-tape letters still be, would they still be applicable in this case? Well, it's been a few years since I've reread screw-tape letters. It is a book that is full of wisdom. And it's clearly the work of a man who examined himself further, examined himself further than most, and was deeply interested in his own Christian formation. And so, yeah, it's a book I recommend, especially if someone wants to get into Christianity. It's a tremendous book. And every time I read it, I think, wow, I take away so much, and I see how easily and quickly I deceive myself in so many ways. Now, the comment and the question about the devils is interesting because part of the cleverness of the book is that it's supposedly basically reading the male between two devils, an uncle and an apprentice devil. And a big part of the book is that the devils hide, and the devils hide behind all sorts of Christian things, self-righteousness, morality, all of these little tricks we play on ourselves. And so part of the deep conceit and cleverness of the book is that you have, the devils are always hiding because in some ways for the devils to sort of appear as themselves, the game is over. And this is a really helpful observation, especially in the waning light of Christendom when Lewis was writing that there still was in the UK at that time, a degree of expectation of Christianity that was, it was fading, but it was still there in the culture. When it comes to, you know, how, when it comes to devils for other peoples of faith, well, there's a long tradition of, and many other faiths of fearing devils and evil spirits. If you read a book like Blood and Thunder by Hampton Sides about Kit Carson and the conquest of the Navajo, you know, the Navajo people were tremendously preoccupied with spirits as many, many people throughout the history of the world have been. So there's always a degree of commonality between the assumptions about evil spirits and what is good, bad, right, and wrong. And then there are always differences. So I think a lot of the takeaway from Screwtape is the Christian way of life. But at least since post-Augustine, anybody who's schooled in the Christian way of life, in the ways we deceive ourselves can probably read the book with benefit. Excellent, thank you. Hey, this one's from Charlie. Is it possible for church bodies slash entities to have an estuary and outside thoughts be talked about without causing internal strife or conflict? I'm gonna editorialize a little bit here and I think that's what Job does at his church, if I'm not mistaken. Go ahead, Paul. I think church bodies should have estuaries and is there the potential that those estuaries could get problematic? Oh, absolutely. I have the, there's almost the, the only person who is here every Sunday, there are only two people who are here every Sunday and go to the Livingstone's estuary and that's Rick and myself. And Rick came here via the Jordan Peterson stuff that I was doing and Rick was right there and really prompted me in many ways to start the meetup. And so, estuary is also a baby of Rick, a little baby of Rick as it is of me. And so, I can be very candid in our untapped estuary meetings. I don't know how less candid I might be if I had a number of members of my congregation that were in those meetings. But you do as, because I'm an employee of those people and when you're talking in front of your bosses, that's a layer that you're managing inside your head. So, at the same time though, I think the benefit of an estuary for a church might become that, yeah, will it raise trouble? I'm sure it will. But the kinds of trouble it needs to raise will probably be helpful and productive for the kinds of outreach and mission the church says it wants to do. In other words, if your church is too much of a walled garden, if your church is growing a hot house tomatoes and is too insular from the kinds of issues going on outside of it, your church is not going to be effective at all evangelistically. And so, yeah, sometimes you need to put difficult things on the table and try and talk them through. That's part of life. And churches that get disconnected from their environment just basically die a slow death because new ideas won't come in or new ideas in fact are in, but they're never dealt with in church. And so, the theology and Christian practice isn't happening that will keep the church a vital place for the world. This is part of the reason why church plants grow so quickly is because they don't have their walls up yet. And so, all of that negotiating usually happens even before the church is planted. So, yeah, I think every church or almost every church should have an estuary and I think the estuary would be troublesome in some ways for the people of the church, but maybe those are some of the troubles that the church should work through. Nobody imagines, not nobody, nobody should imagine that the path to sanctification and missional productive fruit will be easy. My sanctification is not easy. Reaching out and getting to know people unlike myself is not easy. It's the work of the church. So, if you're gonna do the work, set up the platform, the shop, set up the space in order to do that work. And again, when the Jordan Peterson stuff was happening, I would say to many colleagues, this is something you should do. This is something, how many, I would go for years without the kinds of conversations I now have on a daily basis as a local church pastor and the church was terribly out of sync in many ways with the community around it. Does that mean that the church was a bad place? No, the church was a wonderful place full of wonderful Christian people who were dealing with the things in their life and the church was doing wonderful ministry to them. But the church had very little capacity to do much ministry to anyone else. Well, if most churches are that way, well then you're going to see a terrible die-off in the culture. So, estuary for me is a space in which churches can get with the program and start doing, if you're going to do evangelism, you're going to need to know how to talk to people and what they care about. And how are you gonna do that? Well, I know a church planter who, before he planted his church, basically had five questions and he would sit in a coffee shop and he would basically say to people, I'd like to ask you five, I'm a church planter, I'd like to ask you five questions. I'll buy you a cup of coffee. Would you answer my five questions? No obligation at all. And got terrific feedback and that really helped him figure out how to preach in his church. Now, whether or not most of those people who he talked to in coffee shops ever came to church, most didn't. But what he learned was, who's in my neighborhood? What do they care about? What are the thoughts? He couldn't be an effective preacher, an effective evangelist or an effective missionary without that coffee shop experience. What is estuary? Estuary is a place where you can engage with people and hear what they really think. And if your theology isn't grappling with the real issues of the people in your community, well, you are not going to be evangelistically effective in that community at all. Now, likewise, whether or not anybody that my friend talked to and asked those questions to ever came to his church is besides the point. What that did was made him a better preacher. Problem that he had was once he started his church, he no longer was doing the coffee shop thing. Why? Because he couldn't. Why? Because preachers are in some ways captive audiences to their congregations. And so a congregation that doesn't encourage their pastor to know what's going on in the community is not a congregation that is setting itself up for, I think, the mission and the work of the church. So I know for some people that might cause a little bit of dissonance because on one side, the church people are like, well, if we start an estuary, we expect to see a regular group of people start to come in from that group into our church because we're putting resources into that. And I say, well, as a Calvinist, it's a little bit easier because, well, hey, that's up to God. At the same time, and I realize I do play both sides of that fence, at the same time, I think a church that isn't actually engaging, it's really pretty much only grooming the sheep it already has isn't doing the work of Christ in the world. Yeah, that's why churches should have estuaries. Can I ask a quick follow-up question to that? Sure. I guess this is just my take on the estuary a little bit. I will phrase it as a question, though, in my statement. From what it sounds as though you're saying, and you're kind of struggling with whether or not to formulate the estuary, I think that's a good question. You're kind of struggling with whether or not to formulate the estuary as a space that individual churches set up individually, or if it's this sort of amorphous idea that can be sort of taken on as like an orientation towards those who are outside the church, but coming from inside the church, plural, lowercase Catholic church, rather than saying this particular church should have an estuary, perhaps it's better to understand it as sort of like an orientation of, a missional orientation towards those outside the church, because you can have a mom and pop church, or say like a startup in a context where it's not gonna grow or it's dying. You have all these different contexts. Certain churches, like you say, will be able to form an estuary easily, say in urban context or whatever, but if you're more like in your context and you're not seeing a lot of growth, it might be better to partner with another church or it might be better to, instead of doing it individually, have this sort of larger, more amorphous group that can meet instead of doing your own thing. I just think that the idea of the estuary is really, because if we see it as this individual, church is doing their own thing, then it just sort of takes away from the idea of what you're trying to say, at least from my perspective. What do you think about that? Churches will do their own thing. I assume that, because churches are different. In some ways, and I said this to Andrea, and I'm gonna probably next week download her video and post it on my channel as well. Ryan, is it Ryan? Talks of, in some ways, this is an application of some IDW culture into the church. And his Bennett, Ryan Bennett. Ryan Bennett made the observation that the, Topher, your mic is a little loud. Ryan Bennett made the observation that the IDW is not so much the content on internet servers, but the protocol that allows those servers to talk to one another. When I think about the estuary, so I'm in almost daily conversation with some individuals that are looking to really start up their own estuaries. Some of them are in church and are going to be sort of like Livingstone's estuary. Others of them aren't necessarily terribly connected to the church, but are going to have some of this culture in it. And I think that's okay. There is the danger that the, like the IDW, the idea goes out there too broad and is diffused and basically the signal to noise ratio gets out of whack. Now that very well may happen. Some people have wanted me to basically start a thing, start a estuary, start the estuary. And I have resisted that because, number one, I would very quickly become a bottleneck because I still am a pastor of this congregation and I am still trying to do all the other things I'm trying to do. If I quit my job and devoted myself full time to it, but even then, I think it would suffer from all of the weaknesses that I have. It would be too much a reflection of me. Therefore, I would rather consult and bless and promote and see what develops out there. Some people have asked me questions about, well, what if a church is basically too greedy in terms of, they do a kind of a bait and switch and they start an estuary and then they start really leaning on people to convert and start coming to church and so on and so forth. Well, that'll probably happen, but the consequences of that will be what they will. So I have a disposition towards openness and freedom and sort of letting things run and see what happens. Does that get me in trouble? Does that lead to some catastrophes? Yes, but my thinking has always been, if to whatever degree I can inspire and promote and at least express a culture which seems fruitful in this way, I would rather see 10 things start and five things die than put all my eggs in one basket. And in a lot of ways, I'm downstream from Peterson in this, but I look at, and again, I didn't plan any of this. When I started, when I talked to Mary, when I talked to Karen, when I talked to Jeff and Job and when we started our meetup here and we heard about a Discord server, I mean, we haven't planned any of this stuff and it's been extraordinarily fruitful, at least according to my metrics and it continues to be so. So I'm keeping going what's worked with us so far and will there be some train wrecks? I'm sure there will be, there always are. But the thing about a train wreck is, if you can figure out why the train crashed, you're gonna have a better train. So it's that type of culture. I don't know if that answers your question, if you wanna follow up, push back on anything. Yeah, I think your response, the first off that came to mind, I'm this cautious Canadian. Can their, their estuary. You were breaking up, you wanna repeat that? Oh, sorry about that, yeah. Can you hear me okay now? Yep. Yeah, I was just saying that the first thought that came into my head was, I'm this cautious Canadian telling an entrepreneurial American how to run their church. But you know, I guess I would push back a little bit on that, when I said amorphous, trying to invoke sort of the ESJW mantra of like, everyone do their own thing and intersectionality, whatever, any of that sort of group think identity stuff. I'm not into that at all. My name, Postmodern Pilgrim, is more meant to invoke the journey that I've been on as in postmodernism and now sort of journeying out of that. So for all of you who think I'm a crazy postmodernist, I can say right now that I'm not. So yeah, but to answer, I guess push back a little bit. I guess what I was trying to say was, I just, my dad's a pastor and so I grew up in a church for about a decade in the city of Vancouver, little evangelical Mennonite church. Those do go together. And so for a season we helped plant other churches and there was this one notable church where they had this crazy idea of starting a coffee shop before actually running the church itself. They called themselves the Rock and they started up this little town called Squamish, BC. Some people know it as the Climbing Canada. It's a nice little spot. But anyway, so they start this thing in this hiking town, this climbing town and they've got hikers coming from all over the world to this coffee shop called The Rock and they get in there and people start asking them questions and then from there they actually ended up growing a church of creatives, of rock climbers, of crazy yahoos and they started this thing called the Rock and they started this little town called Squamish and it began as this coffee shop, it began as this little crazy idea and it turned into something really beautiful. So I have no qualms about this entrepreneurial, let's try everything and see what works kind of spirit. I love that. I'm just a little bit hesitant to formulate, before we send them out because they'll be sent out. They're sent out. I mean, people are doing their own thing as we speak. We've got Jordan Peterson groups popping up everywhere and all this stuff is happening. It's very live, the wire is live. So you can feel the energy, I think. But yeah, no, I think maybe if we were to do something along the lines of writing up a paper on the story and the structure that this could generally take, dependence on certain context, obviously. But I just think that might be a little helpful to give certain groups say, this is a general idea of what it could look like. We did an R. Jordan Peterson group and take some of these ideas and apply it here or there. And some people will take some of it and leave most of it. I would certainly do that. I think most people would, but it's helpful to have that for some people. I know there's a lot of other people who would be quite afraid of doing their own thing and who are a little less impulsive and entrepreneurial in that sense. So, but yeah, no, just an idea. No, and that's a common, the response back has been interesting. And I think as time goes, we will probably figure out, be able to articulate, be able to articulate with a little bit more clarity, what we are at this point acting out. And again, I go back to Jordan Peterson's first biblical, biblical series one. I mean, in a sense, first we acted out and we watch each other acting it out. And we learned from that. And then at some point, the language comes. And right now, I think what we're doing is really healthy because we're talking about it. We're pushing back on each other. We're asking questions. And at some point, we say, this is in and this is out. Now, a lot of people want to say, well, before we do anything, we need to know where the lines are. And I'm sort of saying, well, I sort of have a sense of what's in and what's out. And so we work on that, but that's always a judgment call too. And so with our local meetup, we continue to talk about ourselves and what are we doing and what do we need to do? And we continue to tweak it. And, but again, part of what I've seen in this is that we've... Why have some of the Jordan Peterson meetups endured that have been connected with this little corner of the internet here? We didn't have the breakup that the portal Discord server had. I think there are reasons for some of these things that we don't really know. I think we act... If you were to sit down with someone and ask them to write out their culture, they couldn't because it's too close to them. And so part of what we're doing with all of this talk and with all the videos and with all the trying and the practicing is we're exploring it. And like I said, we're gonna get things wrong. And who knows, maybe two years from now, the whole thing will be done. And we will have said, oh, now we know we couldn't do that. And okay, but part of what happens in the church is that the church, the Roman Catholic Church, the Orthodox Church, even Protestant churches are very old institutions with deeply embedded wisdom that can't be discerned down into lists of rules or if then constructs. So yeah, I think we're feeling our way forward. And it's very interesting. A lot of the kind of principle movers of some of the new estuaries that are sort of trying to get up to the point of being online and visible are people who have been part of other movements before. And so their particular estuaries are going to have elements that I can't bring to it, but have other streams. And so yeah, your caution is certainly well-founded. But in this world, baby, you've gotta have, I bring, just bring in a lot of church planting stuff into this thing too, which is a bias towards action. And it's from a guy who does a lot of talking. There's a- Hey, we've got a two-parter. Oh, Kevin, Sherry wanted to say something a second, so. Go ahead, Sherry. There's a great saying by a horse trainer. He says, if you're not making any mistakes with your horse, that means you're not doing any. And it's better to do something. And so I think that I apply that to so many things, right? Like if you're not making any mistakes, you're just not moving, you're not moving forward, you're not doing it, you're stagnating. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And it's a big problem in churches. Okay, go ahead, Kevin. We've got a two-parter. They're kind of two sides of the same question. Do you think we should evaluate public figures to claim some sort of faith in their public life? How can we avoid being co-opted on either the left or the right for our faith and or values? Also, Jesus told us, do not judge, or you too will be judged for the same way you judge others, you will be judged, and with the measure you use, you will be measured. How can we avoid being judgmental of a person in a negative or sinful sense, given that we have responsibility to judge individuals from a distance as citizens in a democratic society? Didn't read the first paragraph. We even have Biden and Kamala Harris in it. I was recently chatting with a couple of Christian friends who are significantly more progressive or liberal in their faith traditions than I am. They are both very excited about Biden's VP pick for Kamala Harris, in part because they think Kamala is a practicing Christian. Evidently, Kamala regularly attends a church in San Francisco and has spoken about her faith during her campaign, albeit in a very SJW inclusive type ways. Politics aside, well, how do we evaluate, should evaluate public figures who claim some sort of faith in their public life? I often say that, anybody who listens to my video knows, I respect my father's faith. I don't think my father would have made a good president of the United States. Would you rather have a bumbling Christian or a competent Muslim running your country? It depends a lot on the Christian, it depends a lot on the Muslim, it depends on what needs to be brought in. The matrix of these things are enormously complex. We have to boil down the world into handles and labels in order to try to figure out who people are. So whether or not someone goes to church, attends church is data. Whether they identify as a Christian believer or not is data and the history of the relationships between politics and Christianity throughout the history of the United States is incredibly complex. And so, I think that's the key to the question of who is the Christian believer in the United States is enormously complex. Abraham Lincoln was not a very faithful churchgoer. Abraham Lincoln died on Good Friday and in some ways, in a civil religious way of thinking is the Messiah of the American Republic. Had a family history going to Norman Vincent Peale's church. Now, Norman Vincent Peale's church was part of the Reformed Church of America, the RCA, a church more deeply related to the CRC than any other. Joe Biden, many Christians of certain stripes keep their, don't put their faith out in front of who they are politically, but keep it quiet. And I think that's actually not a bad way to go as a Christian politician, given everything that says, that Jesus says in the Sermon on the Mount. Don't practice your righteousness before others for the world to see. Anybody who has grown up in the United States is going to have been deeply impacted by Christianity at one level or another. Jimmy Carter's faith, I think it's hard pressed to look at Jimmy Carter and say he's a bad Christian. The Southern Baptist Sunday School teacher, he was a bit of a Puritan telling America to put on a sweater instead of using more heating oil. It's part of the package you get with people, with their religious faith, but in any given person, how that works into them varies tremendously. So it's fair for voters to think about that and to work through that, but give voters the liberty to make their choice. So Kamala Harris, I don't know much of anything about her. I do know that politicians and their campaigns, now a political campaign is not the politician themselves, campaigns are the handlers and people that tell politicians what they should and shouldn't emphasize. And so, for example, there'll be some communities in which Joe Biden perhaps wishes to elevate his Roman Catholic roots. The same happened with John Kerry. John F. Kennedy's Roman Catholic roots were obviously controversial. When Jesus says, do not judge, it's pretty clear there that crino, the word means condemn, but we all must discern. And because right there in the same passage, Jesus says, do not throw pearls before swine. Why? Because a pig cannot understand the value of a pearl because the value of a pearl is simply not within the pig's frame of reference. You can pour slop in front of a pig and the pig understands the value of the food. So this is something we must do. I think talking about how, if you're talking, again, politics and religion, religion is always, politics is now, their religious life and their political life are going to intersect. And I would imagine that for any president of the United States, there are moments when they have to make a decision that they have no map for and their religious upbringing is going to impact that, but also the aspect of the religiosity. Again, for Barack Obama, this was a very interesting part of his campaign, Jeremiah Wright. So, but at the same time, he also read Marilyn Robinson with appreciation and one of his first podcast interviews was with her and he asked her questions. So people are complex. There are few things as complex as religion. And so is it worthwhile considering when you think about a candidate? Absolutely, but it's part of the matrix. Some people will say, this person is a Christian, so I'll vote for them. Well, in many campaigns, everyone has some claim on Christianity or some history in a particular Christian church. This person is a Roman Catholic, case of John F. Kennedy, I won't vote for him. Many Protestants believe that. So always a factor, you have to work it through. I don't know what else you can do. I would say up your resolution. Although at the same time, if someone from the Christian Reformed Church was running for office, because the Christian Reformed Church is such a small place that would probably bias me towards them. But then again, let's say if a child of mine were running for office and they had very different ideas of politics than I have, I might still vote for them because they're my kid. So that's kind of the way voting goes. All right. All right. Nick. Paul, some people close to me are grabbing hold or close to grabbing hold of the Q conspiracy theory wherein Trump and Trump alone is the on-world leader in the last 250 years to defy the cabal of globalist corruption. They'll single-handedly rescue millions of sex-trafficked children, et cetera. These are Christian people in the charismatic stream. I am wondering how to approach such a situation, which I believe not only to be bonkers, but dangerous and even corrupting to the church. I can tend to overreact in opposite direction and my gut tells me to just be calm and trust that things will level out, that a better mindset and be ready to speak when I'm asked for input. Any advice on how to navigate this situation? Maybe a good question or two to ask if I'm asked what I think about the whole thing. If I can editorialize a little, there's a lot of examples you can give of other folks around the world because focusing only on Trump is a little unhealthy. There's a whole bunch of people that have gone against the grain in Brazil and Italy and Poland and Hungary. There's a whole bunch. So it's not just one guy. So that's one thing you can push back on. Go ahead, Paul. The Gulf of Tonkin incident, I'm just pulling that up here. Rick's got a little window here for me to put things into. The USS Maddox incident was an international confrontation that led to the United States engaged more directly in the Vietnam War. It involved the confrontation between ships of North Vietnam and the United States in the waters of the Gulf of Tonkin. The original American report blamed North Vietnam for both incidents, but the Pentagon Papers, the memoirs of Robert McNamara and NSA publication from 2005 prove the United States lied to justify a war against Vietnam. And you can read about the Gulf of Tonkin on Wikipedia. Is Donald Trump a mastermind at playing the blowhard buffoon while he's a mysterious chest player three moves ahead of everyone else? Could be. I noted on the, this week I did a video that talked about Trump more directly than probably any of that I have. Mary Cohen noted that Donald Trump in college was a very good chess player. That speaks to intelligence. He's not dumb. Who knows? Okay, who knows? Donald Trump was laughed at when he rode that golden elevator down with his pretty third wife and said he was gonna run for president and then he won. And I remember the last days of the campaign, reports were out that he was spending money and time in Minnesota. The Democrats laughed at that. He'll never win Minnesota. He won Minnesota. The world is a very strange place. And our ability to grasp complexities that we have very little grip on is extremely limited. And so this goes into the religion of Kamala Harris or Donald Trump or Joe Biden, or to what level is there, we are so easily fooled even in areas of our life that we are very, very close to. So, and this is why in some ways I'm finally one who says, we just have to trust God. And because we don't know enough to not yet at the same time as people who live in a democracy, if you're a voting age in the United States, you get to choose. Canadians, well, they get to live with whatever our choice is. If you live in Michigan or Pennsylvania or Ohio or Florida, your choice matters a lot more than my choice here in California. So that Christians are doing this, well, why should that surprise us? I think you could look at reasons for believing some ideas and not others, but we all have to choose. We all have our opinions. We all get lots of things wrong. If in the 1960s, someone came and said, well, guess what? The date, August 2, 1964, guess what? That incident in the Gulf of Tonkin, that was a plot by the CIA to get us into the Vietnam War. Especially in 1964, a lot of Americans who had a greater level of trust in the government would say, our government would never do that. Well, guess what it did? How do I know it did? Well, the evidence looks pretty good. So work from the evidence that you've got. Again, this goes back to something that I've repeated in many of my videos. The world is too big, okay? We can't deal with all the data. How do we deal with the data? Well, the same way a camera deals with the data, we compress it. How do we compress the data of the world? We do so through a matrix of stories and authorities and personal experiences and temperament. All of that comes through and the communities around us, all of that comes through into a picture of what the world looks like. Well, if you can tell a really convincing story, you can fool a lot of people. So that's our lot. QAnon told a really convincing story. Now, in terms of how you should react, I would recommend, I think you wrote it quite well. Stay calm. Jesus commands you to love, QAnon conspiracy theorists. Jesus commands you to love Christians who will not get a vaccine because they just know that Bill Gates is using this to implant a tracking device in them. These are people you are to love. So loving them might mean figuring out ways to, if you don't believe them, test, challenge, ask questions. And generally speaking, you will have more influence with people if they trust you. Because that goes back to the whole data compression thing that we do as human beings. If you can build trust with them, you will probably have more incident, have more influence with them. Same goes with dealing with people of the other political party. Same goes with dealing with people of the opposite sex or a different culture or a different ethnic group. Ask yourself, are my actions building trust with them? Well, then you're probably working profitably. So that's my answer. Okay. I'm interested in your thoughts on Jonathan Peugeot's Genesis 1 through 3, views on Genesis 1 through 3, which he repeated in his recent conversation with John Vervecky. He states the idea, which I've heard elsewhere, it is the lack of humanity in man which led him to eat fruit. Lack of humility in man. Oh, humility, yes. The lack of humility in man, which led him to eat the fruit, and that God was eventually going to have us partake in that fruit. However, because of our fall, we are in a perpetual state of decay wherein sin takes us further away from God. The idea that God would have given us the fruit is an idea very strange to me, but I heard it also in the Hillsdale lecture on YouTube. The name of the lecturer I cannot find. How common is this idea in the study of Genesis and what are your thoughts on it? It's not uncommon. The story is so evocative and sparse that it leads us to exploration. And in fact, I think the Bible itself invites us to live within it, engage with it, explore it. John Walton has written quite a bit on those early chapters of Genesis, and some imagine that, well, why is the tree of life there? And how does that work into the story? Well, he bars them from the garden so that they won't go back and eat from the tree of life and live forever in the misery of their knowledge of good and evil, and even the name knowledge of the tree of good and evil. I mean, that story is so powerful, so evocative. Again, just this morning, I was reading some 15th, some commentary from the 16th century, the Elizabethan period, on people's takes on Genesis. Read Augustine on Genesis, read Origen. Jewish commentators on Genesis. That story, wow, it just leads to all sorts of thinking and speculation. What was on God's mind? Good questions. And I think we're invited to speculate and discuss. And so, now my evaluation of it, Adam's lack of humility, which led him to eat from the fruit, and God was eventually going, okay, so we're gonna know the mind of God in this? Well, maybe. Jonathan reads the Church Fathers, and Church Fathers loved talking about these kinds of things and writing about them and speculating and teaching. So, there it is. And well, if you're teaching and debating, teach and debate. Other people say, no, I don't think that was on God's mind. And well, what do you think? Well, I think this. Well, defend your answer. And then you look closer at the text, or you look at other parts of the scripture, and that's sort of how the game is played. And it's a good game. So, yeah, I guess those are my thoughts. It's not the first time I've heard the idea. Okay, this one's from Luke. Testuaries are full of life in diversity and multiplicity, and in the harmony as on giant microorganism. Let's have that be connected to the church, but not be the church. How does the life-giving environment feed from the church? The analogy gets a little muddied. But this is the question that I've been thinking about. Well, here's the question. Where does the river end and the sea begin? Where does the estuary end and the river begin? Where does the estuary end and the sea begin? Part of the reason I put estuary at the end of the river is that the estuary is not the river. I think this is partly how we are as people. As a human being, I have this boundary of skin that envelops me, and it's a pretty important boundary. But there's another sense in which I am sort of out there with other people. You know, we had a question about grief, and I remember when my sister died, I was just pondering, well, my body is enclosed in this skin, but me, I'm this story. Well, how does that relate to the body? Well, it does. Well, my story and my sister's story, my sister who died, her body died, and something of her story died. Other aspects of her story did not die. And so, I think that's the reason that the church is the body of Christ, but the world is owned, the whole earth is full of God's glory. I think there are roles for boundaries in the world. If my skin isn't working as a boundary, the body has trouble. And I think the church, you know, Jesus, Jesus selected 12 disciples. To the best of our knowledge, there were a whole group of others around the disciples. One got picked up after Judas, you know, after Judas went away. I don't think having some lines and boundaries is the bad thing, but that's why I would separate estuary from church. Partly because, again, and again, I think Peugeot makes these arguments better than almost anyone else. There needs to be a wall. There needs to be a center. There needs to be a fringe. That's how things work. Every act of, every choice of selection chooses against other options. So, at least in this age, I think we have a church that's not a church, but at this age, I think we have a church and we have an estuary. The church isn't an estuary. My body isn't my whole self, but they're related. How does the life-giving environment feed from the church? Well, that's because the river flows into the estuary, just like the church flows into the world, but the church is not the world. The analogy gets a little muddy. Yeah, so do estuaries. That's what mud is for. Mud is, and again, I think this is partly implicit in Peterson's observation, when institutions tend to ossify, they get old and brittle, and so you need flow in and out. And I think that's just how life works, so. Early in the C-19 response, you defended churches closing while businesses and government stayed open. The position that it was out of love for the sick to suspend care of their healthy. Now we are looking at a half to full cycle or more with online-only church, which isn't real church as you admit. It's going on so long, you yourself are closing up and reinventing just to try and regain some ground. The state crushed those who tried to stay open. You think we as a society made the right call to comply or do nothing? So in March we closed completely, and I did a little sermons from the corner of my office, like I did YouTube videos in June. We opened briefly a little bit, and then, I'm not gonna say online what we're doing now. We are streaming from the sanctuary on Sunday mornings, and if you wanna know what that looks like, 1390 Florin Road is our address. I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I think it's irresponsible to have a sanctuary of unmasked people singing loudly. You're gonna have to figure out whether it's irresponsible to have nothing. Is there nothing in between? And if you are finding things in between, why are you doing it? And how broadly will you talk about it? And so, yeah, I, each church has to look at their situation, and I'm gonna have to look at what's going on around them, and they're going to make their decisions and act accordingly, and that's what we should do. Now, I've, I've always been someone who believes a lot in locality, that, I'm glad that we initially closed everything down. I think that got the attention of some of our people. I don't think we would have had the social distancing and the mask wearing that I think is a reasonable accommodation to the current situation with the virus, and now that's become standard protocol. So, I think each church and each pastor has to figure out what they need to do before they're God, and there are times where civil disobedience is important. So, again, I would not, at this point, push all the chairs back together and have a full group with no masks, with no masks on, all in one enclosed space, especially with a lot of senior citizens. I think that would be irresponsible. There's all kinds of ways that we exercise responsibility. We try not to leave extension cords around the floor. We try not to leave wet spots on a tile floor. We climate control the room. So, I think each church is gonna have to figure out what it needs to do to do its mission, and then they should do it. And I don't think a temporary pause is necessarily a bad thing, but how temporary and what does the pause look like, and are there other shades of, are there other ways to get what you need to do? Now, Living Stones Online is partly to serve the members of this church who shouldn't be here. We've got some people who are on chemo and they're immunocompromised. They should stay at home. And so, we'll serve them better because of these upgrades. Other people, again, I've had so many people say, well, you're my online pastor. You're my online church. It's like, oh, okay. I'd like you to someday find an in real life church, but let's see to what degree I can help you, and we can help you. So, let's do what we can. So, that's my take. Okay, this is a- Go ahead, Char. Paul, I just wanted to say, I remember when I first started watching your videos, which was early on, I remember you often saying how this was not a replacement for church. And I agree with you on that point, not disagreeing with you. But then, oddly enough, we find ourselves in this situation where everybody is doing online church because they actually can't go to church. That just kind of blows my mind, actually. Yeah. I didn't want to have to say that. And there's a difference between personal responsibility and being forced not to be together. Yeah, I find, so right now, the church across the street from us, they're Hispanic Assemblies of God. They put a big fence up, and they're doing church outside. One of our church plants is doing church outside. We're doing our meetups outside. And we have a fire pit, and we have wood that we burn, and we're all up there on the hill, and the chairs are six feet apart, and there's a nice breeze that comes through. And even if COVID would go away and we could meet inside, I'd kind of like the campfire meetups. So we've been learning some things all through this thing. So I'll, again, I'm, for reasons, for all kinds of reasons, I think a lot of churches are finding ways to do their work quietly. And in many cases, the state, as long as you're responsible and doing your work quietly, I don't find anti-church patrols prowling the streets. You know, dragging granny off to jail or finding churches a lot. I think the churches that get a lot of attention are the churches making a lot of noise. Well, if you didn't want to get a lot of attention, why did you make all the noise? So, you know, if you're in China and church is illegal, you do church quietly. Figure out what you need to do. Go and do it. And if there's a consequence, pay the consequence. But be responsible. And like I said, we don't have trip hazards all around. We don't have mop handles and wet spots in the floor. We don't use sewer water for coffee. You know, we're always looking out for the health of our members. So we just make adjustments. And I don't know that the state is crushing those who try to stay open. I haven't seen that. But again, churches that make a lot of noise, well, they want attention. So they're gonna, they want to fight with the state. Maybe it's a good thing, you know? More power to them, go ahead and have the court fight. I don't think there's any problem with that because you're figuring out where the boundaries are. And that's fair. But little churches like mine, I'm fine to stay below the radar. Okay, we have a Bible study question. You spoke in one of your Bible study videos, John Four, God and Fire, sacrificing on Mount Jerusalem or Jerusalem on your church channel about the needs, the need for the Jews to contain God with the tabernacle and that this was the entire job of the priestly class. Earlier to contain God ends in him escaping this containment and consuming whatever gets in his way. What does this mean? What is the power of God? And how did the Jews contain it? In what way does the incarnation of the Holy Spirit and what way does the incarnation of the only son of God play into this dynamic? We certainly still have priests that have the tasks changed from guarding the power of God to spreading the good news. I probably was a little bit more selective in my characterization. I said that in some ways, the tabernacle is a divine containment unit because the language of the desert wanderings is usually something like, and God broke out in the camp. The whole, one way to understand, and I'm in Exodus right now in the church, one way to understand symbolically the relationship between God and his people is the burning bush. That Moses is walking along and there's a bush that's burning. And of course, he's probably seen plenty of lightning strikes and fire brush fires out there in the dry world. And if you've seen brush fires, you know how they go. And this brush fire was not going as it went. This bush was burning, but it was not consumed. What's with that? So we went over to look at it. In many ways, that's Israel. And the whole point of the Exodus is the question, can a holy God live in the midst of an unholy people and how? And so if you understand what the priests are doing and what this whole mosaic law is doing is administering the way that an attempt to undo the separation of the flaming sword in the Garden of Eden. And you find this fire imagery used all the time. God is the fire in the altar. That's why Aaron's sons are killed when they try to introduce strange fire. That's why the sacrificial animal, instead of the sinful family, goes into the flame and the animal is consumed. God says in a number of places, I am a consuming fire. You find that in the Old and the New Testament. Well, that's obviously a symbolic image. And to say, God says, I am fire, is different from saying fire is God, but fire is a good way God comes down into Mount Zion as a fire. So the fire comes down from heaven in the challenge on Mount Carmel. So in some ways, the altar and the tabernacle, so God is fire on the altar, God is fire on the lampstands. You keep the lampstands burning. So there's, you know, that's part of what's going on in these stories. Now, when God breaks out into the camp and the people are consumed either by fire or by pestilence or by the sword, this is a way of showing the dynamics between God and the people. And so in that way, the tabernacle, which is at the middle of the camp, has all of this, it's a boundary, and it keeps the people out. Only the priests in certain specific roles are allowed to enter into it, but it also keeps, in a sense, God in. Now, God obviously is not limited to that. And part of the vision that Ezekiel sees when he is outside of Babylon makes that point that God can go anywhere and God can show up anywhere. But it's very interesting again, in the Genesis, in the Exodus story, it's the angel of the Lord that comes to Moses. So yeah, so that's sort of how, that's sort of the symbolic logic of tabernacle and temple and altar and sacrifice, and it communicates this relationship between God and the people. God is a consuming fire, and well, we ought to be careful with fire. The mountain of God in Sinai is cordoned off. So that's, I don't know if that answers the question fully. I think we've gotten to the end. Cool, well, we're, so, yeah, we can end now, unless there's any questions anybody wants to ask that they didn't write down. Well, if we want to go to the top of the hour, we've got about 15 minutes for Q&A. All right, then maybe we're good. We've got one from Richard. You just made a symbol of God. Isn't that relevant to why there was a commandment not to be, not to make a commandment not to make graven images? We are commanded not to represent God. God, when he comes to us, often has to represent himself in one way or another. I think the commandment suggests to us that even the representations that God uses for himself are not to be pushed too far. And that's why God is a consuming fire. We get this from scripture, but fire is not God. And the fact that God uses multiple, multiple representations, God is consuming fire. Elijah is running from Jezebel, and he's a still small voice. God speaks through a donkey. God isn't the donkey, obviously, but there's an angel with a flaming sword. The angel of the Lord comes to people in the Old Testament, and then obviously in Christ himself. So we can't think about God without representations, even verbal ones. And that's, I think, part of the respect for the name of God, all the circumlocutions in Judaism. But yeah, we can't help but think about things with representations by virtue of our limitations. And so when we, and the Protestant, the Protestant ethos has generally been, well, we have to use representations, verbal or otherwise, we ought to use scriptural ones, but we ought to be very careful about ones that we create. And even icon carvers, this is why in some ways Michelangelo depicting God as this old man reaching out his arm, you know, that's, we shouldn't picture God as an old man. God is not an old man. There, even in the book of Revelation, there's the one that's on the throne. Well, you get to see the throne, but you don't see the one. And others say, well, God is made in our image, so we can work back from the image up to God and talk about the hand of God, the right arm of God, so on and so forth. I think we understand that these are representations, but that God is finally beyond all these representations, which I think is what the commandment tells us. Right on time, we've got another one. The switch is where, at one point we are comfortable with a God who commanded war and a God who is now cool with people huddling themselves with social distancing, et cetera, to the point where the visceral, dangerous nature of life is now something godly people should eschew. And previously it was par for the course. Do you think God communicated differently as a norm back in those times? If so, then this position would force a more esoteric view of the arc of history as opposed to a compatible list view, which tries to integrate evolution, science, contemporary docile ethics. It's interesting to know that Jesus and the Pharisees don't disagree that if your animal falls into a pit, you can get him out on the Sabbath. There were regular accommodations to human need. I think few of us would imagine hauling people out of a tuberculosis sanitarium to put them in the sanctuary on a Sunday. I think few of us would imagine going to the nursing home and wheeling the dementia victim out into the sanctuary on a Sunday. Maybe crumbling up the Eucharist and injecting it through their feeding tube. Things can get a little crazy. And this is why I have a problem with churches. Again, I was reading this history about Elizabethan England. There were complaints about secret masses being held. And at that point, war was about to break out between the Church and the Church. It was about to break out between England and the Catholic countries of Europe. They were hunting down and killing Jesuits in England. This was Elizabeth, who many believed was not sufficiently Protestant. She had trouble from the Puritans as well, who wanted the Anglicans to stop wearing vestments in church. So, yeah, this is a God who commands war. And he's also a God who, when David goes and is hungry because he's fleeing from Saul, is allowed to eat the showbread. And John the Baptist would have liked some pretty harm-firm lines, and Jesus eats with sinners. This is why I say you have sort of the view of the antithesis of the world, which is black and white, right and wrong. And you have the view of the spectrum, which is better or worse. This is the bounded set and the center set always live in dynamic relation, one to another. Jesus doesn't say to the thief on the cross, You know, you're a little late coming to the show. Weren't you just mocking with the other guy? Are you doing this just to save your hide because death is near? This is why, again, I say churches have to figure out what to do for people. And someone might say, well, the mass should be in Latin, and if people need to understand the mass, let them learn Latin. I mean, these questions can go on forever and ever. And we, at some point, we have to make our choice, and we will answer to our God for our choices. I don't know we can get beyond that. Someone is typing. Two people are typing. Christian T. Golden comes in first. In regards to the Graven image. In regards to the Graven image, I think it's a little bit of a different In regards to the Graven image concern, there is something about making an image of God that lends itself to the belief that God in his entirety is lovable. To recognize some manifest thing as representative of some aspect of God isn't so dangerous as believing that you've got God summed up in one particular manifestation. Even something as wonderful as Lewis' Aslan is but an impression of some aspects of God and should not be assumed to be a graven set in stone image, God in his entirety worthy of worship. There are a lot of, there are a lot of, There are a lot of, there are a lot of loose ends that you come up with because, you know, Aslan is really an image of Jesus. Well, Jesus is the icon of the invisible God. And so to give our own favorite heretic his due on the Discord here, what do we mean by that word God? And because God is instantiated in Jesus, does that mean he's in any way a lesser God or not God? And of course, you know, you can have an argument with Sam about that. The position of the church has been to say he's fully God and very God, even though Jesus has skin on him. So these, I mean, but again, as a Christian, but again, as with the Genesis one question, these are, this is, this is the, this is what we do with theology and Christianity and the Bible is we, is we, we work through these questions. And as with the estuary, we're not, we're not going to fully get everything down in our lists. And I think maybe it's just my temperament, but we ought to have some, some kindness with this. And I think that kindness is justified by Jesus goes to a dinner at a Pharisee and his feet are not washed by the, by the host and the woman comes in and they are scandalized because if Jesus is all that, why doesn't he know that this woman is a sinner? And Jesus has something to say about that. And so we are saved by grace, not, not by our works. We will get lots of things wrong. And I also assert that the work that we do is done in gratitude. And so we respond to God's moving first on our behalf in grateful obedience to his will. We want to obey him because we wish to please him. Sometimes we're afraid, but we want to obey him because we wish to please him, which is the way that when my children obey me, that's how I would want to obey them. And that's part of the reason I'm not a tyrant, or at least I hope I'm not a tyrant, because I don't want my children complying with me out of fear. I want them responding to me out of loving gratitude. And I think that's a much better picture of the Christian life. So I think, I think we're at the end of it, Rick. So thank you all for coming. And I'll post this recording and probably next week at some point, which is when I usually do it. And we'll see all the fancy stuff that Rick did. And we'll continue to try to make these better. And I'll hang around in the room a little bit more. And then Rick and I have a little bit of work to do here. So I guess, Rick, when you, when you show me the change of signal there, I think we're at the end of it.