https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WncXd92r_Ek

 you you you you you you All right, well, all right, all right, all right. I've been reading Matthew McConaughey's Memoir and I haven't gotten up to dazed and confused yet Someone in the comments section said a pastor shouldn't know anything about dazed and confused If that person had any idea what pastors know about people's lives Rick was just telling me that Sammy the Bull Gravano is now on YouTube and you know telling stories and I'll tell you you get pastors on YouTube telling stories, but pastors have a have a have a bigger threat than mob retribution to be concerned about and that's why we We go to the grave with a lot of our stories if you want to read some of my father's stories My father did write a memoir after he retired and it's called Chains of Graves by Stanley Van Klay There's a little book promotion. It's on Kindle and if you if you buy the book on Kindle I think my mother gets a couple bucks. So welcome today to the Bridges of Meaning Friday Question and answer you have to get this computer set up so I can keep an eye on the Keep an eye on the on the YouTube streams. I haven't quite figured out how to run everything here We have some new people in the room today I was just talking to a woman from Brooklyn really made me made me all excited because You know, I hear Brooklyn and Patterson in New York. It just makes me Makes me long for home and remember Remember New Jersey and growing up there and everything. So let's see if I can watch this thing So like so if there's last week Okay last week Last week I gave a hundred dollar super chat, which was our first super chat. That was kind of cool I'm not in it for the super chats, but that is turned on. So if you want to do that, I'll try and Acknowledge that kind of doing a little bit of this and a little bit of that um, how is everyone in the How are all the bridges in the chat room? Say hi Valerie got it should hear your voice there you are How are you today Valerie doing all right, uh looking along and uh, I just I just I almost got you to wait So I was like, oh my goodness. It's almost my time. So I'm like, oh I need to jump on You're you're right on time you're right on time so Now rick and rick and joey want me to move along there They're worried about the backlog and I think they're probably right. I should listen to them more Um, so so i'll jump in and we'll start with the questions We just got everyone trained to be all quiet when you start streaming and now you're asking us all to talk Well, some of you are a little some of you a little less reluctant to talk than others, right luke? Right i'm busy right now paul I'll never get a chance to get rick to say anything but um, that'll just continue to promote the Continue to promote the myth that that that rick is just my cyber eagle. So All right brody Back from december 19. Okay, gotta gotta keep these moving. Hi paul and a recent article on douglas murray esther o'rally O'rally Who's esther o'rally esther o'rally said and yet murray fails to persuade The socially conservative reader that this train was designed with a breaking with brake systems in the first place He writes it if there is or was a moderate middle ground in this culture war But what if it's been a zero-sum game? all along It makes me think that of others such as helen pleckrose james Now even richard dawkins who are aghast that modernity the enlightenment values are not holding What are your thoughts on this quote? I'm going to use a fancy verbatim term opponent processing I think In many ways both things are often true is This current train going down the track going to make a mess Yes, it will and I think we saw some of that last week. We're going to continue to see some of that I think donathan péjot is right that people think 2020 was bumpy 2021 could be a lot bumpier and it has been already Will it go off the rails? That's what human beings do we go off the rails and then somehow some way things sort of get back on the rails and we keep playing the game, so I Had a good conversation yesterday with With brett sockeld who wrote that book trans Transubstantiation he and I have spoken a number of times. I really like talking to brett. I I find in brett a brother from another Biascidical mother in many ways We just we I think we just really click and the conversation was a good one i'll post it on monday But we're we're both moderates and we're both optimistic moderates and when I say an optimistic moderate, it's Things are going to get bumpy pyres fall people die but part of the advantage of Christianity over A metaphysical system that doesn't afford a next stage or a next life is that Messiness from this life can be accounted for and adjusted And worked through in a next stage and and even that thought Impacts our view of what we do in this world. So Um, yeah, and so helen pluck was in james lindsey, although james lindsey it's been very interesting and and I hear this a lot Increasingly from people who are in some ways supposed to be Hardcore died in the world atheists. They're getting less and less anti-christian and more and more appreciative doesn't mean they necessarily believe this stuff but more and more appreciative of What's going on in christianity and why? um, it has taken the form that it has they see the utility of it even if they don't buy the physical claims of it so Yeah. All right. Hey one question done that only took me a couple of minutes any further beyond I'd like to see you and or john make a video on the eschaton I feel like till that happens. You're never going to win over the new atheist um We're never going to win over the new atheists. That's not how these things work. You might see movement between camps, but People people make their choices and they go to their grave and these labels work to a degree and they don't work to other degrees but The eschaton is what I mean by the eschaton eschatology is the study of last things It basically talks about and I can phrase this in a lot of different ways the end of the simulation or the apocalypse Or the day of the lord or how many different ways? We're when you see the kinds of things we're seeing in washington dc it sort of reminds me of matthew 13 the little apocalypse where Jesus is strolling around jerusalem with the apostles and they're going ooh about the giant stones Of the temple and jesus kind of shrugs and says not one stone will be left on another like when and then he says a bunch of things and Preterists will say well those things kind of happen But symbolic people will look at it and say those things keep happening And so it's that reason that you know, jonathan peugeot was in some ways sort of like a prophet arising at these days and um saying the kinds of things he does that's that's the natural aspect of the ecosystem, so Well, I talk I think I talked about the eschatology quite a bit I have at least lately Um is god actually real and again a sentence like that The real operative words are what you mean by god and what do you mean by real is heaven actually real? What do you mean by heaven and what do you mean by real? Where do we go when we die? Who is we? What do you mean by go? um And there's some other questions that get into this Can god really rain down fire and brimstone? Every time there's a volcano we watch god really raining down fire and brimstone Does it really matter if I watch porn? Or think certain thoughts of course it matters How does it matter and why does it matter? this morning before Coming in here to the the church I was listening to Matthew McConaughey's green lights and enjoying it and hearing about some of the Adventures of his youth and the lessons he was learning and the book is starting to grow on me But there are consequences to all of these things I I released a video last night hard lines and grime lines And that's continuing to be in my head A lot of my monologues are just what's in my head right now and so you you sort of get a window into at least part of my psyche with those videos and You know if it weren't for The the rough upbringing Matthew McConaughey had you know, there's one story about Remember the johnny cash song one piece at a time When he when the guy worked in a Cadillac factory and so he steals his cattle one piece at a time and builds it Matthew mcconaughey has a story about how when he was a kid during a summer he He would get up in the middle of the night and once at a time steal from a lumber yard So he could build a massive tree house out in the woods That's theft. You know, is that good for him? It's like well, yeah. No. Yeah. No, it's All of this stuff matters c.s. Lewis has a great line in One of his books may be mere Christianity when he says, you know every time we every time we do something We either sort of turn towards or away from god But as as brett suckled and I talked about in the in the video that i'm going to release monday you know the amazing thing about Christianity is that This god is not just See this is where we get to the hard line things This this god when you read the sermon on the mount jesus is more demanding Jesus lays down a sexual ethic that he listened to and think How on earth can I possibly? Stay on the right side of the line of that sexual ethic And then There's a man like david who's man after god's own heart who? Obviously comes nowhere near jesus sexual ethic god has that kind of Bandwidth and capacity and this this gets back into jonathan edward's You know these these Conflicting excellencies i'll call them. It's it's sort of a theistic opponent processing that on one hand god is enormously demanding that moses Because he Struck the rock instead of speaking to it the second time. Sorry no canaan for you But on the other hand, he's so outrageously generous That he sends his son to pay the price for sinners Who While we were still sinners christ died for us, so this is the story of the bible And and we have a hard time Keeping both these things in our mind that god is more demand so demanding that we think he's unreasonable And he's so merciful that he we think he's too lenient and that's the picture of the bible and so when new atheists pop up and say Well, I just can't believe this bible because there's inconsistencies. I look at him and say you don't know the half of it But isn't that you and isn't that me and So again, matthew mcconaughey's his grime lines in that story he's You know there's he and one and one of the things he got from his father so there's a story about where matthew mcconaughey and a buddy stole a pizza and and he came home and He had gotten caught and his father found out about it and all his father wanted to do wanted him to do was tell the truth and matthew mcconaughey was too scared to tell the truth and If his if if he had just if his father if he had just told the truth to his father his father would have Yeah, because his father had stolen lots of stuff and his father was stealing pipe I mean, there's there's a lot of stuff in there. And and so on one hand you can look at matthew mcconaughey's father and say this is a man who You know, he would he would he would rob he wouldn't rob he would steal Yet he has this high moral value that well if his son steals that's not a good thing But it's a forgivable thing but lying don't you dare lie to me or i'm going to beat the crap out of you Well, yeah, you shouldn't beat the crap out of your son either. So but but there's a sense in which For matthew mcconaughey Some of the image of god is in his father Who you just read the story? He's not a perfect man But but yet even in the midst of that mess, there's an element of god that shines through it What's that element of god will confess our sins to him? Well, why is confession so important? Why is it so important that we come clean to god? So, you know part of part of what i've seen christians do for a very long time Is try to motivate Individuals with well, don't you want to go to heaven when you die? Well, yeah But what if they don't believe in heaven and what if they don't believe in hell and I got into some of these things with my conversation with sally It's not going to be an effective line of argument and I and I don't You know a little bit later, maybe i'll manage not to bog down too much on One question or another a little bit later Zarlars asked does god have telos have a telos if so, isn't that telos greater than god god himself is the telos He's the be that's that's how the beatific vision works That finally what god offers to this world is himself Why does he do that? Because he's the greatest thing he's also absolute terror And and there's a there's a way in which these things come together That one of the earliest pieces on my blog is from I think 2009 when I wrote a piece about hell where In some strange way if every description of Of heaven in the bible What do we mean by that word heaven? We basically we mean union with christ so that heaven is well, is it a place? Well, what is a place? Is it is it in time space like we are right now? Well? Yeah But do we access it? I mean You get to a point in theology and physics and knowledge where things get really weird and so Now I don't say that to undermine any of the stories and this is where we sort of come full around by Saying all of these stories and descriptions are true Well, but you just said things get weird. Yeah, but this is where you get into c.s Lewis's miracles his chapter on horrid red things. We we can't talk about this weirdness without narrative and imagery and concrete representation and You know the question is well does all of this concrete reality basically Express that weird stuff that That our minds are too simple to see Well, yeah that's kind of The point of it all and well, how would you get that from christianity? I don't know jesus is son of man and son of god jesus jesus is god I mean, there's so much weirdness right in that assertion and then we go to To be with him and we live with him and we fall in love with jesus I mean, there's a there's a sense in which the grime line and the campiness speaks truth That a lot of people who are playing at sufficient sophistication sort of miss Yeah You push this stuff hard enough and deep enough and you begin to realize. Oh, yeah, it is it is very weird Why does jesus ascend what what is this? Why does he eat a fish? What is why does he say this is my body? I mean You know why unless you eat my flesh and drink my blood you can have no part of me john six It's plenty weird so You know to get back to the early premise here James lindsey on the unsafe christmas party says i've met calvinists that basically say You know, they can't convert people. I'm one of those calvinists. It's not me who converts people now God might use me in a process, but it's always god that That moves us and shapes us. He's the author. We are the story He is the sculptor. We are the clay That's that's how this thing works It's all well and good that we all understand this way of thinking and if it makes us better people in our communities even better But unless it actually goes somewhere immaterial and then becomes material again, and that's the point of the crucifixion and the resurrection That jesus doesn't just you know pass in and out of rooms But he eats a fish which means that well, how does that happen? Because if he's If he's a ghost he can go in and out of a room Which is exactly why he says show me some fish i'll eat it because ghosts can't eat because ghosts are in some ways Less real than the walls and the door and he says I am more real than the walls and the door And so I am more real than the fish. Well, what do you mean by real? Well real is Is true at every level? it it it Masters the physical level it masters this, you know, what do we mean by spirit? Spirit is the unseen that forms and shapes and moves the matter And so when jesus enters a room, he is master of the walls and the floor and the fish And he is master of the world. Well, then why doesn't he go up in front of caesar? And harrid and pilate and say how do you like me now? Because why would he bother? Because the people that are front and center in his world Are his friends? And you'd say well well in terms of a status hierarchy Why would peter be greater than harrid or caesar or pilate but he is because we're talking about peter now And most of the people listening to me can't even tell me which caesar was in power When jesus died and was risen again The most important people in the world were in that room right there And jesus would continue to go on and colonize more and you know, we have the apostle paul and on and on and on so You know the I hope i'm not being too hard on eddie further beyond but The the question even the question of what is a christian You know this this always sort of baffles us and you know what god decides god knows god picks and chooses God decides who he wants to spend eternity with And well fortunately for us he seems to be open to our ambitious chasings after him And and you see this again and again in the gospel someone will run up to him and say, you know lord heal my He'll heal my family member if you can But what do you mean if I can it's like the guy the guy's in utter panic because his child is sick and jesus you know It's not very nice of jesus to say. Oh, yes, i'll i'll heal her right away I'm, so sorry. This is happening sounds like some customer service representative when you've had an uncomfortable flight on delta No, jesus is not like that Jesus is master of the world. And so he will write the story the way he wants to and yeah, we'll we'll have issues with him, but Who are we? so That's that's the that's the thing about and and you know, I understand eddie further beyond your um You know your anxiety and your desire and in some ways that's a good desire and I don't want you to lose that desire I don't want you to lose that that heat and desire that That your lost friends and family could be included in the great story of god in a far better way That's great but some of these categories They're they're part of the show they're part of the program It's it's it's not that it goes somewhere immaterial. It's that we understand that the immaterial governs the matter That spirit governs flesh That just like our hand our our mind moves our hand. So Yeah, that's a great question Any any comments on that from the um from the discord room? So See luke must be busy Luke always has a comment Okay, i'll jump in. Yeah, there's jacob jacob before you say anything. I want you to meet well, where is she? Shosh jewel she's from brooklyn. So um, I met her before so you two will have to meet and talk because that'll be fun Anyway, go ahead. Shoshana here I'll sign off. We're gonna have to talk. Okay. Yeah, okay. I'm shoshu's. Thanks. Yeah um so, um you know you you spoke about the the thing about uh, you know jesus setting the The bar really high and then david kind of bringing that down I don't This is one of the things where like it's like christians don't seem to understand something that I think is very easily understood in judaism, which is that god gives you lots and lots of opportunities and There has to be enough work there for everyone to be challenged yet Being our father It's not a God doesn't need me to do anything right and um the analogy I gave in the text is You play chess with your father He wins sometimes and he loses sometimes He wins sometimes in order to make you work as hard as you can and he loses sometimes because He What he really wants is for you to win every single time and I think that's that's just a perfect analogy for what life in this world is Right god gives you really high standards and if you never fail if you then Obviously the standard wasn't high enough and like it says I believe in proverbs uh At sadik a righteous person falls seven times and gets up And if your kid never skins his knees then You're you're just not doing it, right? I agree. I agree I agree jacob well said so And that's why the father metaphor Is is so good and that's why? You know again if you read matthew mcconaughey's green lights his father is not a perfect man by any means but there's There's something of our father in heaven that Shines through matthew mcconaughey's father and and something of his creator is revealed through his father And all the messiness of him, so no, I agree. I agree well said All right leaf whiz torr hi paul, I have a question i've been struggling with When do you punch bullies this kind of rolls into that if you are a kid in school should you punch the bullies? What does the bible say about punching bullies? I think there is a time and a place to punch bullies and wisdom is knowing the difference and in The world is so amazingly complex and and you know, I like jacob's I like jacob's, you know the way jacob just laid it out right there because part of how this world is is is a great degree of freedom and um there there are times and places to punch bullies and there are times and places to not punch bullies and this and part of the part of the reason Many in this this this area of the internet matthew mcconaughey jordan peterson Sir, if you You know schools now have a you know a zero tolerance thing about bullying and and there's something appropriate to that because Bullying is cruel. Um, I was bullied to a degree I was pretty small when I was a freshman in high school and um, there was a You know, there was kind of a bigger kid who you know was a lot bigger than me But he couldn't run too fast and then so then he had a little sidekick who could track me down and hold me until the big kid got there and you know, and a Lot of years later just a few years ago. I made the comment about this And uh, then my mother learned that you know, I didn't know I didn't know any of this stuff was happening Of course, I wasn't going to tell my mother about this there. I had a certain degree of pride So there's a whole culture around that And so schools right now are all um Are all hyper to cut out this culture and and to a certain degree Yes, that's right but it has to be this is where you get into again the jonathan peugeot stuff about There has to be the fringes and the edges and the jonathan height stuff where kids have to learn to work this stuff out themselves They need a degree of unsupervised play. They have to get into a little bit of trouble Now the difficulty is that sometimes it will go too far and lives will be lost or you know it's it's reality's just so enormously complex and wisdom develops in time, so um Yeah, there's there's a time and a place to punch bullies And schools should be aware of bullying and try to do things about it but How to get that exactly right? We never do so we keep trying our best. So it's a good question All right, richard zurek 04 Hope you're doing well paul. I am i've been waiting through peugeot land lately And have a similar question to eddie eddie soup spoon I was discussing the christian sexual ethic with an atheist who advocates the consent only culture you've critiqued and found it difficult to do so Yeah, it's not gonna it's not gonna work. I said to him. I wanted to do not only not gonna work It's not even true. It's you you It's you you think that through long enough and you see no, no, it's not consent only Okay, i'll stop interrupting myself i'll try to stop interrupting myself I said to him I wanted to do more research on that topic But I actually experienced some hesitation because of the peugeot i've been watching should christians attempt to rationally justify things like our sexual Ethic and worldly terms well-being educational outcomes, etc Especially when one of the most important aspects of christian emphasis on marital union is to be in line with the pattern of christ uniting with the church I've been moving away more and more from evolutionary and scientific explanations for christian practices in favor of symbolic biblical understanding And feel like it's um and feel like i've been missing the point or something if tried to justify them rationally thoughts That's a good question It's sort of it's sort of the difference between tim keller has this great illustration where He tells his son to do so and his son his son is I think probably a tweener or something His son says why and if and tim keller says to his son if I tell you why I want you to do this Then you're doing it because you think so, but I want you to do this because I want you to trust me I think both of those realities are good and right and true And just like with the bullying question There are times to punch a bully in the nose And there are times to not and and schools should Worry about bullying and do what they can about it, but schools shouldn't do it in a way That makes it tyrannical And so there are times in our life when We have to resist reason And be obedient and there are times in our life when Understanding the shape of obedience with rationality is helpful to people a lot of preaching is Sort of giving explanations that help people be obedient But sometimes you just need obedience and and that's kind of the hard line and the grime line and so I'm convinced that part of what goes into a lot of these challenges for us Is to be able to be obedient and to be obedient to others Challenges for us Is that consciousness is Is monofocal We we can really only see Now we're it's the exaptation of our visual Mechanisms we can only really see Very clearly one thing at a time in terms of our consciousness And so when we focus on obedience we can say oh, yeah obedience is important and it is But then we can sometimes look at obedience blind obedience and say oh well that was just You know look at any, you know, look at politics right now, whatever side you're on You know, you've got you've got two sides who are sort of blind obedient to a certain propagandist zeitgeist and People are out there yelling they should think And again, I talked to part of the reason I try to not I try to post things on my channel as soon as I can is because I want to talk about my conversation with brett Sockold without having all of you roll your eyes because I was there and you weren't there and you will be there monday, but so so You know again, I think about verveky's opponent processing and in terms of our lives obedience And understanding sort of lean against each other When you're a child You know you your mom says don't touch the stove you say why because I said so Because to a certain degree any explanation she gives about the potential harm of burning your hand and maybe permanently deforming it Is unintelligible to a five-year-old? And that's why because I said so is the best answer But there will be some kids that touch that stove and they will learn a lesson and now Well rationality, okay, how far can rationality possess go i'll say okay it hurts All right. Well, is that terribly rational? Well, there's these nerve endings in your hand and the the synopsis fire to the brain and and they do this and because Evolutionarily yada yada yada yada yada It hurts. Well, it hurts is pretty good too and it hurts is probably more salient So i'm not only reading the matthew mcconaughey green lights. I started reading uh Stephen king's on writing which i'm really enjoying and he tells this story about when he was a kid He had strep throat and he had a terrible ear infection And so his mother would take him to the doctor And they would puncture and drain his ear and he writes about that. He writes it very well, obviously stephen king And and so and so the doctor lays him down and puts a pad down and it's happened once before and the doctor's coming At him with his needle and the doctor says it won't hurt a bit And and he sort of believes him again Why and and what the doctor of course lied to him because it's going to hurt Terribly, but the doctor lies to him and he sort of believes him again so that Actually, the medical treatment can be effective on him. And and so this is this is the kind of world we're living in so I would say Because we're conscious creatures and we can have to take things episodically one thing at a time there'll be seasons in your life when You just learn the discipline of submission and obedience And you say you know what? I've got all kinds of good reasons to not be obedient but For now I'm just going to say This is what god wants I will submit You know sort of like mary when she hears about okay, you're going to become pregnant. Um, this is you know I'm god's tool. I'm going to be obedient Let him use me and then and then there'll be times in your life when It's going to be rationality and you're going to think things through the thing is if we didn't have both we couldn't live so Consciousness makes us So lately we've talked about a lot of dualities Is it one thing or is it many things is it one thing or is it two things? Well, sometimes it's one thing and it's two things But we can't see we can only see one thing at a time and so that creates dualities dualities is just this and not this So it's kind of two things that are one thing again. This stuff gets really weird when you penetrate it, but Yes when it when it comes to So again, I was I was reading mccona-hay's book and Compared to matthew mccona-hay. I was I was a much more obedient Child in many ways not perfectly obedient but much more obedient. So I read his book and I think about my life and think What did my obedience get me? And I think that thing through and I find my obedience got me some good things Maybe I didn't have some of these other experiences. Maybe i'd be wiser if I did but One of the things I recognized too is that So I pastor a church and in my church there are people who have been lifelong obedient faithful christians And there are other people who have had Long and complex and messy and grimy lives before they came to christ and when they came to christ and they learned a degree of obedience They their life their lives settled down and they had a lot more order and And so when I talked to those people a lot of times people who had had Sheltered obedient Ordered lives growing up look at the other side and say oh my story's so boring compared to yours And a lot of times the people on the other side look at them and say I wish my story was more boring Each of us Wants so, you know, I do a lot of conversations often with with younger people younger than myself on this channel And often I realize that some of the people who have had ordered Have had great parents and loving lives and have been obedient You know when they come on the channel, tell me about your life there aren't a lot of grimy stories that grab our interest because They haven't done much because they've been good people living ordered lives and every parent wants this for their kid In many ways I want I don't want my kid to suffer. I don't want my kid to get in trouble I don't want my kid to to to to do all kinds of things Before it's time to have all kinds of complexity later in life when it's going to complicate their lives That's what every good parent wants. But at the same time All the best stories come from you know, Stephen King was raised by a You know raised by a single mother who really struggled with a lot of things and so Stephen King and his brother really struggled Matthew McConaughey his parents Divorced twice then married twice Parents Divorced twice then married three times each other and i've known couples like this, you know They get married they fall in love and then gosh, they can't stand each other They get a divorce and then maybe they marry someone else in the middle that doesn't work out. So they go back to number one I mean And and well, maybe if they were more obedient They could have weathered that and had less weddings and divorces and the lawyers and the preachers would have made a little less money And Life life lays itself out in strange ways. So I think you I think it's a good question Richard and And maybe you're in a season of life now where you're going to work on obedience And and you'll discover that obedience is hard But but you know, look at the monks. What do monks learn in monasteries? They learn that obedience is hard, but obedience is also fruitful And you know as jacob's little speech that he just gave us sometimes Sometimes disobedience is fruitful, too If we can learn from it and grow in wisdom, so It's a good question any any any comments from Any comments from the discord room from the voice chat? Um, I guess I want to I want to make this comment really quick. I think that uh Wisdom wisdom says that you never punch a bully you take their back and do a rear naked choke Yeah anthony's anthony's uh Yeah, you'll have to meet anthony anthony's often in the open studio and uh You know, he's he's waiting for that big fight. He's waiting for that big fight. So we'll uh We'll wait with anthony for that. All right, jason s almond tree or ammentry and in the thriving metropolis of rip in california I just had a long discussion this morning with my younger sister about time and space We began our conversation about how abstract thought needs to meet the material realm And mankind is the conduit between these two things Somehow this led into time and space So I was wondering if there might be some link or parallel between time and abstract thought And space and the material world. It's an interesting question Is time more heavenly and space more earthly? Is time masculine and space feminine? Maybe that's a dumb question. I don't think it's a dumb question I'm just trying to understand all these things and piece them together. They seem important well, these are these are fun questions and You know the medieval in the medieval C.s. Lewis. So when I first met burn power, he said my favorite book of c.s. Lewis is the discarded image And that was one of the c.s. Lewis books I hadn't read and he says few people have read it and he's true the few people there's no audio book of the discarded image But and so then I read the discarded image and it's a really cool book because it contrasts it lewis basically explores the Classical and medieval thought and that lost world The the the geocentric universe now There are ways in which that model Doesn't work for us But there are ways in which that model continues to reveal a degree of truth You know just recently with the conjunction of saturn and jupiter and now mercury Everyone gets all excited. Why because the heavens seem to be declaring and validating the story of christ Okay So I think those are good questions and I don't really have any good answers for them jason but i'd encourage you to Keep thinking about them and keep asking them and uh, see if you can See if you can get peugeot to take a crack at it I was looking at his december question and answer video and uh, his answers are a lot shorter than mine I should aspire to to that kind of greatness. So that's a good question See see rick and joey how quick i'm moving through these i'm only 45 minutes in and i've gotten through more than one question so Okay pvk is christ going to return yes and be pleased with Uh pleased about are not celebrating the lord's supper as brothers sisters Um in his church universal will he be pleased about us not celebrating the lord's supper as brothers and sisters of a church universal No Will he be pleased we withheld this joint celebration because we weren't in tradition x or believe in dogma y Um, no, he does not like our unity our disunity but Now i'm gonna make it more. You know, my sunday school class often complains that i'm I I take the bible and I muddy the waters Well, what kind of unity is he looking for? so The roman catholic church has a high degree of structural unity and and there's some good things about that but there's some complexity about that too and Evangelicalism is sort of an attempt to create another kind of unity across structures so It's very interesting That you can look at the new testament. Let's say now I expose my protestant self you look at the new testament and You know what? What kind of unity did they have there a close reading of the new testament reveals Boy, there's a lot of fighting going on and and even that little window we have into the very early church from the new testament is obviously enormously incomplete because I think again a close reading of it suggests that You know with luke and paul, we sort of track paul running around but those those greek named deacons Named in act six start roaming around and we hear some of their stories and then we've got other people roaming around like for example the author of the book of hebrews and Who is that author? We don't know and and you just get the sense of this very live context, which is enormously messy and You know paul is so upset at the corinthian church. I just just reading a book You know suggesting that maybe the corinthian church that paul's writing to maybe is a church of 50 people And so, you know the the size of the mega church named living stones in sacramento um It's We and this sort of gets back to to richards question about obedience and rationality Yeah, it's we're all a mess But and just then to get sort of to jacob's Realize jacob's Offering in this question and answer god understands our mess and He's going to use the mess to To get there, you know to get us there get us where well wherever he's getting us to go so Yeah, and and I You know the the bridges of meaning discord where you know, a lot of people are excited about orthodoxy You know my conversation with sally we're working stuff out. You know that again, like I said you know when I talk to brett sockeld often, I feel like he's a brother from another ecclesiastical mother and so often he'll say things and I think boy I I think that's right too and You know part of me hopes that maybe whatever I contribute For Whatever becomes of this little contribution that I'm making via youtube and the discord that that somehow We we move to resolve the protest that is protestantism and to see the division between Rome and the patriarchs to see that healed and to have us all move towards the unity of christ So Yeah, I want to see I should read the rest of your question lest first corinthians 11 17 through 30 34 be used as justification We should remember that it was that it was time specific and already diverges from christ's and treaty And I assume you're talking about the gospel of john should we care should be taken to read this in the context of time and space Yes, while I understand how instantiation of doctrine can act as a bulwark against corruption or data loss My overarching concern becomes doctrine over persons At what point does insularity and exclusivity become counter become a counter narrative to love and its universal expression Yeah, all of our lives now. We're sort of having aristotle socrates issue here or sarah aristotle plato issue issue here is it's is it's sort of the the the vision the the emanation vision of plato or is it sort of the ground up instantiation of aristotle? so We've got that in here. It's the one in the many we bump into that I seek to colonize the definition of dia logos My new definition would be communication between two or more nodes on the christ net Even nodes unaware. They are indeed at the network What do you say man of the beard? I think I just said it The beard's growing longer. I'm i'm getting to the oh no phase and i'm tempted to shave it off so we'll we'll see how long the beard lasts or if I decide to you know Try to groom a bit. I mean part of the reason you have the evolution of the beard is my daughter. So lovely Lovingly illustrated is that um Yeah, I get tired of it. You see it gets starts growing way down here It just keeps getting bigger my cousin who I assume has facial hair like mine. His beard gets way out here So do I want to do that? I don't know anyway Bro Bro tiffy Hi pvk, i've been wondering do you think that the bible supports the idea of a soul as something separate from the body? Okay, is my story separate from the body? in in some ways my soul Is my soul So in the in the in the The mary cohen john vervecky i'm gonna have mark um on the channel next week This question about story and narrative is the story the thing we can't get at and is the narrative our telling at it I mean the the soul us and the soul has that kind of problem to it You don't our our soul isn't our soul isn't a material thing Our soul isn't a physical thing And our cell and that that's why you know, I tell this story before I visit my grandma when she's pushing 90 And i'm a college kid and she looks at me one day and she says, you know When I I think about myself. I think about myself at your age But when I look in the mirror, I wonder Where did that old lady come from? Well, what's the union between What's the what's the timeless? Everlasting aspect of my grandmother Well, that's her soul That's her story, but that wasn't purely contained by her because bits of her were seen by others My view of my grandmother probably held a sliver of truth Unique to our interaction That my grandmother couldn't see and that certainly was true of her husband and her children so and the only The only possible The only possible perfect complete view of my grandmother would have to be Held by god and in that sense And and jesus gets at this when he notes that When they talked about abraham and the patriarchs They didn't use the past tense and jesus says that's because abraham and the patriarchs are still alive in god But there's a sense in which abraham and the patriarchs are are are reduced by even God's knowledge of them until god Re-instantiates them in the resurrection and and if you understand the logic of now when I say mythology I don't mean that disparagingly or less real but rather more real but rather the way that these stories are Are told and embodied if you understand That reality you can begin to see how Philosophically mature and deep and profound the bible is because the bible not only contains That kind of thought but articulates it in stories and ways that even children can get so Yeah, the soul is you and you have a sense of yourself but your Parents have another view of yourself Your children have a view of yourself Your friends have a view of yourself and because of all your biases and because of your limitations of time and space you can't see it all so From what possible vantage point could actually the totality of you that would be your soul be be be be known Well, that would only be god because it would have to include All the way back to your ancestors and the decisions made by parents and grandparents that Made into you becoming the you that you are all the way down to the biochemical phase so so That that is what your soul is but It's it's again analogous to a story But it's far deeper and richer than any story any of us would ever have time to tell So jews believe in the ruach or breath breath As it relates to the origins of life of god. Yeah But does that necessarily correlate to the platonic Platonic idea of an individual immortal soul Now I am a christian and I don't believe our souls are immortal Our souls have beginnings now in some ways if we imagine our soul to be a story They begin long before we're actually conceived But they are not eternal They are everlasting and I I think that's the you know, unlike theological systems such as You know my friend daniel is a mormon and so he always tells me that well children choose their parents because mormons have this entire mythology about pre-existing souls And I don't subscribe to that. I I think we are not eternal. We are instead everlasting and Well, why are we everlasting because we are known by god now again if you're if you're a naturalist or a materialist then all of this All of this stuff that we most care about is just fluff It's just sort of the the mental The mental It's just information that is passing away and will die And and that's why The entire shape of the christian story is about life and not death because Your story Doesn't die the way your body does. Well, how can we think about that and talk about that and and And bear witness to that christianity bears witness to that so I think that christ's life is eternal. Yes, and that is he is Christ is divine. That's what we mean by that. He is pre-existent. He has no beginning no end. He's eternal He's outside of time And that's I think part of the reason why the church fathers and the early church councils made the decisions that they did but he is He is also human So there's and and again all of this machinery around Christology and trinitarian logic gets into those kinds of ideas and and the The theology and the narrative all go to try to embody These ideals and again the assertion of the religion is that all this is true That's that's that's the way these systems work. So any any comments from the voice chat on that? Nope Nope, all right Where am I oh calepa All right. I always I often get questions about the Some of the process youtube is full of information about how to make youtube videos currently, I am using a sony a 6400 camera and i'm using rick and I have been going back and forth over How exactly I should make my videos rick doesn't like the The mic in the picture Um, I don't mind it in the picture so I've been monkeying around with this. I use a blue yeti mic I for my monologue videos use, uh obs right now For most of my conversations, I just used the zoom recording I told david fuller that from rebel wisdom and he gasped says you just used the recording. It's like yeah It's simple. It works. Yeah, the quality is not there. Yeah, there's a bunch of issues with it, but that's what I use So I I used to use uh screen-o-matic Screen record-o-matic that I started out with that there were sound issues and then I was using Um Then I was using Uh bandcam and bandicott. I still use bandicott as a really quick and easy video cutting Cutting and editing software. It's super fast and it's super easy, but you can't do much with it That's why it's fast and easy And but obs has been helping me maybe do a little bit better on my sound levels. So That's what I use All right, um a little word to the wise with questions about Video clips. I usually don't look through these questions and answers before friday morning So if you recommend a video for me to watch I probably haven't watched it Yes, david bentley heart is a prominent theologian Um Refers to jordan peterson condescendingly I told rick You know, I david bentley heart is obviously a big deal and he's very popular on this discord server He's david bentley heart I when he wrote his I I did I in fact look at this little video they talked about His new testament Uh, you can google nt wright's take on david bentley heart's new testament Nt wright is also a very prominent Scholar and nt wright didn't particularly like david bentley heart's translation of the new testament so david bentley heart is david bentley heart and um Yeah, I I haven't taken a deep dive into him he's he's he's an astoundingly Good writer he's You know, he seems to be willing to go on small youtube channels but before You know at some point You know the what I watch and what I read and when I watch it and when I read it is Really very dependent on what's interesting me now or if you know, i'm Increasingly now i'm getting i'm getting requests to um i'm getting requests to Read and review and have conversations with authors on my channel i'm gonna have to figure out What i'm gonna do with that. There's some books that I very much do want to read. I just found out again from From brett sockled. I didn't know how I got his book apparently his Was it his mother? his mother had started watching my channel and Thought oh He should talk to brett and so She contacted brett and said tell the publisher to send him a book and so I got a book kind of in the mail and I put it off for a long time because I don't know if I want to wade into the whole thing But then when I read it, I was very excited because it was very germane and so then brett and I really hit it off People are complex and and part of how you can Create a big youtube channel for those of you who want to create a big youtube channel. This the simplest The situation is fairly simple get bigger names and do conversations and interviews with big names because If someone has a big name and they're high in status people will come and watch you on youtube That's an absolutely fine way to grow a channel That's not really what i'm about. I am More interested in Seeing what kind of Communicate community we can knit together and Not necessarily to see how fast it can grow But how durable the knitting can be and how productive The interactions between you all The interactions between you all can be so that's That's more my goal And so when you know when sally says to me You know the bridges of meaning discord server seems to be a little bit more durable, you know discord server sort of flower and wither like jonas vine, but And she says well that's partly your influence and I think it is partly my influence and it's because i'm a pastor and it's because I You know, I I dipped on last night and A bunch of people were there playing a game and looking at a funny video and having a good time That's I I love that. I love that. I want to see I want to see friendships made Via this discord server. I want to see Men women find each other and fall in love and have children. I want to see I want to see people Work on tough things in their life and they might not resolve them, but they might find Friends along the way that can support them and help them get through so Yeah, i'm a small church pastor and maybe i'm You know founding a small church discord, but that's okay Because one of the things that i've been thinking a lot about lately is what do people need? We're not hatched on You know, we're not hatched on some river floor in northern california And have some salmon spawn us. We are raised in tiny little grouplets called families Where we have a mother and a father and we have brothers and sisters And I was listening to mary and karen Their conversation and and where you know, we have cousins who are sort of like siblings But there's no sibling rivalry and so cousins are special and we scale out from there. So If if we create a small youtube channel with a you know, again small people say oh 16 000. That's not small. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah All these things have their own scales And but if we have a place Where people can come and make friends There's lots of answers out there and this is again sort of gets where the The the soul and the body come together. There's lots of answers out there but Just recently in the open studio Cassidy and shane and Andrea were all in one window And Andrea were all in one window together and it's like what they don't all live in the same place. And so uh andrea was in arizona visiting family and shane drove down from california and they met up with cassidy and That kind of thing just delights me because what it means is that There are friendships that are that are that are blooming And growing and and these kinds of friendships are the kinds of things that Shape us and give life to us. So Yeah The the the talk and the ideas they're all good but they're all in service to an end which is heaven and earth and it's it's not only the friendship and the Fellowship today but in christianity That then goes from this age into the next and is everlasting. So All right future zeus Future zeus You reference cslucis miracles routinely. Yes, I do, but I don't know what you actually got from that book Good question when I read miracles it struck me as some rehashed lewis Lewisian ideas and an uncompelling argument that reason itself is a miracle. That's true It's obviously affected you deeply true Can you explain what you have gotten from that book besides an apologetic argument that reason is a miracle? The kind of apologetics that losing that lewis might have said made his faith feel weaker And that's how I feel reading it. Well, then stop I I started reading that book routinely when You know i cast. Um sally, you know spoke compellingly about her doubt. I started reading that book routinely when I was really struggling with The kinds of doubts and and really in some ways i'd say a meaning crisis When well, what if what if what if everything we care about is just the imagination? Mary cruft of meaningless physical beings running through time There's a meaning crisis And and when i'd read lewis lewis prompted questions that Helped me and and again So I was listening to Julian talked to nathan I had nathan on the channel nathan digital gnosis. He's He you know became a christian with jordan peterson started going to a church had some conflict with a Assistant pastor who was giving him let's say direct instruction and he wasn't having it. And so He's you know sort of became an agnostic and he's you know interested in philosophy Kind of bored with doing computer stuff And so he was having a conversation with julian. Of course julian is well known around here, too julian I remember my first conversation with julian was such a delight. It's like look at this There's a hutterite out there who who listens to philosophy while he welds dumpsters and he loves kirkagard and he he thinks deeply about his christianity and he lives in community and You know that such a such a joy to find julian and then to have julian And nate talk was I just found that conversation so compelling But when you listen to nate again and again and again and He comes down to this hard question of Well, how do we how do we how do we reconcile the bible in history? and this has been This has been a really tough thing that the church has struggled with for the last couple of hundred years and it prompted the modernist fundamentalist it prompted some of the the hard stuff that darwin would present and Both of the answers that the modernist fundamentalist fight produced Has complicated The the faith development of the church and these questions have to be dealt with and so While you're right lewis does deal with reason and the miraculous and I still find lewis's point that What we consider natural and what we consider reason And so what we do is we do very much you know, there's some opponent processing within that relationship, too and so But what really grabbed me was again this i've i've been Really reflecting a lot on his chapter on horrid red things because what's the relationship between the story? and The thing that the story is pointing to Because if you're a materialist Especially now that you know the old atheist answer to reason was well We do we develop reason because it helps us succeed in the world And then donald hoffman comes along and says no actually it doesn't really it's all the tricks and hacks that help us survive and succeed in the world and You know cs lewis pointed that out alvin plantiga pointed that out And so then the question is well does reason actually point to something more real than the world Well and and this gets into the verveky Mary cohen back and forth Is there what what is the thing behind the story? Is that just sort of an articulation of events? Or is there meaning and is meaning more than just an experience that we have or something that's in in the human Intersubjective is meaning in fact Why we were made and Again I got into some of the stuff with brett sockeld so I you know Your mileage may vary is always the case for any kind of book recommendation and the fact that That people find lewis's book unconvincing does not surprise me and to some degree or another Lewis found it unconvincing because he stopped writing that form of apologetics and started writing Started writing story now he wrote the the narnia chronicles and I I think his writing the narnia chronicles was in continuation with his apologetic work And then he wrote till we have faces which is his best novel but You know from some accounts his best novel was sort of half written by joy davidman and so lewis wasn't a great Fiction writer he just wasn't not like tolkien and tolkien couldn't stand narnia now If if if ward is right and new lewis was just being his nerdy weird old self riffing on You know medieval and classical mythology via the chronicles of narnia in a children's book That's totally believable that the narnia chronicles follow the seven planets and what those meant in the medieval period that's totally lewis So Yeah, I i'm not at all upset or bothered by the fact that you don't like miracles Your mileage may vary I find it to be a deeply helpful book and It has it has helped me Find a way to wrestle with this stuff now again I mean I say what i'm about to say a lot of people are going to jump in and Try and make me feel better and i'm going to tell you I don't feel bad at all About what i'm about to say. I'm I am a pastor. I'm not an academic. I'm not a historian I am You know, I have I have my own assessment as to my own level of intelligence and my own capacity For processing things and all of that is limited and i'm totally good with my limitations Um, I see people who are way smarter than myself and I watch them tortured Because of the difficulties and complexities in the world and it's like i'll be a little dumber and a little happier Um, i'm not i'm i'm a okay with that trade-off And so if you know if you're a pastor And so if you know I I talk to I regularly talk to people that are way smarter than myself and I I have learned sometimes I should just sit back and keep my mouth shut because Brilliance is being produced and um, I don't want to get in the way or muddy the waters And again, some people are going to say oh paul blah blah blah blah you do blah blah blah and that's true, too Anybody who knows me personally knows I have a really robust ego That is is not easily Depressed so I don't feel bad about my limitations or the the poverty of of what I can produce I'm just happy that i'm just happy to be helpful for people that they can find joy in life. So that's Oh, how am I doing with oh gosh, i'm not catching and they keep coming. They keep adding more questions. Okay, I gotta keep moving Uh richard with another question first video I watched of you was your first rebel wisdom interview And you re and you referred to jordan peterson as a type of an unauthorized exorcist. Yes I found this was a helpful description, but for some reason something clicked in your interview with brett anderson Did peterson cast a demon out of brett Is this a miracle like the placebo effect? question question this think about everything that i've been working on in terms of trying to Understand what we mean by this crazy word spirit Jordan peterson is an exorcist exorcists cast out spirits jordan peterson in his work Was casting out spirits From our culture Why do people hate him because well Look at the story of legion Jesus Tells that spirit time to go And don't send us into the abyss. What's the abyss? Forgottenness the torments of hell Don't send us into the abyss. All right, go into those pigs now Symbolically when you think about that story There's a reason That story doesn't leave us alone And um, yeah, did jordan cast out a demon out of brett. He absolutely did the meaning crisis is a demon Okay And I was talking to someone that was dealing with some stuff and He's he like many people I talked to Kind of interested in jordan peterson but you know in terms of having In terms of embracing a mental ontology of God's existence and jesus resurrection and miracles They're they're they're way too modernist for that and at this point in time that they're not ready to go to church and say I believe But There are little lying spirits in their souls that are whispering things to them every night And if I say that symbolically or say it on tv in terms of a movie or or something like that We seem to be able to take it But when we bring it into the real world and what we mean by that is some imagination of the physical world Then we then we start coughing and well, there's a spirit there, too What do I mean by a spirit? Well watch all my videos where I talk about spirits because And this does connect in with miracles because I want to have us have a better understanding of what we mean when we use that word because I find I find people who are the The biggest atheists around throwing it about like there's nothing inconsistent about its use and I look at that and I say hogwash You're saying that all of all of this story and all of this mythology is just is just cruft But then you go and use that word That's when peterson is dead on right that no, you're not an atheist People are all offended peterson is an exorcist. He's been casting demons out of people He's got his own spirits that he's wrestling with that's quite obvious But that's what he's done if you understand what a spirit is And why we are spiritual and again, i'm I don't think i'm done thinking about that or have settled on things But I think i've got a far better understanding that both seems to match with our current contemporary usage of the word and the biblical usage of the word so That's what i'm working on jason again I've been hearing a lot about the unity between chaos and raw potentiality and order the unity of heaven and earth A friend of mine was talking to me about new york's about new york's new year's eve Luckily, I recorded the conversation and was able to listen back over it and I think some more and think some more We talked about how there seems to be a third element that might not be mentioned He brought up the song of school house rock three is a magic number I'll have to look that up My thought is that in the unity of chaos and order heaven and earth. There is also god genesis 1 1 God created heaven and earth. I mentioned here that the three colors of the veils of the temple red purple blue Heaven would be blue earth red and god or the king would be purple. Do you think that's correct? I think it's working symbolically How do you think the purple or the third element could be the fear of god or the king? Um, and then it goes he goes on from there Yeah I think I think you're thinking productively and this is As with many things the potential of symbolism is almost always its liability And you know, we've john vervecki is wrestling with that in some ways with with mary cohen because the power of symbolism is that It can map all kinds of things The power of science is that you remove things and get very specific And that again is why the personal is the powerful and that again is why we are the breath of god and the stuff of earth and why all of these things come together and why Oneness is such a powerful thing that it keeps coming up and people can't leave it alone and dualities are powerful things Why you know, it's one or the other it's one or the other it's back and forth and why when three comes along Well now we're sort of reaching the edge of what our consciousness can bear So and and if I say it that way it almost sounds like a reduction and some may in fact reduce and say oh three is only powerful because Consciousness is monofocal and that then leads to dualities where we sort of quickly time shift between one or the other And then three just blows our mind Of course god is three in one So you can you can reduce it to that kind of um consciousness psychological logic as well, so Yeah, that's out there, but I think you're doing productive thinking Nine-digit eric Why oh why in that conversation with vervecky and mary was authorship not mentioned? Because Every conversation has a life of its own. But yeah, you're right. It's um Authorship is a metaphor. That is a very powerful one and that's part of the reason why I often use it Tolkien is the author of middle earth is tolkien in middle earth Now we're sort of this is sort of parabolic knowledge sort of like mary's Daddy is the knife mommy is the fork and baby is the spoon and now mary has just done a video with With mark and manuel that that digs into that now that all gets pretty esoteric. All right, I have to uh um any Any comments from the from the voice chat on any of this stuff right now that i've prompted in you? All right, i'm gonna keep going maybe maybe i'll see um Um So shosh jewels had hers that she made me if I can get down to there today, I won't be so backlogged Uh pastor vanderkley You said we can only understand each other Through projecting ourselves onto others Do you think that cs lewis projected himself onto god in miracles? And by fashioning god into the likeness of a lion in the chronicles of narnia. Yeah, I think that's how we process things we we go back and forth and that's always risky because it's idolatrous, but We we don't just avoid idolatry mentally. We also avoid idolatry physically and that's part of the reason for the church That if we act these things out in the church It it affords us the ability to think thoughts that maybe we couldn't think unless we have the kind of discipline and obedience that I was Talking to richard about before so actually the um Jesus is the lion in in narnia. I mean that's jesus is aslan. Well aslan is god well and You know in all in all fairness to our brother sam in the discord Really it's it's really the reason that i'm really glad sam is here in the discord I mean you can you can sort of we can sort of sit on our laurels on the church councils And say up. It's all set three and one one and three and um two natures of christ but that doesn't mean theology ends that does become a framework and um I And and one of the things that sam does in our presence is because he he knows so much I mean, it's it's i'm not gonna sit down for a debate with sam on the trinity He's read too much You know i'm gonna throw nathan jacobs and brett sockel that sam because that'd be a much fairer fight You say well, you're a pastor and sam isn't yeah But you know these titles and these educations and these things that we have they only tell the beginning Those are only rough references you can find lay people out there that know way more than pastors and you can find lay people out there that will know way more than scholars because Knowledge is a very very complex thing. So part of the part of the blessing of having sam here is that He he pushes us Okay, you lazy trinitarians, you know put up or shut up and you know, I I'm glad sam lives in chicago because if you lived in sacramento, i'd have to do a whole lot more reading on church fathers. So um This is I think how god loves us with uh, God loves us with each other and brings people into our lives that help us grow mark Paul I loved your talk with john vervecki and mary cohen, but you didn't really interject as much as I would have liked Well, I was enjoying it. I'd like listening to them and I a a a growing edge of mine is to not interrupt so much Because it's a problem sometimes To that end. I would love to hear your thoughts on what narrative is and why it's important Yeah mark mark and I are going to talk I see narrative as a thing you submit to in exchange for not having to make too many Combinatorial explosive choices. Oh, that's really good Maybe since you have to outsource your cognition And you know mark knows a lot about this and he's been in the he's been in the open studio too quite a bit um you know, i'm looking forward to having mark on the channel and and Exposing him to a little bigger platform. He's obviously done a lot of work in this as has manuel as have the Awakening from the meaning crisis discord server. So this is this is why we're doing this stuff and I You know to have mark, you know And manuel sort of challenged vervecki and that's that that speaks of john's quality because In academia a lot of people would say i'm not going to talk to you unless you have a phd behind your name But you notice john doesn't do that and he Treats people with respect and he's open and he entertains ideas and but he's also a you know He's also a scholar and he's also a human being so um, you know I To have to have an opportunity to work on this kind of stuff like we're doing outside of the university This is this is wonderful and and to have to be a pastor in this and to sort of put a church valence Over all of this and to have this be part of people's discovery of faith You know, this is a dream come true. I've always wanted the church to to be something like this because There's lots of different people with lots of different temperaments and what it takes to find faith and to have that faith become fully formed in oneself both in terms of obedience and Rationality that's a rare gift and we're enjoying it now. So You know enjoy it while it lasts because it won't last forever. Nothing ever does is the age of decay, baby Maybe since you have to outsource your cognition these narratives are the way that we do it I think that's a good point too If we don't do that carefully narratives will be provided for us. It's absolutely true and narratives This is where okay, so let's join narrative and spirit in some ways spirits are sort of like narratives Or if we're saying story is the thing that that narratives try to get at then in some ways spirits are stories But they're very agentic stories and they're very communal stories and they are outsourced and they are sort of like ideas You know, we're using these different words to try to get at the things behind them Which our words are only models and approximations of And so, you know, that's why this is a really helpful comment How do you feel about this construction? I think it sounds productive and i'm intrigued by it What is your idea of narrative versus story? I don't know but we'll probably keep talking about it making progress in it that's that's part of why someone left a comment that Uh, stephen king in his book on writing gets into the question of what is a narrative now? i'm still in the Biological the biological the biographical section of that book i'm still early on in the book really enjoying it stephen king is, you know, one of the most successful authors of our time and You know his his I'm really tempted to subscribe to cbs interactive but it's like part of me is like how many of these little how many of these little channels are going to subscribe to because They're doing a new adaptation of the stand and I really like the old one and I want to see it That I you know now I think you're right mark that that narrative Narrative is a way of us getting at Something behind something real and again Yeah, it's it's this we're doing we're doing hard stuff here, but it's pleasing and it's productive and it's and it's good so So keep at it Okay a adams elias Do you think there's a worship? Do you think? There's a worship of history As a vehicle of canonizing a new set of heroes History is a very funny word because history when we talk about that word We we talk about it as modernist You know think about that, you know, you have herodotus and his history and livi and his history And there's always a vibrant debate about the gospels Matthew mark luke and john are those history? and You know Tom holland is working through his ideas. What's the bible's relationship with history? This gets into that really naughty question about How And his Historicism historiography All of these things come together what and and what we're doing why we're stumbling about these difficult things is that The the question is how do we sum up? the vastness of reality into logos Of course Because you know lately i've been talking about I had to preach on john one The word becomes flesh. Well, what on earth? What what is the relationship between flesh and word? What's the relationship between heaven and earth again? You notice all of these connections Coming together. Well history is an attempt to record what And if you read good history, it's full of people and we're looking at motivations Well motivations are always quietly behind our skulls. How do we know what's motivating another person? We don't even know what's motivating ourselves so why do we look at these patterns and and and and and so I think a big issue in terms of the The downfall of the bible in the modernist fundamentalist fight had been in some ways a worship of a certain kind of history History I'm just noticing that a whole lot of people talking about these things were um, they're doing currently as going down in history. Yes Before history is even a chance to happen. That's right the arc of history the right side of history and and what that betrays is sort of the the modernist The modernist take on reality with a priority to physicality But there's a cheat in there because again all of these all of these physicalists naturalists materialists Atheists in terms of their morality are all preoccupied about suffering Suffering well is suffering physical Well, there are nerve endings there are there's a biochemical level to it But you're not really concerned about the physicality of suffering. You're you're concerned about suffering. Well, what is suffering? Well, if all of these ideas and experiences and emotions are simply the cruft of physicality Why do you care so much if people suffer yet you do? So Yeah, yeah, you're this is just one of those nexuses Um, is this just historianics? Or do you think people will try to gain power by rewriting big history? Oh, yes the that history has always That would sound like a postmodernist history has always been The a fight for power Is the story of america a story about white supremacy? Well, sure it is. Is it a story about liberty? Well, sure it is. Is it a story about the destruction of native americans? Well, sure it is Is it a story about religious people looking for a blank slate in order to construct the kingdom of god in new england towns? Well, sure it is Ah, but now we have all these competing histories and a hierarchy is going to develop. Well, it's more one than another. Well probably part of that's going to depend on whether you're a Puritan coming over with the mayflower whether you are a virginian coming over and making a bundle growing tobacco Or if you're a native american or if you're an african coming over in the belly of a ship so history is very modernistic because we are attempting a monarchical vision of the entire thing but All of us none of us can afford a monarchical vision Only god can And whether you want to put god in scare quotes or not It still works the same and that was a big part of jordan peterson's work So yeah, yeah big history is big power And if you can and and the what's happening in america right now is a struggle for the history of the country, which is why statues were being torn down because statues reflect the stories and the narratives behind them and It's why you know walking away with nancy pelosi's podium Is powerful in our nation so yeah All right, uh growing and learning together I find a lot of people from the peterson world I find a lot of people from the peterson world felonies Cultural marxism and post-modernism And I have seen people describe the followers of these ideologies as evil or disgusting That's how people talk when they don't like someone Are they really? I'm sure some of them are and some of them aren't What do you make of all this is it warranted? I think we uh, I think our language is a commons and we ought to care for it And so if you use a really big word like evil about someone Well It should fit so Do you use the same word for I don't know a genocidal dictator who killed 30 60 or 100 million people and Your neighbor's dog that poos on your lawn Does that word really cover both my dog that dog is evil because he keeps He keeps making he keeps leaving his turds in my lawn You want to use evil for that? And you're going to use it for mao is mao a dog who leaves turds in your lawn so It's this is about the commons of language and our language ought to be measured And this gets into rhetoric. There are times when when rhetoric is Exasperating But it ought to be measured now now just because someone says that a person is evil doesn't mean they are evil and There's all this complexity within rhetoric within speakers and listeners. So So my admonition would be Find the right word for the right context in the right moment in the right audience Anybody who is a practice speaker knows that audience is crucial And anyone who is trying to speak to an audience has an agenda For the lives of the people listening And so choose the words that pursue the agenda, but also keep a mind to the commons All right Tristan woo boy Hey paul greetings from hamilton, ontario courtesy of a cultural christian turned pentacostal jesus freak who someone found Who someone found himself somehow found himself a student in the reformed institute of redeemer university. That's me. Hey redeemer university I know that um A lot of good people there at redeemer I don't know how to ask this question without sounding like a butt hurt traditionalist But I suppose unfiltered is better than nothing at all sounds good to me. I like unfiltered What is your advice on how one should relate or engage? I mean those separately with one's Exvangelical progressive church friends I have so many friends who have gone the way of everything that you've said in your videos on that topic progressive revelation of modern moral superiority replaces an inspired scripture with a very human text, but the the liturgist science mike peter n says The church is nasty and full of trump supporters So i'll be over there in my universalism because it feels good and I want to be on the right side of history That's a pretty good summary To put it bluntly When does someone stop being my brother sister in christ? How can I tell the difference between varying um between variants within the body and a profound departure from the tradition What does one do in the light? In light of that with those relationships what a wretch. I am a little canadian flag. I love it great question Okay, let's start with first things first things first First Jesus commands us to love the lord our god with all our heart soul mind and strength and to love our neighbor as our Self and right there in that tension you find yourself with your friends I would I think relate and engage lovingly on both counts And here's the crazy thing about love Love does not mean remember the opposite of love is not hate the opposite of love is apathy Um, so I think Number one maintain as much relational contact outside of this sphere of interest have common hobbies have um common interests Enjoy the same music build community Community Why is community important to the Quest for truth Because to a certain degree Productive disagreement can only happen if there's a platform of trust between the people And this this to me is is part of what has been so special about the conversations in this little corner of the internet You know john vervecky John vervecky knows what I am. He knows what I do for a living I know john vervecky a little bit. I hope that the um the meeting and I I hope that at some point we meet in person Maybe maybe it'll be thunder bay, ontario. I hope by I hope by september that vaccines and air travel and all of that can Can can become Sufficient for for that um But but john john is able to do these conversations because john trusts and john is John is in control of himself now There's the specific It's it's it's far harder to To deal with these kinds of things In contexts like that matter like a family or a church And that's why those kinds of conflicts Are so difficult. That's why church fights. I remember having a conversation. He was a he was a he was in the minnesota state legislator And he was also the president of his council And I asked him I said Describe, you know compare and contrast political fights and church fights. He says oh church fights are a lot worse why because via god and Salvation and everything else the voltage is so much higher because it means everything and it means everything always And these are people that you have a high degree of commonality with so you care about them And so when when things go bad, it really hurts And and that's why You know in washington there need to be republicans and democrats going on fishing trips together and playing baseball together and having You know sons and daughters marry each other and having shared grandchildren and and this is You know, and this is why If if the only people that you will be friends with are those who share your political opinion. You are in a bad place And if you are cutting people off on social media because they are loving trump or hating trump You are going to have a problem and and this is part of what is What is challenging america right now and again brett sockold and I talked about this on on our monday thing That i'll post on monday And it is exactly what jordan peterson said on the bill marshall, okay, maybe you think half the country are idiots and assholes What are you gonna do about it kill them put them in concentration camps exile them You want a civil war? Dial it back find commonality Create a space in which you can have a productive argument and disagreement But steep but keep loving them Because the command of christ is to love your neighbor all the way up to and including your enemy and often the biggest enemies are the one that you share a home with Or maybe even a bed with That's the way reality lays itself out Why do you think divorces are so painful? Why do you think when when a woman shows up dead the first person the cops think about is her husband? Who he shared a stage with with and pledged undying love. That's how this stuff works. So Keep your ties and relationships with the people you disagree with and be patient because you know what Because you know what Everybody's all in a tizzy about what happened Just not too long ago and that can be about the specific things that happened last week in america Or it can be if you listen to this a year from now the things that happened a week or a month ago when you're listening To this that's how we work so Be patient Love your enemies And especially love your enemies who are your friends and especially love the enemies that are within your church And and when and where do you draw a line for the most part? we as individuals don't need to draw that line and so Take up the the monastic the monastic pledge of staying So is your church going off the rails? Stay with it People want to jump ship. Oh, okay So what does that do for the other people in the church that are not jumping ship cutting and running? Sometimes there are time there's a time for it, but don't do that quickly or lightly or easily that should be a last resort Stay in there stay in the fight be a pain in the neck minority And that gets into the question of the union of the body of christ Yeah, that's a great question. It's a question where a lot of people are at see how am I doing? How am I doing? um Shosh jewels i'm gonna i'm gonna keep at this. I may go a little over time Rick rick was like well, maybe we should do a three-hour one. It's like All right, okay building off the previous question and answer Is it because we see the world through projections that we see the father through his image And would be an eye and would be annihilated if we were to see him without the mediation of his image Oh, that's a good question. That's a good thought Yeah, I think there's something to that that's really good That's really good. I really like that I think there's something to that because you know when I was a kid you'd always You know, it's it's in the bible all over the place. Well, you can't see god and live What does that mean? Well, what is idolatry? idolatry is in some ways Not seeing god because we're we're seeing our own avarice We can't see through our own desires and temptations to actually see god and what that means is that we create a a ring like Like sauron's ring and we create something in order to try to wield the world through god And When people do that to us we find it enormously offensive and That seems to be what god how god finds it So that's a great thought matthew That one's gonna that one's gonna live in my head and you know, if you see it coming out in monologue videos You know you colonized me so gold star for colonizing All right, jason again amentry. Hey paul. I live in tennessee So maybe it's something to do with the area I live in but But does there seem to be a larger or more national concern with the way that politics has entered into the church I don't know if in my lifetime that hasn't been a concern. Does it rise and fall? I'm sure it does but again It we probably see it depending on where we're standing and what's going on You know martin luther king jr. In the 1950s and 60s said sunday morning is the most segregated time in america that isn't just true in terms of skin color Just recently I was feeling kind of down and someone told me to go Listen to some good teaching But then I realized that I don't even know who to listen to and where to find good solid Christian teaching anymore because of the way that politics is seeped in with the teaching. Even if they aren't talking about, then read old books because there'll probably be politics in it, but it won't be germane to you. Read old sermons. And you know, if you can read history next to it, you'll see that, well, there's probably some politics going on there too. So I would say do a time shift. And that might help you. And again, this is, this is where CS Lewis was so helpful. We live in the tyranny of the moment. Well, how can you break that tyranny? Read old books because they're not in the tyranny of the moment. And one of the, one of the ways that you know, our times are tyrannical is because certain elements of the population don't want you to read old books, because they're not in the tyranny of the moment. Well, why not? Well, because they're tyrants. They want you to, they want you to, again, read CS Lewis's screw tape letters. God wants his children to become sons. The devil wants us to become food. That's what tyranny is. I'm going to colonize you and use you and spit you out when I'm done with you. No, read old books. You'll find good, you'll find good Christian teaching and old books, and you'll gain perspective on what is always true because they'll have their own warp back in their day too, but at least it's not the same warps you're looking at today. Even if they aren't talking about politics, I feel like something seeps in along the way. Yep. To me, it's poison. Yeah. Yep. Yep. Yep. Read old books. That's my answer. I'm trying to be fast here. All right. Grim grizz. Ooh, we're into the present. We're into today. Oh, I might exhaust them today. I'm excited. That grim line, hard line video was really good. You started speaking at the end about missionary whatnot. I come from a digital land of false realities. Yes, indeed. Would you consider assembling a bridges of meaning overwatch league? E-sport money. Blizzard entertainment is over Overwatch. I think is a game is I'm an old man. I don't know what to think that them young kids are doing out there on the interwebs. And prototype a missionary team to reach the Utes from the digital realities with us, with the sub with subdivine creators. Do you have that sweet missionary skills safe enough to teach the pub? Do you have sweet missionary skills? Do you have sweet missionary skills safe enough to teach the public any nunchuck skills if things get dicey? Great question. Yeah. You know, my conversation with grim grizz. It was such a great conversation. Um, it's such a cool guy. I hope. Jacob's always telling me I got to make disciples. That's, that's, that's, that's a true thing. I hope what I'm doing is making disciples, but I don't, the world is too big. And so, you know, some people are going to need to take a little bit of what they've learned from me and do a new thing that I can never do. That's how the kingdom of God works. That's how the church works. That's how mission works. I can do things that Jordan Peterson can't do Jordan Peterson can do things that I can't do. Uh, I can do things that Luke can do. Um, Luke can do things that I can't do and round and round and round and round. And that's why the body, um, that's why God works with us in, in such different ways. And yeah, yeah. Yeah. And the thing is we will all, if we care, we will all be missionaries of one sort or another. And, um, yeah, yeah. So missionary skills. Hey Paul, I'm a Jewish follower of Jesus. Hey, we got to Shosh Jewels. I've been listening to your podcast. So interesting. I'm so interesting that multi-generational Christians lose faith. Yeah. And yet I was first generation believer in my family. Congratulations. Who came to believe in 1980 at the age of 26, continue to find more reason to believe as the years pass. Amen. I have two adult children. One is a follower and one leans towards the new atheists. Our son has now said, I begged God to reveal himself to me in a real way. When I was in high school and he didn't show up, I gave him 17 years. Now I'm done. So what do you think this is predestination? None of us have access to the book of life. So I am a Calvinist and so I have a vigorous view of predestination, but none of us know. And so I think Neil punt, who had a, who wrote a couple of books, he was a CRC preacher, wrote a couple of books called biblical universalism, basically said, we presume everyone is saved unless we know differently. I think that's a pretty good way to look at it. And I remember my father talking to my father about Neil punts book. And my father says, I think practically that's how we all have to look at it. And I think my father was right. Um, we are such time bound creatures and we live in the moment and. You know, it was so much fun last week. So, um, um, a friend of mine walked into church right before the sermon and sat down from the sermon and listened to the whole sermon. And afterwards we talked about the sermon and, and, you know, according to a mutual, um, you know, someone who, who knows both of us, he says this guy, he never would have imagined that 10 years ago from this guy, what changed in him or Jordan Peterson. He listened to Jordan Peterson. And then Sunday when we were talking, he was laying out for me a very Petersonian idea of what religion is. Now he doesn't believe in God and he, you know, doesn't know the Bible and he still thinks religion is, well, he doesn't think religion is hogwash anymore. Now religion is sociology. And that's why in my rationality rules video, my last one, I said, you know, he's making his way because we're all young and stupid. Everyone has a right to be that. And then in time we learn and change and grow. Now this question about God's hiddenness that's going to be in my sermon this week because there's the funny thing about this, that the answer about God's hiddenness in the Bible is really complex. Psalm 19, the heavens declare the glory of God, Paul and act 17. And, you know, God is the knowledge of God is plain. And if you look at almost all of human history, almost every people in the world had some conception of God, right or wrong, bent or twisted, but one way or another, it was out there. The Bible acknowledges that. There's sort of a common tongue that we use when we use this word God. And about 500 years ago, you know, we entered sort of a dark age, which we call the enlightenment where we think we know so much, but the one thing we don't know is everything. And, you know, that sounds pantheistic, but I'm not a pantheist. I mean, Louis was right that pantheism is sort of default religion in the world. So your son's working his way on his stuff. Let him work. Let him don't don't trust God. Don't don't be anxious because. And, you know, I have loved ones of mine that have rejected the faith. And so I know that pain, but we have the kind of God that would seek us at the cost of his son and the, the closeness of the father and the son is closer than a mother and a son by virtue of the Trinity. If Christianity is true, then. God is so good. He will work things out that are right. Now, some of the universalists just jumped up and down and said, woo, that's right. Okay. And maybe they're right. I'm not a universalist. Others will, will hear that and know that there are mortal enemies who deserve judgment in the age to come and say, that's right. I can't answer that question for other people or convince them one way or another. There's a quiet. But, but I can say that a God who would do what he did for us. Can be trusted. And that's the foundation. So, no, I wouldn't say, oh no, he's reprobate. No, no. Cause the apostle Paul was hunting down followers of the way. And Jesus as Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me? Was hunting down followers of the way. And Jesus as Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me? And blinds them and then sends them to Ananias and Ananias like, I don't want to meet this guy, he's hunting us down. God says, you go there. God for his artist work is hardest on some of his most stubborn tools. God is God and we are not, but he can be trusted. And that's at the heart of the Christian faith. And that's, and, and God will test our faith and God will test our faith beyond what we think is reasonable or perhaps even what we think is loving of him. And so I don't have any, when people come to me and they are angry with God and they are unbelieving, I have sympathy. Cause look, the center of our faith is the son of God on a Roman cross crying, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me? That's at the center of our faith. And so, you know, the Chesterton quote that, that Zizek found impressive and Jordan Peterson found impressive as well. There's a reason we find it impressive because it's audacious and it's true. And, you know, as Jordan Peterson keeps saying, it's archetypal. You can't get around it. That's right. So love your son, love your son. And if he's far from God and his church at the moment, just pray for him more. But don't be anxious because our God is a good God and he loves you and your son more than you can love him. So trust in him, trust in him and let that trust be your foundation. So, all right, sorry, I'm not getting a lot of a voice chat questions in this time. Cause you know, Rick and Joey want me to finish up the question. So I'm going to do it. I'm going to do it. I'm going to stay out of the look so I can get them through. All right. Okay. Um, I'm going to go ahead and get to the next question. I'm going to get them through. All right. Okay. Um, a DJ Allen, I was reading, I was reading Psalm this week, numbers one through 10 so far. I'm astounded at how much more relevant these feel since the political chaos erupted in DC lately. Comments. Yes. Read David's life. Okay. Think about, think about the times David lives in. So Israel is being mauled in their own land by the Philistines. If you have any idea how hard life was in the iron age. So there's two ways to live. You can grow your own food or you can be a bully and wait till your neighbor grows it and steals it. But don't steal so much food that they die of starvation because then you're not going to be able to play the same trick next year. That's what the Philistines are doing to the Israelites and they've got a corner on iron working. And so Israel is in a terrible mess. And you know, not only are they stealing the food, they're stealing their daughters. They're killing their sons. I mean, it's a, it's a brutal and barbaric age. And so Israel's like, we need a king. Well, why do you need a king? Cause we've got to deal with the Philistines. And so, well, read Samuel eight and then, okay. What kind of King do we need? We need a big King. We need a, a strong, good looking strapping guy. You know, we, we need a, we need a, we need a Rottweiler and so, Oh, look at him. He's big. He's strong. You know, he's hiding among the baggage that could, should give you an idea that you might have one of these big fat American Rottweilers that won't bite. They're kind of big teddy bears because they've been bred to be good natured. I remember when I bought my two Rottweilers, I bought it from a woman who was a cop. And she, she raised police dogs and she said these dogs will bite. And my dogs never did. They were there. They're joyful dogs. My little dog bites, but anyway. So they get Saul. And as is the case often Saul becomes a tyrant, but he's not quite able to take out the Philistines, but he does prey on his own sheep. And so poor Samuel gets to trot off to Jesse. And Jesse's got a lot of good looking sons and goes through the, he got any more. God says, no, well, yeah, we got that one out in the field. Well, call them in. Oh, annoying. This one, David. And, you know, David brings his lunch to his brothers who are at the front. Goliath is, you know, being a troll in many ways, calling down, you know, and David plucky kid, how dare he talk about God that way and saw the coward said, well, why didn't you wear my armor and go out there? Yeah. You big coward. You're the giant of Israel. But David goes out there and of course lays the giant and well, now David's a celebrity and now Saul's, you know, being a weenie and you know, on and on and on and on and on and on and on and on and on. That's, that's the environment. You know, David now he's running from Saul has two opportunities to kill Saul. And he goes and he lives with the Philistines and does raiding parties with the Philistines lying to them. So, so that the Philistines think that he's raiding on Judah, but David's just really raiding on Judah's enemies. And then he gets stuck in the rather, the rest of the Philistines are like, I bet you he's, you know, they probably knew he wasn't raiding on Israel. So they've got competition amongst themselves. And so then he gets into a place where now he's going to have to go out at the head of, you know, it just read those stories in the book of Samuel. They're astounding. And the fact that Hollywood can't do a credible job with them is, it speaks of the poverty of Hollywood. And so, yeah, reading Psalms one through 10 in the middle of a little bit of political tremor in America, you know, if, if, you know, if America loses it's. It's cohesion in the next few months and years and becomes politically unstable, which very well may happen. It happens. This is the age of decay. It happens to all empires. You know, if we say the British empire today, we sort of laugh, you know, what empire do they have? Well, they're, they're, they're having trouble keeping Scotland right now. Um, sorry, I don't mean any disrespect to you Brits over there, but, um, it's the way empire goes. Life is hard and brutal. And, and, you know, I have lived in, I was born in the early sixties. I've lived in the most peaceful, magical time in America. I am so fortunate. Might be, we'd be heading for rough waters. Absolutely. I was a, one of my favorite Frank Capra movies is meet John Doe. Watch that movie and get a sense of the, the political anxiety that there was in America in the 1930s, you know, FDR is having term after term is FDR going to become a dictator and then the second world war, the world is rough. Always has been, it always will be. So yeah, I totally get that. Read the Psalms and it's like, wow. Yeah. And before, when, you know, when the power was on and those grocery stores were full and, and, and one president nicely concedes to the next and elections aren't contested and, and, and Russians or Chinese or COVID or, or, or, yeah, people are going to be reading the Bible with whole new eyes. All right. Uh, Luke Cooper, what do you think is coming to an end in North America? I don't know. I don't know. Any thoughts on the characteristics of what might emerge? This is the age of decay, baby. Everything we build breaks down. And, um, but it's always hard to tell, you know, that I'm old enough to remember the seventies, I was in high school in the seventies. You know, there was bombings, the weather underground, you know, that now that's just a nice website to find a weather app. That's a joke. The weather underground, they were bombing places. Um, you know, the, a look at the history of Alcatraz. A group took up occupation of Alcatraz Island and had it for a while. And the feds just kind of shrugged their shoulders for a while. Part of the problem of Americans has always been, we don't read much history. Look at America in the 19th century. Look at what elections were like in America in the 19th century. You have free and fair election. Look at the election of, of John F. Kennedy and some of the shenanigans that went on in Texas. And, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, yeah. Yeah, yeah, we'll see we'll see. I don't know. All right. Last question for today. I'm going to mark it so that I can remember. No sneak and knew. Well, maybe I'll have, maybe I'll take a question or two from the room just because of I've shut all of you guys up. I watched your talk with Ver risky and Mary Cohen. I watched the talk you for bakian Mary Cohen, we're we're talking about the impact that we're expecting for all things confronting. So I have a pitch on what is, what is Jaime Think about that? Cohen were, we're talking about narrative and John Vervecki mentioned needing to get beyond the narrative and to the notion of trans narrative. That's sort of, I don't mean this disrespectfully, that's sort of John schtick. It's the transjective and he's right because it's sort of thesis, antithesis, synthesis. I mean, again, we've been talking about one, two, and then three. There's a reason these things sort of relate that way. I thought about how much religion is based upon narrative as well as how my personal identity is based on narrative. Yeah, that's your soul. Your soul is kind of like narrative, but it's not a narrative you're in charge of and it's constructed and that's reality. And how our cultural narrative and values are expressed through art and movies and express a narrative. That's right. What is a principality? What are these principalities and powers? Are they emanating from above? Yeah, they live in the heavenlies. You got to think that one all the way through. And we're participating in them, not just following them, but also creating them. Postmodernism speaks of deconstructing the narrative. Is narrative the air we breathe? Well, narrative, and again, John and I talked about this fairly early on and he made a point which I think he's right. It takes us a while as human beings to get up to speed on this capacity for narrative. And it seems deeply connected with our capacity for personal memory and also related to identity. So when you're saying is narrative the air we breathe, narrative is, yeah, it's a really big deal and it's all around us. But is air the right metaphor for that? I don't know. It seems more like a deep coding. But then Mark asked what's the relationship between narrative and story? Is there a thing behind the narrative that narrative is trying to model or represent? But then we take that and we run on it. So yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, it's really hard. What is your take on narrative? That's still under construction. Like I said, I'm going to talk to Mark this week and I'll probably learn something there. I'm reading Stephen King's On Writing. I'm hoping to learn something there. A lot of what I talked about today in terms of the soul, this is something I was thinking a lot about a number of years ago. And when I was getting more, I was more serious about trying to write a book then than I had been before and probably have been since. There's something about this relationality and soul that soul is, I use S, I use story because it starts with S just like soul. Soul is more like a story than it is like a substance. And that word substance, I had to send a thank you note to Strahan and now some of you know who he is. He hasn't been on my channel yet. I'm still waiting for the debut of Strahan on my channel. Because when you get, I'm having issues with the conceptualization of substance. And there's an old fight in theology between substance and energies. And again, some of this has come to us via orthodoxy. And part of the blessing of the revival of orthodoxy in North America is that some of these ancient ideas are now on the menu for Western theologians. And so when someone like Nathan Jacobs goes to my alma mater and goes to orthodoxy, well, I pay attention to that because you know, he's a good faith guy and he's a smart guy and he's seeing things. So what about me? Am I going to see it? Am I going to become orthodox? Am I going to let my beard grow? Am I going to start dressing in robes? How's it going to end? Who can tell? I kind of doubt it. I'm getting up there in age and always the big transition for preachers is when they retire, what will they do? Preachers, when they are constrained by their employment and their church, they stay sort of in one thing. But then when they retire, do they become liberals, become heretics? My father certainly didn't. My father continued to be who he was and I suspect I probably will be too. I will stay a Dutch Calvinist. And I don't think I'll become Roman Catholic. I don't become orthodox. But boy, talking to Brett Sockold, you know, brother from another ecclesiastical mother, sure enjoyed that. So yeah, yeah. What is the story of Paul VanderKlay and how will it end? I just this morning wrote out a PowerPoint for a video that if I have time this afternoon, maybe I'll make on, you know, just I was just going through the Jordan Peterson timeline and, you know, it's it's part that someday someone's going to write a really good biography of Jordan Peterson because he has led an interesting life. And I hope there are biographers out there right now that are keeping notes and finding sources. But in many ways, you can't write a good biography about someone while they're still living. And, you know, if you if you read enough biographies, you begin to notice that biographies. The biography of Abraham Lincoln now is different from a biography of Abraham Lincoln written in the in the in the 1870s. So reality is like that. So there we have we have we have come to the end of all of the written questions. Joey and Rick can now lay their heads on their pillows tonight in total satisfaction and blissful slumber because now the the the backlog is relieved and we haven't gone tremendously over time. But if there's a question or two from the voice chat that someone just has to get in there, here's your chance. Sam wanted to ask, isn't the important thing about the Abrahamic God that he is both arenic and agentic? Yes. So doesn't that kind of get split up by C.S. Lewis with Aslan and Aslan's father, one being arenic, one being agentic and them being kind of, you know, two as opposed to one? Yes. Points scored for for Sam, which is why we love him. Yeah, yeah. I mean, this stuff is really hard. I mean, all this, you know, I'll throw Luke at this that, you know, there are, you know, all models fall short, but all but models are necessary. And Luke can say it better. I don't know if he's still busy or even in the room, but that's Luke's great quote. It's a great quote. So, you know, Will and this and so, you know, you can always just fall back on the fact that how can we. How can our little brains comprehend. The maker of the universe, how can they comprehend the universe? I mean, that's that's what we're trying to do, whether we're whether we're trying to satisfy some desire or whether we're trying to figure out what a good life is. And, and, you know, it's weird because even we as human beings. A parent in a household is a reenac and you get that sense. If you again, read green lights, Matthew McConaughey's is his father was a reenac in his life and yet his father was also a gentic. So these are some of these dualities that we that we split and we have to split them because we learn things when we, when we split them, dualities are helpful. They teach us things. So yeah, yeah, there is, there is that. There is some of that duality. I mean, CS Lewis, CS Lewis is a really cool guy. Got some stuff wrong. Was not a perfect man, but, um, and we praise God for what he was able to do. So good question. Anybody else before we wrap it up? Before we end transmission on this Truman show. All right, Rick, I can't see Rick's camera. Rick had to turn off his camera. We're having bandwidth issues on the living stones network. Rick, I can't see you. Are you going to, you know, turn that back on or maybe it's something has just crashed today's cardboard day after this meeting, Rick and I are going to get rid of a bunch of cardboard around. Oh, there's Rick. He's live again. Are we ready to end transmission? Rick just about okay. So let me thank all of you in both in the bridges of meaning voice chat. Rick found this funky little graphic that you can see on the YouTube. Um, I guess, I guess last week, a bunch of you said, Oh, let's, let's like the video, push Paul up the, push Paul up the, the video up the algorithm. And it did. If you liked the video, I guess we get more stuff. I guess that's why all the YouTubers that I watch who have big channels like and subscribe and hit the notification bell, but, um, I just feel so mercenary. But, um, thank you all for joining me. This is so much fun for me. And, and you are such a great audience. And I hope something that I have said has been helpful. And, um, now that we've gotten through all the questions, uh, hopefully maybe next week, if you ask a question, I'll get to it the same week. And if we don't have so many questions next week, maybe we'll take more from the floor, so we'll see how it goes. Thanks for watching. Thanks for visiting and, um, uh, may the grace of God be with you. That sounds like a very ministerial thing to say. All right, Rick, you can end transmission.