https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mC-rZryOrVs

 Hi, this is Paul. And like I did last week, I thought I'd do it again. This is sort of a week in review livestream where I sort of walk through a bunch of the things that I did this week. Now, I've been working hard to try to figure out how to do this livestream thing better, how to have good conversations. For the first while, I'll keep an eye on the comments stream. If you have a question, just write question at the beginning. If you do it in all caps, it's easier for me to see. Obviously, if you have a super chat, YouTube on this end highlights super chat, so they're really hard to miss, but those cost you money. So it's obviously up to you. But if you have a question, put your question in. And what I'm going to do for the first hour is walk through the videos that I've made, maybe answer any questions from them that you might have. The second hour, I'll start bringing people into the room. In order to come into the room, you have to have your camera on. And I know some people don't like that because you don't want to have your face on the internet, but it's a matter. There's a variety of reasons why I require that. It's because it's a safety thing for one thing because trolls sometimes try to get into these streams and they don't have their camera on and then they do other things once they get on the livestream. So I'm not going to have that. I'm going to give priority to people who have showed a capacity for better conversations if it fills up. And if you do want to come on the stream after I put in the link, be prepared to engage. You can watch it on YouTube passively. So if you're going to lurk, just watch the channel. But if you decide you want to come into, you have to have your camera on. You have to be ready to engage, answer questions, show up for the conversation as it were. So let's begin. This week started. I started this week with the Adult Sunday School class. One of the things that we did in the Adult Sunday School class this week was that's not on my, this channel that you're on right now is my personal channel. There's also a Living Stones, Christian Form Church channel. That's a separate channel. And we livestream the Sunday School class on that. And then later that Sunday I repost that recording of the Sunday School class onto this channel. I don't repost to the church. I don't repost the church service on my channel for a variety of reasons. The sound isn't as good by virtue of just the way things go in the sanctuary. Every now and then I'll clip out the sermon and repost that. If you're curious about the sermons or the worship service or any of that, you can go to the church channel. The church channel is almost always in the notes below. I have a standard package of notes that I usually put beneath there. But anyway, so we had a link available for people to participate. We had three people in Sunday School class. And I've talked to my elders about this and they've said, bring them in. We're only going to bring a few in. And the same rules are going to be there, too. You have to have your camera on. And Rick is monitoring it. And so Rick has control of it. So Rick can pull people out if they start misbehaving. And then also make sure that your questions contribute to the flow of the class. But again, about 500 views on the Sunday School class, we're just starting Romans seven. Romans seven is a really tricky chapter. There are a lot of elements of Romans seven that are, for example, the last part of Romans seven, quite famously, how is Paul regarding this famous section about the good that he would do, he doesn't do. One of the things that I have continued to develop in the Romans class is those of you who have watched it for a while, and I'm about 38 episodes into the book of Romans now, I spent 75 weeks in the book of Revelation about 10 years ago or so. So at the adult Sunday School class, we're not afraid to go slow. And yeah, I like it that way. I like being able to talk through things. As you can see from sort of the God number one, God number two thing, as I've developed, I've continued to develop these ideas. I talk about law number one and law number two, the mediated and immediate law and sort of Greeks and Jews, because I agree, Origin, I really enjoy history of interpretation questions. And this book is basically a book about history of interpretation of the book of Romans. And it goes through Origin, Augustine, Abelard, Luther, post-Bardian, Aquinas. And I think Origin basically got the book of Romans right, that what Paul was really trying to do in the book of Romans was to make sense of the Jew-Greek divide. And I think that's at the heart of the book of Romans. And I think actually sort of what began as these boxes on my workbench of God number one, God number two, I've continued to develop that into law number one and law number two, and sort of these two perspectives on righteousness and how God saves the world through the work of Israel and then through the work of Christ. So I personally, my adult Sunday school class is a highlight of my week, every week, because like my channel, part of the reason I post it on my channel is I think out loud about the book of Romans as we read it together. And those who are able to make the class in person then get to sort of think with me. We don't really have the classroom very well wired so that it's very difficult to do sound well in a room, especially when you have people who are not going to sit in front of a microphone and feel comfortable about it. So but then now opening it up to some people on the internet for my process that I've developed over years of that class to work, I really sort of need people in the room. I think of it sort of like Dr. House, who needs his little cadre of people there, not that I'm treating the people like Dr. House, but I always learn from the questions and interactions of people. So yeah, that was sort of how the week starts. We also had the Freddie and Paul show this week. Rick, the big, let's see, where's the, where's the, oh, there's the Freddie and Paul show. The big moment, let me adjust the sound here. I feel like Grimm Grizz fixing things on the fly. All right, let's set that to the speaker here. Good. So the fun thing about the Freddie and Paul show this week was Nancy, I knew Nancy was going to, so the Freddie and Paul show developed way before I ever started talking about Jordan Peterson, where Freddie had been on the radio doing rap and some of these things. I've told that story in other places before. That sort of, that ended, let's say, and then Freddie was going down to Public Access TV and doing a show there, and he wanted me to come to Public Access and do a show with him on Public Access. Public Access would have required a particular time to do it, and so I said to Freddie, I said, Freddie, why don't you and I just, I'll take out my smartphone and we'll just do a little short show, about five minutes, and we'll call it the Freddie and Paul show, and we can talk about sports, he can do his raps, we can talk about it, whatever he wants to talk about. It's basically Freddie's show. And then part of what's developed, we'd often bring guests on the show. I always thought of the show something like the old variety shows of 1960s, 1970s TV. Some of you are not old enough to remember something like the Carol Burnett show. There are many shows that were sort of variety shows. They'd have music, they'd have comedy sketches, sometimes they'd have more serious conversations, so that's really the origin of the Freddie and Paul show. And Nancy started coming on semi-regularly, Nancy, Freddie's mom, and then Nancy, of course, we do it often on Sunday mornings after the worship service, and Nancy gives a sermon report, which I love, because one of the hardest things as a minister to get used to is getting good feedback on your sermons, and that's actually the YouTube channel has been wonderful for that, because you know, Seth and I get a lot of feedback from our Jewish listeners that have very, sometimes very strong ideas about the apostle Paul, but it's always really good for me to hear what Nancy heard and what Freddie heard, because that gives me a sense of what's getting through. And then that kind of turned into Nancy with her sermon report, where she kind of digests the sermon and gives her own little mini devotional, which I, that's something I really like going, but now the show's been getting longer and longer, and poor Rick sits there with my smartphone. Originally, the show was supposed to be about five minutes, and then it crept about seven minutes, and we hit the 15-minute mark last week, and Rick just ended the show, and sad enough, this 15 minutes is long enough, and so Rick actually has a plan for the show that's coming next week as a surprise for Freddie, but now the Freddie and Paul show is Freddie and Paul show is great fun, and Freddie is always like, Paul, you gotta talk about my show on your other videos, so here you go, Fred, I'm talking about the show on the other videos. Let's see, one of the things that I've been doing more of is live streams, now that StreamYard really sort of perfects and refines this, and that's fun, and some of the, I've got a a friend and colleague of mine, Kevin Adams, who's written a book about baptism, and so I'm gonna have Kevin on my channel, hopefully soon, and we're gonna talk about baptism. The next marriage crisis video we're going to do, we're gonna live stream, so you'll be able to take questions, they'll be able to take your questions and have some people come on again, that's sort of the way that this is developing, so that's coming up. Justin Wells has some really cool videos about story structure that he's been doing. Justin has been on the channel, he's a cameraman, works in Hollywood, he also teaches film at Biola, so I'm gonna have him on the channel, and I think, again, a bunch of these appearances by people who are, should be at least semi-known to people, I'm gonna start doing those as live streams rather than sort of just Zoom conversations. I had a really cool conversation with Mary Harrington early this morning, which will come out on the channel Monday, so look forward to my conversation with Mary Harrington on Monday. So this week started out with my conversation with Nate, which again, we live streamed, and just a terrific conversation, which should come as no surprise to anyone that Nate is a great conversation partner. So that was so much fun, I was so pleased with how that went, and then of course we were able to bring people in and expand the conversation. I really like the way that StreamYard is facilitating the conversation and bringing more people in, so that's part of the reason, again, why I'm doing a bunch of these live streams. Let's see, what other live streams did we, that was, we did the Pope Francis live stream on Monday, last week Friday we did the Week in Review live stream, and then of course I did the live stream with Dr. Jim, and what, I mean, I know a lot of you really appreciate Dr. Jim and his, just such a wise, learned, but feet on the ground man, and he's a great guy, his ability to engage, and he obviously loves English and films and theory and thought, so when he said, oh I want to come back on the channel, I said, well let's do a live stream, so that not only, not only, you know, I'll get a chance to benefit from his wisdom, but Kate James jumped into the channel, she's been a regular in the comments and on Twitter, so it was fun to meet her, Mark, who I had met up in Ireland, came on, so that was, that was just great, great fun, so really enjoyed the live stream. Let's see, if I haven't been paying much attention to the comments here, I don't see anybody wrote questions, so, all right, good, I'll keep going then, let's see, videos, so we have the Freddie and Paul show, this video, so the Eric Weinstein IDW naming, not durable enough to withstand the apocalypse, that was a, that was one of these videos that I almost never posted, and once I made the video, it was a, it was a day, I made three videos that day, there were two which were just sort of throwaway videos, I had smaller ideas that I didn't want to make long videos with, so the Simulacra Girls at whatever, sharing Simulacra dating was, and that was another video where it was a shorter video, I just wanted to make it and get it out, and I'm quite often surprised how well, you know, Mark, Mark LeFavor will say, yes, that's right, you know, your shorter videos are better, you should keep your videos shorter, and Mark has a point, but that was, again, was one of these videos that I just had a few thoughts, and so I just jumped on the camera, and I made the video, but then afterwards, it's like, I don't really want to troll Lex Friedman, I, you know, or those thoughts even worthwhile sharing, and so I didn't even make a thumbnail, plus YouTube had made such a crazy thumbnail, so I released that on Sunday morning, now those of you who know the pattern well know that there's a ritual to the way I release videos, I try to release videos, if I have the videos, once a day at a certain hour in the morning in California time, five days a week, Saturday, I'll usually release the rough draft for Sunday video, if I have extra videos, I might add, you know, two or three a day or something, and I usually don't release videos on Sunday, and there's, part of that is, I want people to go to church instead of watching YouTube, but I also know that after watching the, the, after watching basically the analytics, that most, a lot of my video watchers watch videos during the work week, because a lot of you, like Chad, you know, I was, Chad was on Grimm the other morning with me, and you hear Chad working his trowel, and he's, he's laying tile, and some people are coding, so on and so forth, so a lot of my channel is weekday watching, not weekend watching, but that video, I thought, you know, I recorded it already, it's already out there, I hate to waste it, so I'll, so my routine is Sunday morning, I get up early, and I kind of get ready for my Sunday school class, I go over my sermon again, re-edit the video, re-edit the PowerPoint, up like that, upload that for Roger and Rick, and then I saw that video and thought, I'll just sneak it out Sunday morning, and probably nobody will watch it, I'm not even going to do a thumbnail with it, sometimes there are videos that I don't have a lot of confidence in, but I don't want to waste them, so just put them on the channel, it's like, well maybe someone will find some kind of benefit to it, and then it was just before church, and I was sitting there, and I was thinking, oh yeah, I put that video out this morning, and I did something I don't usually do, so I just went on my phone to the YouTube algorithm, and just, make sure that I posted it, let's see what it's doing, and it had like 500 views in the last 60 minutes, and it was like, oh, I didn't really want people to watch that video so much, and now it's blowing up, it's, but yeah, Mark said he liked it, Mark said it was a good video, so, you know, I'll go over tonight live on Navigating Patterns at 7 Eastern time, all right, so Mark's gonna, Mark's gonna go over that video, so there you go, um, oh, got a question, have you noticed, Paul, that Tom Holland leans more into the New Testament, whereas Jordan Peterson leans more into the old? I should come back to that question when I get to the Tom Holland, Jordan Peterson part of the week, but I hadn't noticed that, but you are right, so I'm gonna start that, and then maybe come back to it, although Jordan does lean into the Gospels, and it's gonna be very interesting to see the way that Jordan goes through the Bible, I'm behind on watching the Exodus Seminar, I, I'm kind of waiting until the first, the first aid of the sex, of the sexist, of the Exodus Seminar comes out on his channel, it's gonna be interesting to see if they actually release the whole videos, or if they do on his channel, like they usually do release, up to, release like an hour and a half of it, and then the last hour they reserve back on Daily Wire, if they do that, and it's also gonna be interesting to see if Daily Wire lets me really have at those videos in terms of clips and commentary, I think they probably will, but I have an agreement with Daily Wire that I can use 10 minutes of those Exodus Seminar videos on my channel, but I haven't done that partly because, well if I can use more than 10 minutes, I kind of want to, so I'm sort of holding my, holding my, my attention to that, holding my, my attention on those videos, so, but that's a, that's a good observation, that's a good observation, let's see, I'm just scanning, so if you have a question, you better write a question or do a super chat, otherwise I'm not gonna see it, so where was I, all right, oh yeah, and then the Monday video, Barry Mason, where I walked through the plow, and boy what a cool thing to have both the, both a transcript, and of course when you do a transcript on extemporaneous conversation, you always have to clean it up, they did it really nicely, the transcript and the audio on plow's treatment of, of westerns, that in conjunction with, of course, Dr. Jim's ideas on it, so much fun, so much fun, and then Grizz over on his channel has been paying attention to westerns, Paul Anleitner, I told him I want to have him on a live stream soon, so I think Paul and I are going to go on a live stream, and we'll probably talk about stories and westerns, because Paul's been doing that on his Twitter feed, so yeah, that was great fun, I very much enjoyed that podcast, I always feel a little bad doing some of those videos, and this one in particular, because most of that video was sort of republishing plow's material, and you know, I do, I do that hopefully sort of to boost the signal, and then looking back over the plow archives, they've got some great podcasts in there, the, the woman who runs that is now married to Alistair Roberts, who was on the channel early on, really sharp thinker, interesting, she's from the Anabaptist tradition, he's much more sort of Anglican Reformed, so super interesting couple, super interesting podcast, really cool, oh question, we got a couple questions coming in, all right, more shorter videos coming, do another video on naming, yeah that needs another video, talk about, now Mark, is this really a question, or is this, is, you just put question to, to get me to say navigating patterns, just one more time on my channel, but I intend to have videos of various length, I know that my channel needs shorter videos and longer videos, but I do want to have shorter videos and longer videos, some people, Mark, Mark always asks for shorter videos, I got lots of people who complain when I do short videos, they're like, no, video should be one to two hours, so there will be longer shittios, yeah a lot of shittios that I've, that I've placed on my YouTube channel, another video on naming, I've got so many thoughts going through my head, naming thing is really critical, and you know, of course it intersects with the IDW, so yeah, I should definitely do more videos on naming, I should go back on that, because that's, that's a huge piece right now, all right, Mark, second question, what about a third way video, Paul, well maybe you and I should do a live stream then, Mark, third way isms, so again, you've heard me say, consciousness is rather monofocal, that gives dualities a lot of power, because we sort of task switch, compare and contrast, and just basically the speed of consciousness gives duality certain power, you put a third in, and it sort of stretches our capacity for thinking and consciousness beyond, which has a particular power, but just like dualities keep popping up, third way isms keep popping up too, so maybe we'll have to talk about that at some point, Mark, all right, live stream invite, that's worth 47 channel mentions, I'm totally frustrated that Grim Grizz is not up over a thousand yet, I, you know, I think Grim Grizz is a genius, I really do, I really do, part of the burden of genius however is, a lot of people don't get him, a lot of people don't get him, so, you know, I hope, I'm happy to do a live stream, Grim Grizz, you want to do a live stream, we'll do a live stream, I owe Manuel, I just got to get back to Manuel, he sent me a thing, Philip, what thumbnails are you most happy with, which thumbnails now make you cringe, I am a really lousy YouTuber, my sister, who's an artist, can make great thumbnails, and there's a video out there about the value of thumbnails and titles, and it is so true, great thumbnail, good title, people will watch your video, that's how this attention economy works, as you can see, my thumbnails, I started making sermons in this way years ago, just because black and yellow works, black and white, I didn't like it as much, and so, I've been making sermons like this, I've been making sermons with this format for 25 years, black and yellow, and then when I started doing YouTube, I wasn't making thumbnails at all, and then I should make thumbnails, but I wanted to find a way I could make thumbnails that would be really quick and easy for me, and that's where I started making the kinds of thumbnails that I've started making, and my thumbnails don't really make me cringe, because I have a, you know, anybody who's watched this knows I have a love-hate relationship with size, and I, if my channel had a hundred thousand subs, or half a million subs, or a million subs, we couldn't do this, and getting to know you people, either by name and comment, or discord, or live stream, or in person, like if you went to Thunder Bay, I mean, it was so cool sitting next to Mark at Thunder Bay, and getting to build a relationship with Mark, and Mark gave me a ride to the Paintball for Jesus event at Thunder Bay, so I got to drive in his car, and Luke gave me a ride from Minneapolis to Thunder Bay, and hierarchies bind and blind, and if I climb up a hierarchy too fast, and even with the hierarchy that I'm already on, it's already too big, so I talked to Mary Harrington this morning, which was, she was so generous in giving me her time, because she's doing so many interviews right now, and you know, she knew who I was, I think, because of the rebel wisdom, Paul Kingsnorth conversation that we did, and so had a delightful conversation with her, but part of the reason I don't go after very many big interviews with high status people is because I find them relationally frustrating, because once I get to know someone, generally speaking, there are some people that I meet that it's like, I don't need to get to know them better, but there are actually very few of those. Often I get to know someone, especially super interesting people like a lot of these people who are climbing a status hierarchy, like Mary Harrington, or Tom Holland, or Jordan Peterson, or John Verbeke, or Jonathan Pigeot. Once I get to know these people, I want to get to know them more. I'd like to be friends, I'd like to hang out, I'd like to have them incorporated into my life, yada yada yada. It's really hard to do that with high status people, and the same goes for for you, Rando's. Most Rando's conversations that go an hour or two hours, it's like, I'd like to know this person better. This person has blessings and riches and glory and interest that I don't have enough space in my life to get to know. Then there are people who I have disappointed because I haven't had a chance to spend as much time with them as they would like, and I feel bad about that, and, and, and, and, and. It's the exploding of this Dunbar number that I find super frustrating and, and saddening. So, you know, my, my shitty little thumbnails, am I going to say a lot on this live stream? Maybe, we'll see. Oh, there's a, there's a super chat. My shitty little thumbnails, I don't, they, they're effective, they communicate the title. Um, I don't, my thumbnails, I don't think drive a lot of attention to the channel. Thumbnail that I did with respect to Jordan Peterson versus the Pope, that was interesting, and I knew that that was going to be clickbaity, and so be it, but I just thought it was a cool thumbnail. But I, to the degree that being a shitty YouTuber keeps my channel small enough so we can reasonably have good conversations, I think it's a blessing. Yep, that's right, Philip. All caps on questions helps me, helps me grab them quicker. I don't know how to say the, the Ann Arborly. Um, there's got to be something behind that little tag. Are you aware that the Discord invite posted on the description is now invalid? Oh, I will, I will try to remember to update that. So, the Discord invite used to be permanent, but that permanent invite on all of my notes meant that bots were getting into the Discord, and so this was back when Joey was, um, was kind of head, head moderator on the Discord, so then they changed the rules so that there's no more, no longer a permanent invite. The invite expires like every week, and I don't have a weekly routine by which I refresh it. So, usually what happens is when I get a complaint, then I refresh it, and I have a couple little files, but it will, it will often get, um, it will often get, um, out of date. Phlebas, do you worry you and others have basically resigned to splitting the denomination again and the spirit of resignation is wrong? Let's save that for the denominational video conversation. Question, could you design a prompt for a chat using the name of the chat GPT that allows the AI to simulate a conversation with you so we won't, I've been chatting more with chat GPT lately, finding it a very strange experience, because on one hand, there's sort of a sense that you can sort of in a in a, an imaginal way think that you're chatting with a person, sort of personifying the, the, the program, but I find it very quickly is way too shallow and way too manipulable in a way that people aren't, so that breaks down. Thank you, Wendy, for the super chat. I'm thinking about what to ask and think about what to ask, and really, I just want to support you, Pastor, and I would love to connect with, um, that Massachusetts man that wants to start an estuary, love to help build those conversations. Absolutely. So IRL politic was, you know, the guy who, who we did a, we did a conversation, we did a conversation, I suppose if you search Paul VanderKlay, IRL politic, you can find it, and also the two pastors of the two CRCs in Whitenessville, Massachusetts. Now, you can, if you Google Whitenessville, Massachusetts Christian Reformed Church, you'll wind up with Pleasant Street and Fairlawn, and that's Joel Vanderwerken at Fairlawn and Matthew Burns at Pleasant Street. Pleasant Street is my mother's congregation. I really need, so one of the things that I did early on was I did a retreat at my sister's Airbnb, sort of, it's kind of hard to figure out what my sister has, and we had a dozen people, and we spent two days just sitting in rooms and talking, and I want to do that again. So one of these days, I should plan that. My sister's, now that COVID is done, my sister has a few rooms to rent, so some of the, just about everybody stayed there. I suppose some people could camp. She's also got other rooms that are bunk rooms, and so she could sort of tier it, and yeah, maybe limit it to a dozen people or so again, or maybe just got out some other big rooms. If we do it the right time of year, we could meet in her barn, and it's really a cool, cool space, and then just sort of, it would be like sort of a two-day estuary meeting, but yeah, Bug, Matthew Burns, and Joel Vanderwerken, I met with them when I was in Massachusetts, and I said, you guys should start an estuary, and they're like, we're interested, we're interested, and I said, I'll come out and help you launch it, because that way I get to visit my mom. So yeah, yeah, Bug them, Bug them, get them, get them, get them moving on that. Part of it with pastors is that pastors have to be stewards of their time, and especially Matthew's church is pretty large, and so he's got a lot of demands on his time. They're not going to do it if they don't have a center of the church, and they're not going to do it if they don't have a sense that they're not meeting a need. It doesn't necessarily have to result in evangelistic growth, but it does have to, in the evaluation of the pastors, be a fruitful thing to do. So, and Cale isn't very far from that, so I'm sure Cale would like to jump up and be a part of that. So yeah. Question, what's your opinion on the book of Enoch? Do you think it should be included more in Western Christianity? Peugeot seems to bring it up so often that I've heard others condemn it as harmful. I haven't read the book whole as such. I've dipped into it just in fact this week when I was working on the parable of the sheep and the goats. There are some very interesting comparable passages in the book of Enoch to Matthew 25, the parable of the sheep and the goats. Jesus is clearly working on a fairly well established script, I'll say, that was very much floating around in Jewish apocalypticism. So I have to read the whole book of Enoch in a sitting at some point to really get a sense of it. Like I said, I've dipped into portions of it. You bump into it when you do New Testament studies because it's very much a background book. It's a very interesting book. I don't, it's by no means my place to say whether or not it should be canonical, but oh Framingham. Yeah, I always go in and out of Logan Express in Framingham. There used to be a Christian-informed church in Framingham that closed. Let's see, both of Matt Michael's parents are from Framingham. He's such a troll. Yeah, that's the guy. That is the guy. Although I believe with a K, IRL politik with a K. All right, scrolling through here, scrolling through here. Ah, thank you Nehama. I gotta say, I gotta say the Jews, guys are an impressive little cohort in this little channel. Nehama, Hezzi, Yosef, even Jacob, you guys, you know, you punch above your weight class. You all really do. It's pretty amazing. You're really amazing people. Really amazing people. Really super excited for the Israeli gathering. All right, where was I? That was the week before, Freddie and Paul show. Yeah, Jesus and John Wayne fun. Oh, yeah, yeah. And then of course, the big, I think that the big video of the week was Marcus's putting together Paul Kingsnorth and Tom Holland. I, when Marcus posted that on Twitter, that he was putting them together, I thought, how's that going to go? But very quickly, of course, Tom was, Tom knew about, the UK is smaller. So Canada has fewer people than California. Australia has about the same number of people as Texas. The Netherlands is tiny. UK is about 68 million people. That's sort of a little bit bigger than California and Texas combined. And so it's a small enough place that Tom Holland had been sort of following the trajectory of Paul Kingsnorth. Tom Holland watches YouTube. See, see, see, if my channel was massive, could I know, Chad? No, it's, that's why small is beautiful. Oh, yeah, the Kingsnorth Holland video definitely seemed relevant to the search for a spiritual home. The question was, why did you choose small? And I said, well, I'm not going to tell you, because I'm not going to tell you, but I'm going to tell you, because I'm going to tell you, because the Kingsnorth Holland video definitely seemed relevant to the search for a spiritual home, the quest for a spiritual home. We need, we need to do, we need to do a big event. Cassidy, I think is probably going to, Cassidy and Matthias, we need to do some big events in Europe, and we need to have Kingsnorth and Holland involved. Holland's been all over the place lately, and the challenge, the challenge we're going to have is a, is the, is an embarrassment of riches, because already we have that, already we have so many people who are worth listening to. That's, that is the challenge. And what Nate said, so Nate's, Nate Hiles' conversation with the Grim Grizz, super good. I still have to download that and clip that up. Super good. There's so much good stuff in Nate's conversation with Grim Grizz. But Nate hit it right, and, and he knew exactly, when he saw me doing the Rando's conversations, he knew exactly why I do them. It's because just like the world is too big for us to really comprehend it, there are way too many people who are way, way too deep and brilliant and broad and glorious and important than for any of us to have time to actually get into. And so this, again, this is my sort of, this is my argument for the life of the age to come, because right now I am limited in terms of how many of you I get to know, and it sucks. And when we've been there 10,000 years, bright shining as the sun, we've no less day to sing God's praise, and part of singing God's praise is going to be in conversation with each other. Look at how praise is done in the Psalms. You get a whole bunch of people and you put somebody on stage and you say, this person has qualities, and you praise them before the congregation. So, yeah, should I get distracted? Os Guinness says that God will not invade the human heart because the human heart is where freedom exists. Is this true? See, I'm a Calvinist. So I think this is where everybody gets Calvinism wrong when they reduce it to unconditional election. God's election does not destroy our freedom. God's election gives us freedom. And that's always the way it is with God. With more God in our life, we have more freedom. And that's both freedom from and freedom to. So the What Do You Meme? channel did a little thing. I got caught by the clickbait. A little thing with Jordan Peterson and Porn, this little clip that Peterson put on adultery from the Exodus seminar. And, you know, Peugeot gave a really good answer to that. But God, God in our life gives us more freedom. And so God's election of us doesn't destroy our freedom, but enables our freedom. I'll say it that way. I'll say it that way. So great question. Anyone speak of Benjamin Boyce's video about IQ going down causing future down road? Oh, I haven't seen that video. YouTube's been been pushing it to me, but I haven't seen it. All right. So yes, if you haven't watched the Kings North Tom Holland video, by all means do. Tom Holland got a lot of attention from the channel this week. So that that video and that was only that was only just a portion of that video. That whole video was great from start to finish. Really good. Really good. And the best thing about that video was was Tom going into going into debate mode or basically going into hunting mode because he's like, okay, I got Kings North here. I've got to ask him these questions. How on earth did Kings North get into the debate mode? And so that was the question that I was going to ask him. And so into how on earth did he slip the moorings of the secular world into the enchanted world? I want to know because I want to follow. That's what's so amazing about Holland and what's going on. All right. And then the video made us that. So a lot of the videos I do are in some ways safe for me because they don't affect my day job. They don't affect my home. They don't affect my denomination. Not this video. And I did I did this video because I that this group this group out of CRC Voices. So I actually just wrote a post on CRC Voices this morning about CRC Voices and how my talking about CRC Voices has CRC Voices was sort of a sleepy little pond. It was like a dying church. And now suddenly there are a whole bunch of new lurkers and participants from the CRC and CRC Voices because I've mentioned it on this channel and I make no apologies for that. It's CRC Voices is and the people in it are they're Christian people and they're used by God. And CRC Voices is the best place online to talk about issues in the Christian Reformed Church. I have been watching this debate in the Christian Reformed Church for over a decade. And where the debate is at now is I think the Christian Reformed Church's division is inevitable. And Phlebas asked Phlebas who is in the Christian Reformed Church, do you not worry? Do you do you worry you and others have basically resigned to splitting the denomination again and that spirit of resignation is wrong? It's not mine to split. Would I be happy that it doesn't split? Yes. The only way it's not going to split now is if the progressives who want to affirm say we will submit to the denomination's teaching. That's the path to it not splitting. They have made it very clear and I take them at their word. They have made it very clear they are not going to that they have made it very clear that they believe it is God's call in their life to move in affirming direction. I take them at their word and I will say I have while I very much understand the difficulties of the traditional position I don't think that the affirming tribe has really wrestled with I don't think they've done the confessional homework that needs to happen because I think it's a radical rewriting of Christian anthropology and soteriology and I think people are just I think it's a radical rewriting of Christian anthropology and soteriology and I think people are just accepting practices without actually thinking them through. Now they're going to do it whatever I think about it and I get that but the only way the Christian informed church is not going to split would either be the denomination as a whole says you do you we don't care in that sense what would happen is that the affirming position would get increasingly tyrannical in the denomination. We've seen this in society we've seen it in mainline churches it would happen in the CRC and if you look at my previous videos the Christian informed church over the last 30 years has grown more conservative not less those trend lines will continue I've outlined those arguments before and so in other words the only way this is not going to split is if one side basically concedes and at this point what we saw in Senate 2022 is that the traditionalists have they have the mass and they have the near-term future and so it's the affirming that are either going to have to submit or get out that's what's happening that's what's coming and whether that whether that gets concluded in Senate 2023 or 2024 or 2025 that's the path and so then the question is the question is what happens to these churches many of whom are in Grand Rapids some of whom are in Canada what happens to these churches do they there's one idea out there by a prominent member of the reformed church in America of the reformed church has been playing around with affinity classes which I think overall are a bad idea I think affinity classes are a bad idea because a classist is a regional body and I think geography matters and so what I said in the video was you know if you're sort of an outlier christian reformed church that's affirming and there's a vibrant RCA classes around you that's probably a better option but for the christian from churches of Grand Rapids east they've been the establishment in the denomination for 70 years or longer they know how to do establishment they should just decide to lead and leave and try their hand at their vision for ministry and there might be say four classes in this denomination maybe Canada east Canada west CRC east CRC west probably Grand Rapids and Denver perhaps and go for it and what I want is that both sides are able to even if they can't share a synod that they're not too far away from each other that they lose their relational connections so they can continue to compare notes with each other how are the traditionalists wrestling with these issues how are the affirming in the christian reformed church tradition wrestling with these issues and then actually have a situation where churches can go back and forth over that line without having difficulties of minister pensions or buildings or these kinds of things in a sense to to try and have a relationship similar to what was hoped for with the reformed church in America before it really ran aground in 2020 so to me that's the best way moving forward and yeah I totally get I totally get that that's sort of good that's him I totally get that that's yeah I think it's the only way forward and some of you who follow me on Twitter know that I got back and forth I went back and forth on Twitter which I usually don't do with the pastor of the church in Washington DC she's a super sharp sharp super sharp sharp woman she's she was top of her class at seminary great preacher so so her church has done really well in Washington DC and so she's like well what do you mean about this your urban thesis about CRC church is not doing well no there are a few that do but in terms of the classes in terms of the system they're not doing well in these urban areas New Jersey where I grew up Chicago Toronto San Francisco Los Angeles generally speaking not every church generally speaking CRCs are struggling in those areas and they tend to be thriving in places where the Christian Reformed Church originally settled and thrived such as the Midwest farming areas here in our classes in central California churches in the central valley like Ripon California they tend to be doing well urban churches not as well so yeah yeah yeah so that's that's that's the deal with that video um let's see more questions I thought I saw a question here okay question what do you think of Tim Keller's book Every Good Endeavor is articulating a strong theology of work useful for reversing Protestant church attendance decline I haven't read the book I that came out after my sort of intensive Tim Keller phase but I hopefully will get to reading the book but I think I did see some of Tim Keller's stuff on work theology and I think he's right we have a big problem in this country not honoring trades and it's it's probably it's probably not a bad thing that women are going to college more than men but probably fewer people in general should go to college and more people in general should be working trades and other things with their hands not that college is bad I think college is great it's just not for everybody question how do you think world war ii affected the development of masculinity in mid-century America deeply seems like it was really dangerous to be classically masculine in world war ii our westerns are reclamation yes I think the I think the popularity of westerns in the 1950s had a lot to do with um world war ii and masculinity and you know less less do you think that world war ii is just you know war is just kind of a macho thing no if you look at just look at the look at Ken Burns treatment of the pacific war that war in the pacific with the Japanese oh that's just a horrible thing it was just just horrible the the fighting on the islands I mean it was if you ever needed an example of the fact that nobody wins in war just look at island hopping in the pacific the Japanese were fighting to the death they bypassed a lot of islands and then for years later they would find Japanese still holding out on some of these islands that never never given up the war it's it's just it's just incredible question if someone says orthodox pendulum could you guess what they meant I uh a lot of thoughts would spring up but I I probably wouldn't guess Lance likes this format good I don't know that I can do it every week but um on weeks that I can do it it is a lot of fun um grim gris start a house group gathering ah thank you upcycle club appreciate it yeah mark you're right starting anything is hard keep things going as harder and stick with that whole thing is nearly impossible people try things all the time and they almost always fail yep that's true that's true more trades yep absolutely Isaac Donda I've been reading fatal discord yeah great book and I'm curious what you think of the place that the Protestant church holds within this modern world is should there be a shift to possible course correct so there's big p and little p Protestantism big p tends to be the historic self-conscious churches churches that consider themselves formally Protestant in terms it base it's sort of as basically Catholic but having a long-term disagreement in a few areas that's big p Protestant ever since the beginning of the church all the way to the book of acts you will find that the church is a balance of chaos and order if you go back in church history you have the historian church you have the Aryan churches you have the Catholic church you have the Donis Donatus churches the church has always been the church has always been a a constellation of organizations the hegemony of the Roman church in the west was a significant accomplishment and in some ways a little bit anomalous and just by the fact that you had the churches in the east I'm currently reading let's have to keep my eye on the time here I'm currently reading and I forget that I'm I've got this I'm currently reading I should talk about too long this book Vatican one great book I was I'm rereading it actually and I'm wanting to do more videos about it a lot of we just don't know a lot of history it's helpful to remember that in the early part of the 19th century Napoleon took over the papal states and imprisoned the pope not once but twice the relationship between the Roman Catholic church and modernity is really complex and you're right Isaac that goes all the way back to that goes all the way back to the beginnings of the Protestant church and in some ways the Protestant church the the little p Protestant churches which are sort of churches out there in the wild and the little p Protestant churches which are sort of churches out there in the wild are maybe a return to in some ways now this is what I'm about to say is deeply Protestant in some ways the normal situation for church in the world now even if you closely read the New Testament the church in Laodicea the church in Ephesus the church and and you know rightly and very impressively the Orthodox continued to work that framework but where was the line between church and synagogue until this came up on Jacob's channel with Father Stephen de Young where on earth was the line between church and synagogue early on where at what point can you draw that line these are really hard questions so you had obviously the Pauline church and then you had the Judaizing church as Paul called them what happened in the early 20th century what happens to this very Jewish church where does Islam figure into that picture Protestant big p Protestant churches continue to look over at Rome and to a lesser degree to the Orthodox little p Protestant churches don't look anywhere else they do their thing he just do their thing so that's that's that's going to continue all right um let's see I should finish up what I what I started here which is a very bad difficult thing for me so the the video that I released this morning right after I posted that video and started doing the thumbnail and I saw the Bishop Baron Tom Holland conversation with Justin Briarley really interesting conversation mostly because of Tom Holland I love Bishop Baron I'm not always sure he shows up for conversations and the Peterson Vervecki Peugeot Bishop Baron conversation the four brothers in Vervecki Peugeot Bishop Baron conversation the four horsemen conversation I I could I could basically excuse the bishops it was a good it was good participation Bishop Baron is a Bishop Baron is a tremendously impressive figure who has written very important books contributes very important theology and philosophy has done amazing work through word on fire but too often in these conversations he doesn't show up what do I mean he doesn't show up he's there on stage he will listen to some of what Tom Holland or Justin Briarley says and he will give a set talk now you can look at Tom Holland and look at a lot of repetition and say set talks there too he's got all of us have them I've got mine we've all got our points that we like to make and we make them regularly Jordan Peterson does it John Vervecki does it Jonathan Peugeot does it if you talk enough you're going to have your set points but I often get the sense I often get the sense watching Bishop Baron in these kinds of conversations that he has these set points and they're very safe sets now okay he's a bishop so he's got to look over his shoulder and he has to answer to those above him and I get all that so fair enough but I don't I don't think he really shows up well for a lot of these things that the questions that I raised in this video I'm really thinking hard about about what does it mean what does it mean for the pope to be on discord or not discord the pope's not on discord the pope isn't on twitter a bureaucracy is on twitter and they're harvesting certain set pieces for for twitter that's not being on twitter that's not showing up for a concert that's not showing up for a conversation um you know for better or for worse whatever you think of Jordan Peterson doing on twitter he shows up for it it might not be always his best self showing up but he does show up for it um and there's this so then I in that video I read from the grand inquisitor portion of Dostoevsky's the Brothers Karamazov Dostoevsky's just an amazing writer and and he he has this just the way he lays out this coming to Jesus at Seville in the middle of the inquisition and you know raising a girl to life and healing the sick and then of course the grand inquisitor shows up and you see all the people who are looking at Jesus looking down and when they arrest Jesus they don't say anything and this is masterpiece masterpiece and it lends it it it forces the question how can Jesus show up in this world and this is this is very much Tom Holland's question about slipping the moors of the seculum and and and sailing into the enchanted seas and this is the enchanted seas and this is this is in many ways part of the question of the church because again the church often turns wine to water and I'm just as guilty as any minister is of that now trying one's hand to make God show up is always idolatry and so the church can't do that church has to have open hands to receive in AA you can't make someone sober and this is this is back to the Oz Guinness thing and that's that's really the point that Oz Guinness is making that's that's really the point that Oz Guinness is making but you build an altar for God to show up you pray your prayers of petition for God to heal you make your life a living sacrifice and when Jesus is being tortured on a cross those who are mocking saying he saved others he cannot save himself are in a sense doing the whole atheist yeah God isn't going to show up and save you is he and and what makes the crucifixion just amazing is how was God showing up on Golgotha and it's right there in that tension that the Christian life is lived and Tom gets at that I'm gonna I really have to do some clipping of the Bishop Bair and Tom Holland conversation because Tom did show up to that conversation and Tom really showed up to that conversation Tom's been Tom's been showing up to a lot of conversation you know Tom might not think Tom might be frustrated that God doesn't show up like Tom necessarily wants him to show up that's probably a sign Tom is becoming more and more Christian because that is the frustration of every Christian it's the dark night of the it's the frustration of the dark night of the soul the dark night of the soul it's the frustration of the the faithful Christian saint who prays and God does some miracles but not others and and God doesn't do the miracle the saint most wants it's it's 2nd Corinthians 12 with the thorn in the flesh and and Jesus telling Paul my grace is sufficient for you my strength is made perfect in weakness this is where the church labors and so we're we're stuck in this dynamic where on one hand we're longing for our lover but receiving love is always a gift and we are the inferior in the relationship and so often on Sunday afternoons I've got my we've got family over and we have watch parties for Oak Island my favorite show one of my favorite shows and the bachelor or the bachelorette and what reliably happens in every season of the bachelor is so you know you know the premise you have one dude and 30 women and you know they just keep making cuts and the more they make cuts they have these one-on-one dates and then whether you got an early one-on-one and you haven't spent a lot of time with Zach or you've never gotten a one-on-one as as the as the cuts keep getting made as the process keeps going the women get married and the process keeps going the women get increasingly anxious and frustrated that they're not going to make the cut and the truth is only one of them is going to make the cut and they know that and so they get more and more anxious and as they get anxious they come to Zach and they get angry frustrated why aren't you giving me the attention that I know we need if I'm going to wind up the game show and there's that tension in it that tension is in the Christian life it's like Lord why don't you why don't you show up and and it was very interesting it's so watching Zach this season Zach sort of leans into these women and says you've got to trust me now on the other hand the way the show is set up you shouldn't trust him in fact you shouldn't be on the show at all if you want to find love and you're an astoundingly attractive person like everyone on that show is you do not need a game show to find a partner you might you maybe could use a therapist or a pastor or some good advice but you really don't need a game show yet that tension is the Christian life where Christ draws us to trust him and it would be it is not unfair because that's exactly what Christ himself has to walk through the garden of Gethsemane so yeah I pray for Tom Holland I pray for Tom Holland that God will give him those peaks behind the apocalyptic veil but I also have to say to Tom Holland the Christian life is a lot of waiting on the other side of the and why is that the Christian life because that's Christ's life so all right where was I I distract myself and then I get preaching and then oh I should say something about my conversation with with Eric um need a lot if 50 years so if you didn't watch and many of you haven't just by the numbers if you didn't watch my conversation with pastor Eric at at German Valley in German Valley Illinois at the Grace Valley CRC just a lovely conversation just a lovely conversation a lovely a lovely pastor a lovely church you know the church and if you go to their website um you know what I what I love it so here's the church let's see is this one oh this one's not coming through all right let's all right uh present stop screen present share screen oh that wasn't the one I wanted um this is the one I wanted anyway present stop screen present share screen we'll just take the entire screen the screen there there isn't that nice church out there in the middle of cornfields and you know they've got their yeah this is of course post-worship wars contemporary worship they've got their they've got their their folks there who have some musical gifts and they're used they're making a joyful noise and they're praising God and they're normal people and they they know how to love and this is people look at this and they're I could I could talk forever about these kinds of issues these are the people of God this is liturgy this is the work of the people and um God bless them and and and the world is the world is full of it they're not professional musicians they're not skinny jeaned pastors they're they're not super professional staff they're they're doing the work of the Lord so all right back to the questions I'm just scanning for questions there's one question with reactionary feminism on the rise will women finally have conversations about the sacred feminine and why chaos is seen as feminine I don't know they might they might um the word the word sacred is such a fraught word in our culture they might I think we'll be having them talking to Mary Harrington oh what an interesting person um such cool stuff minority simply is the rejection of the Catholic Church I think DC Schindler has it right yeah there's a ton there there's a ton there um throwing anarchist bombs Catholic anarchist bombs all right let's see would be more creative taking a Protestant tool into the Catholic stall might get it done but it won't add the same creativity um Baron's gift is not conversation I think that's right it isn't that isn't Jackson voice say said it again oh the anti-Catholicism in this channel is rich are we anti-Catholic I don't think so um um I don't think we are um well Anselman's got some critiques um process oh we got some um woohoo we've got some conflict um let's see uh scrolling down for questions up we got a question I do not know if you already reacted but what is your take on the discussion between John Vervecke and Decoding the Grooves people I saw some of it I've got to get back to um Andrea Andrea's gonna set up a conversation between myself and Chris Kavanaugh but I want to finish watching that conversation I see Chris I see Chris Kavanaugh as just sort of a tick typical secular materialist I don't I don't know that his critique has anything beyond that but I'd like to talk to him yeah Miss Mary I miss Mary yes all right okay I've gotten to let's see did I get to all of the I should go back to this question and Tom Holland in Dominion so he was pretty clear with this on on the conversation with Bishop Baron that and I have to go back through his book Millennium in the U.S. the title isn't Millennium it's a different title I got a copy of the English version and I've got a copy of the U.S. version um and then Dominion follows because Holland wanted to take it all the way back to the Hebrew prophets and that's where Dominion starts and and tall Holland I think I don't know if Holland has ever read any bar field but there's a lot of resonance between what Tom Holland sees as this tradition within Christianity all the way back to the Hebrew prophets and bar field with participation loss of participation and renewed participation um Peterson Peterson Peterson doesn't talk about Paul of Tarsus doesn't talk about Peter doesn't talk about the apostles he talks about Jesus and he talks about the Old Testament so that's that's I think something that's I think something all right so here we go um there there is the link I'm gonna pin the link you are welcome to come into the room remember the rules of the room don't come in to just lurk uh come in to participate um have your camera on Michael first in yes providence is oh providence has given me a slow workday so I'm oh wonderful providence has given me a slow workday so I'm oh wonderful and um since some somebody was mentioning trades and such this is my new filming location for talking about such things so so tell me about your new project I've heard I've heard whispers of your new project yeah so I just um I just uh started another channel I've got like a few short introductory um videos out and uh last night I just interviewed a guy who's probably the oldest person that's been in a randos conversation he's 91 um and he's uh basically been just making stuff since he was 10 and he was a shop shop teacher for a lot of his career and um and uh ended up pastoring uh church uh actually uh the uh charismatic catholic movement that happened in the 70s he kind of got a church sort of formed where he was around that and um as long as I've known him it's been through the ag church but but um so the the goal is just to kind of get people that are doing these things and you know I want to try to talk to somebody every week um but really to encourage people in their local churches to um you know find the men that know how to do things whether they're doing it professionally or just they know how and then probably find needs which are not hard to find within a local church and then bring a young person with you and have them help you and and then um I'm writing some devotionals and things just so you'll have some little little conversation starters to give it a spiritual emphasis and uh I'm trying to make everything as much as possible just here's a set of tools and let other people take it and do what they will with it very cool very cool very cool project very cool project bring dale in here welcome dale hi paul how are you doing excellent good good did you want to follow up on your question or um yeah did you answer it I was out of the was talking on the phone for a bit I I talked about I mentioned it briefly but now I'm having trouble pulling it up again because I didn't star it so okay it was just about Benjamin's voice interview I forget the guy's name he's an english podcaster and it's his basic premise is IQ is lowering and in the past including roman society the lowering of IQ generally in the populace to something like 85 has completely is what caused the downfall of the civilizations and that's what we're going through right now it included stuff you would be interested in things like that higher IQ people tend to be in groups and up until like the early 1960s the big group was the religious type groups that you had to be a part of and that the falling out of those groups sort of causes a loss of meaning in the intelligent people causing them to have less children causing the drop of an IQ it's the whole premise of the conversation that's fascinating I haven't seen that I saw that Benjamin had somebody on with that but I hadn't watched the video so now I'm gonna have to watch the video it was something I had never heard of before blew me away and it's like oh man he's got to do a conference with Jordan Peterson get those two together on you know Jordan's view of um I'm gonna get on a blank evolution type concepts yeah would just be fascinating hearing them talk back and forth about that that concept yeah oh that's interesting there was a movie there was a movie that someone did on basically they noted that smart people were you know getting jobs and living lifestyles that produced very few kids and um other people in society who were having who were doing stupid things with their lives were accidentally having kids all over the place and so the idea is that 200 years in the future the whole world is stupid um that was basically this whole approach from a scientific there was a movie something of idiocracy that's it that's it yep I saw that movie I instantly thought of that movie when I started listening to it like I just envisioned this future down the road that's true and and part of this you know to sort of bring Michael into this part of this is is working with your hands I remember um listening to some engineers talk about the fact that you know up until a number of years ago engineering students had in their background a lot of experience they grew up on farms so they were used to fixing things they were used to doing things and then when they'd go to engineering school they had all of this behind them and then so when you added the theory to all of the practical experience you really had a dynamic interaction now you've got a lot of people who have only been in school and then they just learn all this theory and they can't actually make anything happen in the real world I understand exactly I'm an engineer I started out as electrical engineer and one of the things I missed when I was doing that is I started out at a drafting table learning and during my process I got into the computer side my degree was in math and computer science and electrical engineering but I missed the drafting table piece of it because that was a real relaxing physical thing when you started doing it on the pit on the keyboard it became crappy well the other thing I was lucky enough my very first job this is up in Grand Rapids out toward Hudsonville they would make me go build what I designed so I've been large control panels for automation systems conveyors that type of stuff but I had to physically go out and build the control panel yep so it's like you get real good at oh that was really a bad idea putting that there I think I'll switch how this works oh absolutely absolutely all right we got two more we got two more entries here uh Justice and of course Chad who is a man who works with his hands so Chad's muted right now so Justice uh I don't know that we've ever talked before so introduce yourself a little bit yeah no I don't I don't think we have hi let me uh exit out of the YouTube I gotta go in the background I can't get it going away in the meantime we'll grab this question by Ann Burr and Burleigh what was all the kerfuffle over rejecting the winsome approach a few months ago uh was it just because it is difficult takes a while or some kinds of quick band-aid panacea the complaint against people like Tim Keller somebody got a you might have to mute I'm getting some feedback from someone I don't know who it's from maybe it's Chad um oh Chad says no Chad Chad's a veteran at this so um uh the the complaint against people like Tim Keller and and others was that basically they were playing too nice they were coddling left and punching right and um they were sort of they they were sort of by default by their posture they were leading to a sort of a continual drift left of the church and what these people needed to do was have a harder line and um uh uh I think that's a fair point but I think it's I think actually the difference is one of context because if you're in a one-on-one relationship with a person generally speaking not always you you're going to need to have a let's say a spirit of finesse to have influence influence but there is also a power in the hard line um and parents learn this um parent parenting is always a combination of both of those things there are some things that you negotiate and you work with and there are also other hard lines and it's always sort of back and forth between those tools and it's like you really need both tools and wisdom is about when you when you when you use one tool and the other so there's there's my attempt to answer that question so okay um justice yeah you were you were saying who are you tell us a little bit about yourself yeah so uh I'm a long-time lurker so I got onto the Jordan Peterson stuff in like 2016 one of my brothers sent me a video and so through that I think I started uh watching some of your commentary on the biblical series and um just I watch a lot of your videos so I've uh seen probably like the majority of them so I just thought I'd pop in um and uh I just thought the the IQ question was interesting so yeah I've heard people talk about the whole like concept of cities as the term is like IQ shredding and how the environment of cities makes it is really attractive for people to go um you know and expand their professional career and all that stuff but you know because of the environment of cities it's harder to have kids and they're not as friendly towards people um who want to have families and the whole like um drain of your professional life and how that makes it difficult to interact with community and things like that and so I just thought that was an interesting question and I uh wanted to get in on it so yeah that was part of what Benjamin and them were talking about is that higher IQ people tend to be educated which tends to make them congregate in cities because they're the easily mobile persons and that's where professions like lawyers that type of thing all thrive Right yeah and I think one of the things I see is like an interesting trend is especially with how um like professions are decentralizing and I think I always saw like the whole zoom work from home thing as potentially a very interesting change in the dynamic of cities where you know suddenly the you don't have to be in LA or New York to do these tech jobs and you know that was always there but it wasn't really as uh in everybody's faces and so you know I saw that as potentially a reversal of that trend where you know people can go and have their more localized communities out in the sticks and you know like I live out in Wyoming and I do a tech job although mine's a little bit strange so it's a combination of tech and hardware but um you know seeing that as an opportunity and it's really interesting like Wyoming is basically a wasteland in some ways and uh but land prices out here have been going up really high um which like they've like doubled which I don't know who would move to Wyoming it's like there's like 500,000 people in Wyoming so There's nothing there! Yeah yeah so it's really funny to me that just in Wyoming that trend is and you know some of the more desirable places I'm sure have gone up a lot so and I wonder if that's driven partially by the whole work from home tech professional thing. Will they pay you to move to Wyoming because they do that in May? Uh I don't know I'm not sure because of that because there's not much industry so they need to get people there and yeah well there's like no jobs but like you can work from home you can buy I know like you can buy a house for crazy price in Maine like on the ocean for very little money. Wow I didn't know that that's great. I thought about actually like moving there but then I was like well I what am I gonna do what am I gonna tile there's nothing to tile in Maine. All those ocean side houses you could tile those I guess maybe yeah I don't know. Yeah I mean you guys everybody's out there who's wanting to find a career the trades are really looking for people to join them because there's this like uh I don't know when I joined the apprenticeship class there was seven guys when I graduated I was the only one that graduated. Wow. Wow. Yeah and it's a good I mean it's a good career. I mean the money is good we bought we have a mortgage comfortably with a three bedroom you know a three-bedroom home it's like why wouldn't you and chat gtp isn't going to take my job. You know what I'm saying it's going to take it might take Paul's job but it ain't taking my job. My uh my idea for the program add a little bit of a sneaky uh sneaky element to it too in that it's not necessarily just about you know helping these young men find these things but more I think these are these are people that society needs more up and I think you know putting I don't know how many people are necessarily being having their iq tested that are working in the trades I have had a guy come that I work with out of nowhere who knows how to read Greek and translated first john by himself one time and you know has a vocabulary that's like twice mine and you know you meet these people out here because he doesn't want it it's almost some of the people that kind of see the the academic field for the game that it is just rejected out rejected entirely um but you know also if Jesus had access to scholars and scribes to start his movement and he chose to go with fishermen and uh tax collectors and and other types of folks and tent makers and you know people like this um and I I think it's really um there's definitely something to that Ian McGillcrest you know right blank right brain left brain thing and there's um the academic world is so much in that left brain thing they don't they don't have any clue of what they're ignoring what their brain is hiding from them whereas in the trades worlds these are creative people you know like every every tradesman knows like there's a hundred solutions to every problem that's the fun thing about the job I know how to fix it that way today I'm going to try something new you know so um and so we need to so these are the people that know how to solve problems we need to get them get them planted secure get their feet on the ground and then as they mature they can start solving bigger problems that society has so when I was a kid my dad um kept like it was expected that we were going to go to college I don't know where they got this idea but um nobody in our family went to college except my dad but like he kept saying you got to join you got to go to college because you'll be a part of uh you'll be a part of a secret club that only people that go to college are in and I was just like totally dumbfounded by this and as I've grown older I'm so thankful I didn't do it because I think I would have turned out like an idiot I mean even more than I am now I'm not saying that people that go to colleges are idiots I'm just saying I would have been an idiot it's clear to me because I I have a very malleable mind and uh I can just be an autodidact and be a smart ass well said Chad well said good good Andrew did you have anything you want to say so this is my dorm I happen to be in college if you don't know what are you studying Andrew? Chemical engineering very boring yeah okay um it's it's one of those things where you just have to memorize a ton and you know it's like you don't go into chemistry because all the chemists do that you don't go into engineering because all the the mechanical engineering people do that what you do is you stand right on the border and you say hey if we put a cockroach bite here you're going to be hey if we put a cockroach bite here we can make this 0.2% more efficient let's see yeah a bunch of bunch of interesting bunch bunch interesting what what part of what's interesting about this channel is my most of my videos are 75 at least people who are logged in because google only has analytics for people who are signed in and give statistics 95 percent of my audience is male which is amazing about half in the united states but 95 male and 50 percent of the channel is between age 25 and 45 which is also quite interesting and and there are you know there are a lot of there are a lot of people who are doing trades like like chad i hear from them quite regularly very early on had a randall's conversation with a painter out of grand rapids and it just makes perfect sense because you've got a you've got a you know sometimes you might say well how on earth does chad is chad able to listen to all of these things well you know look at what he's doing um you know you he's he's working with his hands he's he's he's got a good mind there that has to do something and his mind is working the tile but it's kind of slow and there's a lot of cycles that can be listening to stuff while he goes so yeah and we um you know one of the things that we had on the discord was this open studio what we called it where you just have your camera on and and of course people like me who are sitting behind a computer well it's kind of boring to watch paul at work all you see is these eyes going back and forth and hands clicking and i thought for a while maybe i'd just share my screen with it because you know well then you can see what i'm you know what i'm reading or the texts that i have going but so much of it is email and communicating with people and talking to people and obviously a lot of those things in the pastor's life you can't really have on the internet but there it is ethan says take 50 100 plus iq persons put them on an island well hundreds kind of hundreds not that high and then do the same with 50 100 persons on another island 100 minus right 100 minus there you go okay yeah and and i've you know you know i hear peterson and vervegi talk about general intelligence and i i i've never i'm never convinced that you can really sort of distill quality in a person down to that one number because i have seen people that i know that they scored low in iq but they've they sometimes have a certain genius about them in other respects that seemed to leave iq is a good test of stupidity and poor test of intelligence um it's i'm just i'm just really skeptical because so much of life is experience and wisdom and i'm not saying that's completely divorced from general intelligence but i've known some people with pretty with some low iqs iqs that had a lot of wisdom and i don't know that's what i've seen when you can't answer the question right away you're forced to think about think about it more that's where the wisdom comes from i find because you know the the person that has the solution right away you know sometimes a high iq will produce that but it doesn't anticipate the negative consequences of it if you're waiting you're sitting back you're seeing oh he did it that way this guy did it that way they both made different mistakes now i kind of have an idea you know what the right way to do is yeah yeah well i think that goes into like some a lot of raveki is talking about with different kinds of knowledge right so being able to like deceive yourself with your computational power right you know i do a lot of modeling of physical systems and so what ends up happening is if your model is terrible your result is going to be terrible and you know but you can do all of this fancy computation you can put a supercomputer on calculating something that's worthless and uh spit a lot of circles for no reason so you know having the relevant information is and the relevant framing i think makes a really big difference no matter how much iq you've got yep yep totally agree totally agree all right have we uh have we exhausted this live stream or someone have anything anything else they wanted to bring up into it yeah look at this beautiful bathroom right here wow chad you know another frustration about the internet is chad if if um if i have so much tiling work that needs to be done if i lived by you i would i would hire you in a new york minute and and that's just the way it is and that doesn't say that aren't good tylers in sacramento but um don't know them and i'll i'll put up a short when it's finished all right all right i forgot one all right good all right nice if you were if you were to convince my parents that i should go into the trades how would you do it well tell us a little bit about your parents um my mother is chinese uh born in china she um got here through a uh education grant for a university here so that's how she emigrated my dad is um originally he went to school for chemical engineering found out that he liked comp sci um during his phd so he went back and got a master's in comp sci so he's a yeah he's a all-around smart dude both of them are like college will get you everywhere i would say be a good son and finish your degree at least oh if you met tayo ask tayo what degree he has and what he wants to do over in the uk because he has a big fancy degree and he's like i want to be a writer so be a good be a good son get your degree and then once you get your degree you say to your parents i got my degree thank you very much now i'm going to and and the truth is find find something you can do both at perhaps or integrate i mean because even the way that you talked about it you know your boring degree it's like well why the heck are you doing it you know i that's maybe very american of me but i don't stick with a lot there's some things i have to stick with when they're boring because that's just the way it is but there's other things that you don't have to stick with when they're boring and then find something that isn't boring yeah and i never want to be discouraging to people who have the ability to go to college that's i hope that i never sound like that i just if you feel like you're not cut out for for real for real the trades are very good and you can move up in the trade you don't always have to be you know the guy who sets tile maybe you learn how to maybe have good social skills you can work in office or you know do whatever so you can also learn a lot of stuff you know as a hobby and then find out if you like it or not and either way it's valuable you know if you're going to own a home someday you know being able to do stuff yourself because otherwise you're like got a target on your head for being overcharged for stuff if you don't know what you're doing or at least what you're talking about so you know yeah but you can you can uh well you know hopefully my plan is maybe find somebody in your church that knows how to do some of that stuff and can show you something on the weekend you know fixing fixing somebody's house some helping out some old lady that you know needs some work done in her home or something like that volunteering you know that's a good way to do it too i concur on the hobbies thing for sure like i basically ended up doing this job because of not because of my degree but because of uh because of the hobbies that i engaged in a lot i just had a lot of wide interests and so if you do that you're bound to find something good yep yep cool burst angel says tell your mother that's where the money is and she's not wrong i mean if you if you have to hire out you know a contractor to do stuff so we uh we had a so we have a little bathroom that the floor we basically need to put in a new subfloor and then we'll put a new tile and we had done the the other larger bathroom a number of years ago cost about 15 grand to do the redo the whole bathroom and then you know it was just after the pandemic and now we should really have somebody doing brought in a contractor and he gave us a bit of like 25 grand to redo a bathroom that's about uh eight by eight and it's like uh no i'm not gonna spend 25 grand redoing this tiny bathroom and probably what'll happen is that i'll i'll get some i'll get somebody who knows how to do a good subfloor um and then somebody who knows how to do some tile and i'll probably rip out the vanity myself and i'll remove the toilet myself and we might you know we still haven't decided what we're going to do with the old shower that's in it you know but we're not going to spend 25 grand at it so uh girl country says guy in my estuary took on another younger guy's an apprentice he's an electrician yep yep so i was so there's a guy in my church who uh was running basically he was running an electrician school and and he he had he had exactly what chad described where there's all kinds of people who i mean to get in as a journeyman electrician into the union i mean the whole nine yards this is a lucrative career but to get into the trade school you had to um show up every day for school and show up to work and right away that curve just dropped off and you know and passed a p test yes yes that's right and you know it's it's a that's a real crisis of civilization um oh uh oh uh i just showed up pope shouldn't be on twitter twitter isn't for serious people there's a lot of truth for that grim grizz got off twitter for that very reason so um and i would argue that the pope isn't on twitter grim grizz says they hide the cool careers and apprenticeships and secret guilds being able to find those guilds at churches hot info very true very true i had a i had a question for michael if uh yeah if i could interject um so i was thinking you know about your project and uh the upcoming uh conference in uh chino and you know that theme of the search for a spiritual home and i view a lot of my uh watching like paul's videos and and jordan peterson as oh train's coming by oh man sorry um and i was just wondering how your project uh kind of fits in or how you view that fitting in line with the search for a spiritual home because i mean for me i feel like i've been looking at least since 2016 and you know all that stuff well i you know i've kind of written a lot of stuff i'm gonna try i'm gonna try everything that i've written about like this is my thoughts and how it should go i plan to put in video form because that's the most easily consumable but it is a lot it's basically like the local church is kind of the key and you know getting involved and it might be in multiple ways you know depending on um how how people want to do it you know because if you have students that are not local then they may need someplace to stay so you can have a family in a church that they can stay with you know some people have never had a healthy home environment and um go so and i'm saying like going to church is like a necessary like component of it like that's what you know i want to say and um and and the church needs to be on board with that and getting people you know if they're not living with somebody then like okay you're gonna go have dinner with this family once a week or something something like that and i think that like this is all the stuff it's it's real this is the simple thing i figure out like this is the stuff that we all hope will happen organically but it just doesn't but it will happen very easily with very little encouragement so if i say oh here's this guy you know how to do drywall show him how to do drywall this weekend and help this person out and here's a guy can he come over to your house for dinners on sunday nights or whatever like and you know you just set you just need like that little introduction to get the ball rolling and then then those things can kind of grow naturally it doesn't but it but but but people have a really hard time making that connection themselves so in a big way that's kind of part of what i'm trying to um foster is just something that gives people the excuse to make those connections so that the good stuff can happen yeah i really struggle with that myself uh i say to people all the time i don't have a reason to talk to people so i kind of have a little bit of a hermit bent uh and i i think a lot of guys probably struggle maybe i'm projecting struggle to kind of have a reason to talk to people and you know that's i think where your project is really great is it gives people a tangible reason to get together and you know and if you're with somebody you're not just gonna stand there silently and do drywall and complete silence like some kind of monk you're gonna end up talking to people and um and that's just a really great way i think and i think it really is a good starting point for finding kind of that spiritual home and i just i thought that was very relevant to that well that's an exact say i am that way and i even so i used to be i used to do youth ministry for a long time i did and like i was not good at it when it was like we're gonna go we had like a cool room and we have video games and all this stuff and like i'm like i can't i don't know what to do like i'm just supposed to like go strike up conversations with kids like that i'm you know it's but but then i you know i found out like oh i had some projects to do like took take a kid with me show them i'll do like to me i'm thinking like this is boring this is a boring day for this kid and then say like that was like one of the best the best times ever had and especially kids like that don't have don't have fathers or don't have great relationships with their fathers or things like that like that's all it is is just spending time with them you know showing an interest and like so even as a as a guy like i'm not good at like i need the i need some sort of a um an environment to you know like here i can come on a live stream there's four you know only four other people that's like i can manage that if i go into a big church building or something it's like how do you make connections with people i don't know you get it's like a little bible study or a little group something you know where you can't ignore the other people and then you can start to make um make friendships and stuff so so it's just it's just getting over that that first little hurdle that awkward thing of like you know having to uh matchmake in a way you know right for friendships so joey says i'm here to see chat gtp do tile so that must be uh that must be that that must be what's doing tile there it's very unusual chat bot chat bot and jeans we saw the full-faced chad my goodness what a rare what a rare sighting in youtube land almost as rare as the uh as the elusive rick so to see the to see the elusive rick you have to come to living stones i do have this book that somebody was mentioning earlier i haven't read it yet but i plan to read it and hopefully i'll if somebody wants if somebody who likes it wants to talk about it i'll read it and talk to them about it so all right i was asking with that one before oh this is the this is the chad bot all right wonderful well i think um oh i have one last thing too what oh go ahead okay so god has given me a heart for young men that's part of why why i'm doing this but to reinforce that message he's also given me two daughters and one more who is arriving this week on thursday my wife's oh wonderful c-section so so that's on thursday so folks want to pray that um you know that everything goes well we'll have another daughter on thursday morning sometime so absolutely absolutely wonderful wonderful no i in my conversation with with mary herrington talked about a bunch of different things and only had an hour though i would that i wanted to have two hours but she only had an hour because she's got to take care of her daughter and i couldn't um you know you're not going to step on that but um but she's like oh i wish you know wish wish we could have had more kids she started late and um that's that's i think where a lot of people are going to really feel it is that they they're not just going to be able to have too many kids because they just don't start early enough so praise god for your third child and siblings are wonderful and you only get them if you have more than one yeah so all right terrific okay well thank you all for showing up and thank you for showing up in the comment section and for showing up for the i don't know if i'll do another weekend thing next week is next week let's see next week is no friday is the 31st so i don't know usually the first of the month i'll be doing the the the bridges of meaning discord q a so all right 7 p.m navigating patterns all right very good okay thank you all take care bye bye