https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rNmLd5lS32w

 Thank you everybody for joining us this morning. It is Friday, November 6th. We are all watching or not watching, avoiding or making creative memes about the ongoing election of the next president of the United States. And so we are gathered here this morning to talk about probably just about everything else. And this is Paul VanderKlay and I'm on the Bridges of Meaning Discord. And Rick and I, this morning for the first time, are recording this with remote vMix. Woohoo! And we'll see how that recording turns out. And I wasn't going to be here this morning because I had a little dental appointment this morning, but they didn't have to numb my mouth. So I am in full control of my jaws. So let's begin. And I'm going to pick up with questions. Questions have been piling up even though I said I wasn't going to be here. But the first question is from T for Tech from October 26th. The question for Paul Channel. The question for Paul Channel. Hey, Paul, what do you think about wisdom being God, the spirit? Actually, there I did a conversation this week that I haven't had a slot to post it yet. It will probably get posted early next week. I did a conversation with Ron Dart about Jordan Peterson's selection of Proverbs. And we talked a lot about Lady Wisdom because the Book of Proverbs has Lady Wisdom. And Sophia, that's, you know, Sophia is both a woman's name and the word for wisdom. So is it God? Well, what do you mean by God? So that's actually a long ongoing conversation in theology of how to regard Lady Wisdom. Because she's very much personified in the Book of Proverbs. I don't think I've done anywhere sufficient reading on this to really give much of a helpful, intelligible comment besides knowing that that's there. And actually part of what Ron Dart and I talked about in that conversation is that Jordan, with sort of the direct admonitional approach to wisdom that he took in 12 Rules for Life, with Proverbs, he could actually expand the feminine. And, you know, I would love to see him reach out and have the same kind of effect on women that he's had on men and that could really potentially round out the Jordan Peterson following to not be quite so heavily balanced towards men and maybe add a more feminine component. And so maybe Lady Wisdom can help him with that. So wisdom being God, the spirit? I'll duck that question and just leave it at Lady Wisdom in the Book of Proverbs. Anybody want to jump into that in the voice chat? Have thoughts on that? All right, nobody. Alex C. from October 28, question. Do you think Christian apologetics may do more to turn people away than bring them towards or back to the Bible, church, Christianity, et cetera? Et cetera's really been on my mind lately. Some personal context. I've been listening to and reading Tim Keller, per your recommendation, whom I really enjoy for his synthesis of literature and the New Testament. But I'm a little frustrated that he, when he straw man's views opposing Christianity to construct a logical answer. For example, his book, The Reason for God, using some of the same rhetorical devices Sam Harris deploys. Oh, boy, we'll have to get Tim Keller on the channel to defend himself. One of the main reasons I am becoming interested in the Bible and Christianity again, years after de-converting, is that I am not looking for them to answer the questions I originally imposed upon them to answer. I didn't talk about this much in my conversation that I posted this morning with John Vervecky and J.P. Marceau. But in anticipation of that, I re-read, listened to a couple of Lewis biographies, especially the time in his life where he sort of turns his back on straightforward apologetics and leans into narrative, which produced the Narnia Chronicles. And I'm right now listening to Planet Hollywood, I was this morning. Lewis, so Lewis and his lifetime, and Lewis is a big influence on Tim Keller. Tim Keller is a huge Tolkien and Lewis fan, too. So you can actually find audio recordings, Tim and Tolkien, out there on the internet, which are really cool because, again, Tim Keller is a huge Lewis and Tolkien fan, and Lewis is in many ways behind. Some of Tim Keller's apologetics. It seems, and if you read both Alastair McGrath's and Alan Jacob's biographies of Lewis, Alan Jacob's biography is my favorite biography of Lewis, the Narnian. It's a delightful book. It seems that, in the end, the Narnian is a very, very, very, very, very, very, very, It seems that, on one hand, Lewis was obviously incredibly powerful and persuasive with respect to apologetics, but Lewis's personal experience with them was that it seemed when he succeeded, he found his faith most weak. And so I didn't really get into that in my conversation with John and JP, but why are there so many Johns in this little corner of the internet? Jean-Philippe and John Vervecky and Jonathan Peugeot were just awash in Canadian Johns. I hope that didn't sound right. So Lewis, so in the 1940s during the Second World War, Lewis was sort of recruited into trying to bring a layman's voice to Christianity during the Second World War. He also became sort of a lay preacher to servicemen in the RAF. Now, if you know anything about the RAF during the Second World War, the casualty rates are horrendous. And it's the same for US flyers engaging in the bombing campaign over Germany. The casualty rates in the air war are just simply horrendous. So many people died. And so Lewis is having to figure out how to preach. Now, of course, Lewis was a soldier in the First World War. He wasn't a Christian when he was a soldier. But so Lewis had to figure out how to really engage the RAF and the service people in terms of the gospel. And that really shaped his ability to communicate Christianity to regular people. And that came out in the radio addresses. And those radio addresses, he would write them out, and then he would give them to a group of clergy who would sort of look them over and give him some advice. And there were other editors, too. And that was really hard on Lewis. But they really helped Lewis perfect and engage his audience better. And, of course, those radio broadcasts became, eventually became, mere Christianity. George Marston, a history professor of mine at Calvin College, who was probably the foremost historian of American evangelicalism, wrote a biography of the book, Mere Christianity. And it's a good book. It's not a very big book, but it's a good one. And so that really shaped Lewis. And then, of course, sort of Lewis had written Pilgrim's Regress. He had written Screwtape Letters. He had written The Great Divorce. And then he had written the, and he had also written The Problem of Pain, where the problem of pain is sort of a straightforward attempt to address the problem of pain and suffering and the problem of evil. And it's a very straightforward philosophical book. The peak of this was really his book, Miracles. And as I've said many times, I found that book tremendously helpful for me in terms of thinking through the philosophical issues revolving around modernity and how to not lose my faith in a secular realm and how to integrate something of the ancient world and the biblical witness in the midst of the modern world, basically by looking over C.S. Lewis's notes and following him through the meaning crisis in that way. And the conversation I had yesterday with John Vervecky and J.P. Marceau was just, I couldn't be more happy with that conversation. It really went places that I think surprised all of us. And again, John Vervecky is just such a sincere and generous conversation partner. You know, I keep trying to encourage him to be a little bit more direct. You know, my New Jersey bluntness, it's the, it's the Jew in me, I suppose. I just say, hey, let's, you know, put the cards on the table. Let's, you know, no holds barred. Let's go after this thing. And, but John is just such an honest, generous, delightful conversation partner. But that conversation went some very interesting places, I felt. So, so Lewis, Lewis writes miracles. Lewis was sort of the, the sponsor or mentor of the Socratic Society, which was a very big deal. And as Alan Jacobs noted, nobody could put Lewis down. He was, he was unbelievably well read, unbelievably brilliant, unbelievably articulate. You know, it's just in terms of a debate adversary, you know, big booming voice, you know, nobody could put Jack down. But Jack, his own experience with that sort of mastery, he found difficult in terms of himself emotionally. And he would go through periods of, of struggle about the things that he was writing to use Bill Heibel's words, prevailing books about. And I think that is, that says something about the, the, this sort of, this form of Christian apologetics. It also says something about the, the, the style of Lewis's apologetics, which very much wasn't an attempt to necessarily all the time defeat his adversary. He gets into that in some ways and miracles and problem of pain. But I think what he does when he sort of abandons direct apologetics and begins to write fantasy literature and, and, and mythology, which is really what not what Chronicles is. And again, the reading now Planet Narnia is so interesting in terms of what, what is Lewis trying to do with those books? It's, it's terribly nerdy. It's, but it's, you know, it's, does he always pull it off? Well, no, I don't think so. Not like Tolkien did. But Lewis realized that faith needs to grow. It isn't something we manufacture in people. And in some ways, kind of direct modernist argument, argumentation is sort of a manufacturing approach. And so what Lewis does, I think, in the Chronicles of Narnia is garden. And because what do you do when you garden? You, you know, Chris Arnotti said so beautifully in my conversation with him this week, you know, when you, when you sort of, and I'll apply some for fancy Verbeckis words, when you sort of retard agency in your conversation partner, I think you're, you're diminishing the conversation and you're not actually as part of the vow of a Christian reform minister is that we engage in the work of evangelism. And so when you diminish or retard the agency of your conversation partner, you actually undercut yourself. And I think Alex, see, that's really what you're feeling in that. And now I think there's a place for Christian apologetics, just like there's a place for going into the garden with a Christian, you know, a Christian, a Christian, a Christian apologetics, just like there's a place for going into the garden with a, a, a steel shears and pruning. And if you read John 15, you know, I am the vine, you are the branches. If you've ever here in Northern California, we have absolutely no shortage of vineyards. You know, any farmland that can possibly passably be sowed in vine grapes is currently being covered in them now. But if you look at the kind of pruning they do on a, on a, on a, on a grapevine for wine, it's, it's just draconian. It's like you seem to be killing most of the plant. So there's a place for that. So I, you know, again, for me, I found C.S. Luce's book, Miracles, very life-giving. But the early parts of the book that are the philosophical, I really needed and were really helpful. But the parts of the book that really sing are where he's much more lyrical in the second parts of the book, where we're talking about miracles of the old and new creation, where he's looking at the grand miracle. So, no, I think you're right. And Tolkien was right in that the, the axes and wheels of the modern machine are in some ways antithetical to the kind of growth that we do as Christians. Now, I was just in a dentist this morning and I appreciate the fact that those surgical instruments are sterilized. They are using, you know, very hard, fine, sharp, precision metals. I want the dentist with his skilled hands to be as absolutely precise as he can be when he's fishing around in my mouth for a suture that the dental assistant couldn't fish out. So, modernity has its place, but that's where Tolkien is so prophetic, his love for the trees. So, yeah, no, I feel you. I feel you there. And there's, ironically, there's a decree, you know, there's this place in the Lord of the Rings where, of course, the orcs go to try to wipe out the Rohirrim at Helm's Deep and Helm's Deep holds and the nation survives, but the nation survives because the trees and these other creatures that Tolkien doesn't quite explain, other creatures of the forest, and of course the Ents who are the tree shepherds, they wade in and they destroy Isengard and, you know, we see it now. Nature in modernity, we believe we have sort of beaten back nature and try to colonize her, but we're recording this in the midst of a pandemic and so nature says, oh, do you think I'm beaten quite so easily? So, yeah, so good question, Alex. Joey has a question. Kanye recently resurrected Kim Kardashian's dad on their private island for her 40th birthday, an event we can all closely relate to. What does the Bible tell us about raising the dead? What does it say about our society when we try to do so? And who does it make us or Kanye when we do so? Yeah, it's a really good question, Joey. The Bible tells us that the resurrection of the dead is something that we long for and it's true. And I would think that this technological, one of the best lines in The Walking Dead, the original Walking Dead on TV was Herschel, who was a wise, committed Christian who was the father of, you know, a group of daughters and they wound up at his farm for a little while. And Herschel makes the comment at one point in the series how, you know, in terms, I believe in the resurrection of the dead, but these zombies weren't exactly what I was expecting. And rightly so. And even a hologram, I can imagine a hologram that sort of brings Kim Kardashian's dad back would be impactful and emotional. But you can't hug a, excuse me, you can't hug a hologram. You can't smell a hologram. The Christian story sees death and decay as something which God is going to lay to rest. We, in many ways, as best we can, try to arrest death and decay. We try to make ourselves look like we're not aging. We develop stainless steel. We have, you know, we've developed herbicides to, and pesticides to retard and reduce unwanted species and to sort of beat back nature. But I think anyone who stands at the grave of a father or mother or sister or brother or child or even pet knows that there is something to this death that everything in our lives and hearts rebel against. And the Bible says and gives us the hope that God understands this. And right there in the middle of the story, as C.S. Lewis says, God himself takes on flesh and dives deep to the bottom and pulls us all up out of the world of death and decay. That's the promise of the Gospel for us. And so Kanye doing this for his wife was a lovely gesture and something that I think speaks to what we all long for. And I think Mr. Incredible says, you know, why can't the world just stay saved? I feel like the janitor, didn't I just finish cleaning this up? And so this is actually what's at the heart of Christianity. I remember having a conversation with a good friend of mine who is a university professor, and he's not a Christian. He's very spiritual. He's quite new age. He's into Native American spiritualities. And he renamed himself after a Hindu god and on and on and on and on. And one day I was with him in a little park near our home, and I talked to him about the resurrection of the dead and the restoration of all things and the renewal of heaven and earth. And this guy grew up Roman Catholic, Puerto Rican Catholic. And he kind of looks at me and said, I never heard any of this before. Yeah, preachers should be blamed for this because the heart of Christianity is the resurrection of Jesus Christ. And the reason that my meanderings over the last three years and my engagement with philosophy and all of this has made me more a believer and more of a passionate believer in the bodily resurrection of Jesus Christ is because I think there's no other answer. That the world has ever come up with that is better than this. And I think I can see that in the TV show, Oh, the Good Place. I think I can see that in the Amazon streaming series upload. You can see it in the Walking Dead. Our hearts long, you know, Kim Kardashian rightly, you know, I don't know how to evaluate know how to evaluate. I don't know much about their story, but the fact that she loves her father as she should. She's made to love her father and that this little hologram could give her for a moment a sense, a taste of what the resurrection might be. I don't think that's a bad thing, but it would also give her a deeper longing. Now, the resurrection is a difficult thing to speculate about because the most we have of it is are these little stories of Christ's post resurrection conversations with the Apostles. And this is why, you know, I really enjoy C.S. Lewis's Miracles of the Old Creation and Miracles of the New Creation. And if you haven't listened to my conversation yet with John Vervecki, I'll give you a little teaser. You know, when someone brought up in that conversation walking on water and I told John, I said, you know, I'm not at all convinced that water walkings were created to be able to do. And I think John, I don't know how John first thought about that, but these conversations get really hard in a modernistic frame because we've upped the resolution on the shape of creation 1.0 so that we know a lot about it. And we can't put the Resurrect Microscope to understand creation 2.0. But I live leaning into creation 2.0 longing not only for the restoration of myself in the first creation, but the renovation of myself for the second creation. And if I'm wrong about this, then I'm wrong about this. To be human is to err as human. But I still, even despite doubts, and this world offers many ways of doubting this, I don't see any better thing to long for than the resurrection of the body, than the restoration and renewal of heaven and earth, than however God manages this resurrection. You know, I not only, of course, love to see my father again. You know, in these last three years, I've thought a lot about my father. I've told stories about him. And if my father were alive now, he would be fumbling with his computer, but he would be in this Discord voice chat room right now. And he would be watching my videos. And he might even start making some of his own. If he could figure out the technology, maybe my brother-in-law or my sisters would help him. And he would be on this Discord server. He wouldn't be dropping GIFs. That wouldn't be him. But he would be writing and engaging. And you all would be having conversations with him. And you all would be lining up to have conversations with him. Because so much of what you appreciate in me comes from him. And where I can do some things, he couldn't do. He could do some things that I can't do. And so in a strange way, my father lives on through me in the pattern way of the pattern video that I played. What the resurrection means is that not only do the abstracted, disembodied patterns that only God can maintain and archive of my father are preserved, but they will once again be put in the kind of a body that he never knew. And they will be uniquely his body, but it will be a glorified body. And when the apostle Paul says it will be a spiritual body, it doesn't mean that it won't be non-physical. No, look at all the work I've been doing on the word spiritual. It will mean that when we get sick right now, and all of us have had this experience, suddenly our body is not doing what we want it to do. We don't want our body to hurt. We want to be able to jump out of bed and go about our day. And then as you grow old, and now that I'm in my 50s, I'm feeling this more and more, my body won't do what it used to do. And so that's my body's being very non-spiritual then. And the apostle Paul says we will have a spiritual body. What do you mean by that? It will be finally subject to not only my spirit, but God's spirit. And that might sound like possession, but that's exactly the difference between, as C.S. Lewis so beautifully illustrated in the screw tape letters, the Father above and the Father below. The Father above loves freedom. And the Father above loves nothing better than to see his children fully be themselves. And is it possible to surprise God? It was possible to surprise and delight Jesus. And that's how we see God. So I long for not only my own perfection and renovation, and I don't think our perfection will be immediate in terms of a static state. I think God will know exactly what to do to refine us in a way that potentiality isn't destroyed. And I don't know how time works, so I don't know if my Father now has a head start. And then I think about saints who have gone before, and even if you read someone who grew up, Reformed Church of America, went to Eastern Christian, converted to Roman Catholicism, Peter Crave, and even if you read Peter Crave, I mean he put Socrates in heaven. And so, you know, God is going to have everyone there he wants there. Am I speaking universalism? I don't know. But I want to see my Father perfected. Because, you know, I love my Father. He was not a perfect man. Man, again, watch the eulogy I made of him. I want to see my Father perfected. I want to see my Father strong as I remember him when I was a little boy. And I watched the age of decay take his strength. But at the same time, and just as the Apostle Paul says, outwardly he was aging, inwardly he was growing. And I want to know my Father, my grandfather, as my Father knew him as a young man. And I want to know my great grandfather who I never met because he died on my grandfather's wedding night. He had a stroke. And so my grandfather and grandmother's wedding was called off and they had a little private ceremony so that he could be with his Father. And I want to meet Hartog, my great great grandfather, who this crazy Jew who sent his 19 year old son to America to get a start and then pulled some of the rest of the family over with him and, you know, associated with the Dutch Calvinists. What's with that? And, you know, there are some old pictures of Hartog, one as probably a man in his 50s when his son was in his 30s. And then a man in his 70s or 80s and he's this tiny little shrunken gnome of a man standing by. My grandfather who at that point is a man in the full bloom of health in his 20s. And that's just my family. The Christian Gospel affords me the hope and I believe in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, the promise of that world. And someone might say, Ah, VanderKlaai, these are just flights of fancy. All right. Well, modernist, postmodernist, you can't give me an ought that says I ought not indulge in these flights of fancy and I ought not spend my life on encouraging others to join me in loving each other as best we can now because we believe we can love each other. And I haven't even started talking about talking, you know, dealing with Jesus. So, yeah, Kanye is sort of a fool in Peugeotian terms. But I'm not going to go into that. But hey, Kimmy's 40. You know, there's only so much you can do to hold off that age decay. It comes for all of us. And to give us a chance to live in peace and to be able to do that. And I'm not going to play for a 40th birthday party. But hey, Kimmy's 40. You know, there's only so much you can do to hold off that age decay. It comes for all of us. And to give her a birthday present of a hologram of her father, it's a little weird. It's emotional and perhaps welcome, but I'm sure it will make her ache for a real resurrection and to really hold her father's hand and to really touch her father's hair and have him touch hers. And in my opinion, at least in terms of the religions I know, only Christianity makes this offer. And only Christianity has a group of witnesses that say, we ate with him. We were skeptical. We thought he was a ghost and say, hey, Jesus, you know, nosh on a fish. And Thomas, of course, didn't make the meeting and thought the disciples were out of their minds. And Jesus says, put your finger in the holes in my hand. Put your hand in my side. So no, that's the resurrection is why I believe and why I want to believe and the ongoing, you know, and I think about men in my church, my friend Jack DeWitt, just died this last year. I can't drive around California and not think about Jack DeWitt. My friend Neil Hand, who taught me everything I know about AA, who was a wonder of a man, had been an alcoholic, got sober, eventually came back to church, was the classical and opera buyer for tower records in its heyday. When he died, had like 14,000 left his poor widow with 14,000 records and that many CDs and, you know, support for D had no idea what to do with all of that. But Neil was Neil loved Tolkien, loved Lord of the Rings, love taking kids out to movies. He could never let me buy him lunch, even though he he, you know, didn't have any money and everything. And then he'd call me in the middle of the day and it'd be like, Neil, you're trying to run an insurance business. You're trying to shell insurance. And people would call me. People would call him while he was on the phone with me. Hi, this is Neil. I'm on another line. Can I call you back? It's like, Neil, you're supposed to be selling insurance. You got to make money. And no, he was it was he would much rather spend his day talking with me about the kinds of stuff we talk about here. So I. You know, I'm I'm holding on to this resurrection belief and I'm holding on to the church and I'm I'm trying as best I can to convince others that the resurrection is true. And that they that what they can anticipate after the age of decay robs them of life will be so much better than the best thing you know now. And that. Beginning to lean into that right now is the best, most generous way to live right now. It's such a good way. In fact, that we want our neighbors to live this way. So, yeah, good on Kanye. You know, I'll try not to be envious of a family that can have their private birthday and they'll have to take all their ribbing and means that that that produced. But the real resurrection will be a lot better than the hologram. So there's a little free sermon on the resurrection this morning. Anyone want to say any something to that? Pretty much asked it in the vote text chat. If I were to ask anything, it's that. Oh, it's the question that was asked. Did you go away job? Did I go away? No, no, I'm here. I said I typed the question. I said I have so much trouble wrapping my head around what PVK says, because I don't know how that works with our miscarriage. I have to consider things like disembodied intellects and all that. Yeah, and and. Yeah, yeah. And again, there's so much of this. I don't know. And, you know, I can make stuff up. But what what what gives me hope is the character that I have to be. And and. And in many ways, what I then say is, well, sure, I've got ideas, Jesus, of what you should do. But just looking around the glory of this world. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. But just looking around the glory of this world and and looking at, you know, here I try to answer little questions and answers, but Jesus did questions and answers all the time with people. And his words have changed the world. My questions and answers will never be like that. And so just knowing that and seeing that and looking at the creator of the universe. I would say that whatever God does with that job. It will be more and it will be better than you can imagine. Because and why can I say that? Because I've seen the character of Jesus, who is the icon of the invisible God. And so that doesn't answer the questions, but I think it gives us hope. That whatever he does with that loss and that pain. What I see, what I see. You know, so why, why doesn't God just remove suffering? And I think the answer to that is God knows how to make greater joy with suffering. Than the kind of joy we have without it. And I think it's, it's for that reason that. Suffering is allowed. Because the kinds of joy we will experience on the other end of it. Will be deeper because of the suffering. And that can sound pat and shallow and hollow now. Because when you know, when you're in the midst of suffering, all you want is for the pain to end. And in fact, some pain is so hard that we would want it to end even at the cost of our lives. And we imagine that would be a fair exchange. But I think the fact that Jesus doesn't avoid suffering. Or deny suffering. But goes straight into it voluntarily. As the book of Hebrews says. It was for the joy. It was for the joy of what's on the other side. And I think that is something that. If God gives us the grace to experience it. Can be a word of hope. Even if you can't feel it in moments of suffering. So I don't know, Joe, but it's the best I can do. Can I ask something? Sure. On that note, like what you just said. That God can create a much greater joy because of suffering. Would also, what is your take on whether it would have been possible? Like what is your take on the potentiality that God possesses? Do you think that God could have had the potentiality to create. The kind of world that is to come. Without having us gone through this. Not that he was. Again, it kind of boils down to the other thing you were also saying. Which I've also thought about. Like is it possible to surprise God? Or is it possible for God to. So similarly in the same vein as that. Is it possible for God to have a love for two possible potentialities? One potentiality where we didn't have to go through all the suffering. And another potentiality where. Which is the world we live in where we did go through the suffering. So basically that's my question. It's a good question. I tend to. It's been a long time since I've read Alvin Plantinga's book. God, Freedom and Evil. And he sort of makes the best possible words argument. World's argument there. I tend to like that because. Again, it's the sort of. It's the sort of faith a child has in a parent. That the child. The wise child. Sort of understands that the world is too big. And the wise child. We can see in children that they. It comes to a certain point when children realize that dad and mom don't know everyone. And dad and mom don't know everything. And of course that's an important part of growing up into an adult. But I. If I had to. If I had to create a theodicy. It would be that God knows what he's doing. And I believe he knows what he's doing better than I could know. So that's pastorally where I rest. And I think that's the best way to do it. So that's pastorally where I rest. And I think so much of this. Here's where all of the cognitive science that I've learned from. For Vervecky and Peterson comes in. Because the bedrock concept of cognitive science. Is that the world is too big. And too large. For any of our brains to actually. Manage it. And I think that's one of the things about this. A priori structure that Peterson tries to. School Sam Harris on. And what Vervecky continues to show us is that. We do all this paring down of the world so that we can. Actually manage it to the little degree that we do. Well if I am that such being. How on earth can I do the math on. On best of all possible. of all possible worlds. I can't, I just can't. I can't even exhaust the little room I'm sitting in right now, or the, how many, you know, 30, 40, 50 people who are in this chat room right now, and each of your lives. So it's just far beyond me. But, and then let's imagine, I even had the answer to this question. Let's imagine, you know, God part of the heavens, I pulled a Job and, you know, Lord, I'm gonna hold my breath till you come down here and you justify yourself. I think the reason God gives Job the answer he gives is, if I were to write it down for you, Job, could you understand it? Tim Keller has this great illustration of a sheep farmer, and maybe Sherry can flesh this out where they were dipping the sheep. Why are they dipping the sheep? They're dipping the sheep because I suppose they're dipping them in some kind of solution that keeps them from getting ticks and parasites and things on their skin. And so, you know, they have the sheep bound and the sheep kind of looks up at the shepherd like, what the hell are you doing to me? And if you've been a parent, there are moments like that with your kids when you're, you know, I remember my youngest and taking him into the doctors for, you know, I'm gonna take him into the doctors. He's already looking around. You have all these nice pictures on the walls and everyone's so friendly. And there's a beautiful fish tank in the lobby and there's books and there's Disney on the TV. Then you go into this little room and in comes this woman with a needle that's like an inch long and she's coming at me. He looks up at me with those big eyes like, are you gonna let this happen? Yep, I am. She's gonna stick it in your arm and you're gonna hurt. And the little flowers on top of that band-aid aren't gonna make it not hurt. And in we go. And so, I don't know. I don't know a rule. That's the best I got. Thank you. Anyone else? What about the continuity issue in eternity with personalities? Yeah, that's a huge issue. I think about that a lot. I don't know. I don't know. I mean, how? Go ahead. Oh, no, yeah. I was just thinking about just with the issues with like miscarriages, people's lives being cut short, but then the eternity involved. And yeah. But I mean, given the nature of spirit and the difference between human spirit and God's spirit. Yeah, that's a deep mystery. It is. It certainly is. Okay, anyone else? Otherwise, I'll go on to the next. All right, Josh. Hang on, Paul. Oh, sorry. I just wanted to add one little thing to that sheep analogy about the dip thing. What's interesting about sheep is once they've had the experience and they realize that the shepherd is looking after them, the next time they get into a scary place, they trust. Really? Mm-hmm. Wow. See, it's that kind of knowledge that a urban pastor like me doesn't have, but the Bible is just assumes some of that. Right. And if I contrast that with a goat, the goat will never think you have a better idea than they do. Really? Yes. Oh, wow. That just adds layers to the parable of the sheep and the goats. It does. It does. Yeah. That actually also ties into that whole issue about apologetics too with the sheep at least, the sheep hearing a voice, and then just the nature of faith like a child. Unless you come to me like these children, then whatever the Matthew 18 thing says. And about sheep knowing your voice, I bought some sheep from a lady and they didn't know my voice, and I would call them and they would ignore me. And then they came to know my voice. And I thought of that scripture a lot when it was happening because I was trying to teach them to come when I called them, right? And I thought, oh no, they're not gonna know, they're never gonna come, right? Maybe that's how sheep are because I was new to sheep at the time. And no, they learned it. And now when I call, they come. Wow. Yeah. Wow. That's cool. That's cool. I'm gonna have to call up Sherry every time I have a sermon on it that has to deal with sheep and goats now. Yeah. That's really helpful. Yeah. Yeah, it's been a learning experience, both as a farmer and as a Christian having both animals. Wow. Oh, that's cool. All right. Okay, Josh, October 30, 2020, before the election. I would like to hear some thoughts regarding architecture and art in the Protestant churches especially. You're probably not gonna get them from me. I recently realized the church we have been attending for about two years looks like a local fire station or public safety building. I was just turned on to Hans Ruckmacher. Ooh, you've been talking to Bernd Powers because Bernd Powers was a big fan of Hans the other day. And question he asked, how can you say modern art is ugly when you worship in a building that looks like this? If there's a connection between truth and beauty, it seems to undermine credibility when claiming the truth is being preached, but it's being done in a place lacking beauty. Also, it seems not likely to draw people to show up in a place that only seems there to prepare you to put out hellfire in the world, hence being designed like a fire station. That's a great question. I wish I had a great answer and I don't. Yeah, there are people who really work on this stuff. Any thoughts I have are pretty shallow. I think it could be, the Plain Meeting House arose in the Reformation, I think partly because, well, there's probably a lot of reasons behind it. They didn't want to distract from the word. It's sort of like the problem of in Protestant worship services, if you have a really good worship leader, as we call them, and then kind of a stinky preacher, even Rick Warren talks about the fact that his church didn't really blow up and grow big until they had a really popular worship leader who could just lead the kinds of singing and songs that people really came for. And it's not unusual in a lot of churches that the sermon is a letdown because the worship is so hot. So there's lots to this. And I would say, look around for someone who can answer the question of this and work on it. At the same time, I'm from an iconoclastic tradition. And I think there is something, I think about Eric Little, who was the sprinter that the movie, the Charitaphire was made of, and the prison camp that he was in. Now, if you talk about an ugly setting, ugly can be architecture, but ugly can also be human. And there is something about a saint that shines in the midst of squalor. And so, here's the thing about God. I think he can be so humble because he just keeps winning. And so, yeah, it's great questions. I inherited this worship space, and I, for the most part, let the people of God do with it as they choose. I don't get involved much in managing music or decor or any of this. The only thing that I actually did here was I moved the baptismal font from kind of the side of the stage over into the entryway so people could see it when they'd come in, just because I think I don't want it ignored. And the pulpit and communion table and baptismal font were made by a former member of the church, and he did a beautiful job on them. So, I want people to enjoy that giftedness and that craftsmanship. But yeah, there are people that can answer a question like this, but it's probably not me. Okay, Paul, does the abandonment of supersessionism by the majority of Protestants post-World War II lead to issues regarding the position of Christianity as the true religion or even the necessity of Christ for salvation? If so, why are these issues almost never addressed? What is your position on issues like supersessionism or dual covenant theology? So many of these questions I can't answer well. And I just have just a shallow take on them. But I see the issue that you're raising here, and it's an important one because there's a fork in, there's a fork in the road of the people of God that happens at the time of Christ and really gets solidified with the destruction of the second temple. And I was, just had a pickup conversation with Jacob a couple of days ago and about the rabbinic Judaism and Christianity. They both come from the same root. And so, I think the supersessionism, I think sort of the racist offense of that position, which I think became noticeable because of the atrocity done to the Jews by the Nazis. Yeah. Part of the problem with supersessionism is that it also is a historical reading back of what we would call Judaism back onto the Old Testament, which it isn't. And so in that way, sort of Judaism and Christianity sort of fight over the Old Testament, but that's a function of the branch. So, the tussle is very evident in New Testament books. It's very evident in the Apostle Paul, who of course Jacob has no love for. I know it might sound offensive to you people, but I don't know what's wrong with me, but I love hearing Jacob just speak honestly about his thoughts on that. And I wish I were better equipped to engage with him with those debates, because of course Jacob thinks the Apostle Paul was a charlatan, and Jesus, he can identify with and read and respect. And so, this is a real issue. And so then when you get to things like, gosh, Romans 9 through 11, which of course becomes big versus for Calvinists, certain kinds of Calvinists, big chapters, and the Apostle Paul seems to say that, this other branch isn't going away. Boy, is he right, because we would imagine Judaism to go away. I mean, after how many attempts to not only squash it, but kill its people, it endures. And to me, you're looking around for evidence of the existence of God, look no further. There it is. God wants this people to be in the conversation right now. And so I grow listening to Jacob with his mastery of the Hebrew language and his love for ancient languages and his openness to read the Christian Greek Bible. And so, God seems to be allowing these two branches to stick around. And there are hints in the Apostle Paul that, at some point that rupture may be healed. Oh, and so now knowing, it's just weird, but now knowing my own Jewishness, at least in my genetic family tree and possibly in our manner somehow. So part of me really connects with that. And so I'm absolutely delighted that Jacob has blessed us with his presence and his dogged determination to speak his truth about the Apostle Paul and the Discord server. I absolutely love that. And so, again, with all other questions we can't answer, I think at the resolution of this chapter of God's great story, could it be that somehow the followers of Jesus and the followers of the Pharisees will come together? Now, again, I'm a Christian, so Philippians too, at the name of Jesus, every knee will bow and every tongue declare. But I want to avoid being needlessly offensive. And so I might sound all woke-ish in that, hey, I wanna listen to Jacob and I wanna respect him. And yeah, we're gonna have our differences, but let's build the platform of mutual respect and love and generosity, which is what I really see John Verwaking trying to build, and then let's talk together. Because just like I learned a minute ago from Sherry about sheep, I can learn a ton from listening to Jacob about what he reads when he reads the New Testament and what I'm missing when I read the Old. But understanding that these are two branches from the same root, and we're all waiting for the reconciliation of all things. Does that make me sound like a universalist? I don't know. But there we are, so. Yeah, I think what happened to Protestants post-World War II was a call to confession of what the Christian church has done to its historical adversaries all the way back to the Book of Acts. And when Jesus says, love your neighbor, all the way up to and including your enemy, that includes Judaism and the Jewish people, those who are not converted. So there it is. The same marching orders apply. So let's be Christians with Jews just like we do with everyone else. Anti-Semitism to me, again, just makes no sense. It's a terribly sad, sad thing. So anyone wanna comment on that? Just that the issue with the Jewish identity seems tied to, again, the whole nature of identity in the eternal, given that we are changing in ways, yet we also have our solidity. Tom Holland in that, we had a little live, I love the watch parties. Gosh, this Discord server is really addictive. But I love the watch parties. And we had fun watching Tom Holland's talk. And one of the new things Tom Holland came out with, which I thought was really astounding was that the creation of the secular transformed at least, certainly transformed Christian identity and Christian's view of Jews. Now there's someone with a different religion and Christian's views of Muslims and Christian's views in the sense created Hinduism. And so then you apply that to this conversation. And wow, and this is, again, this is why I believe in the age to come. And this is why I believe in the resurrection what we are, every day an idea or an aspect of this amazing glory-filled world is presented to me that I pause and think, if I spent, let's say my father died at 77, I'm 57. So let's say I have another 20 years left. If I spent every day, every waking minute of the next 20 years devoting myself just to this one issue, I couldn't exhaust it. Glory like that almost demands an age to come where just as CS Lewis showed in the last battle, there's a true Narnia. And in a sense we can, and my pastor Dave Bealan from Grand Rapids who's retired now said some, I think he was getting this from Lewis too because so many of us are Lewis fans, but will there be an aspect of time travel in the age to come whereby we can somehow revisit? And I don't know, and improve. And part of what's sort of fueling our imaginations is some of the things that we're realizing electronically. And that's just, and saying, wow, what if, what if we could do this? So yeah, it's, I don't know, I don't know. I again, I believe to be a Christian is to believe to be a radical optimist and to believe that the story of this world will not only end well, but will produce all of the suffering in this world will produce a harvest of joy and glory that will not only merely justify, but make us, you know, make us want more, not of the suffering, but of the redemption. And this is, I think the epithumia that the apostle Paul talks about, that the angels, the apostle Paul kind of hints that the angels envy us in a way, maybe that's the cause of the fall of some of the angels, I don't know, but they envy us in a way because we, by virtue of our limitation and even perhaps some of our fallenness can partake in the kind of glory that because of their lack of rebellion, they will never have 4P knowledge of. And it's like, wow, could an idea be that good? Could there be a God that could pull off such a thing for this world? That's where I'm placing my bets. So that's why I'm a Christian. All right, hey Paul, iron turtle, iron turtle. David here, I don't know which David. Does relevance realization or the machinery thereof manifest itself as moral intuition and interest? Well, that's a good question, I think probably. As a follow-up, isn't that phenomenologically and functionally equivalent to Peterson's notion of our guiding sense of meaning? Yeah, I think there's, you know, gosh, do I ever wanna see Vervecky and Peterson talk again? The one conversation that we have on YouTube of them talking was a good one. And I was just thinking this morning when I was sitting in the dentist chair, I was just thinking this morning about the old Jordan who wasn't always looking over his shoulder because some major news organization or some social giant was gonna clobber him for saying enforced monogamy or something like that. The old Jordan who was playful and free and could do as he wanted. But I still think relevance realization is sort of a black box. I don't think that's a bad thing. I think that's the part of the moreness of it. But I think it's deeply connected with, it's obviously deeply connected with agency and also personhood. And I think, you know, the one thing I didn't, I wanted to go into more with the conversation with John Vervecky and JP was this question between cause and reason, but I'm gonna have to learn a whole lot more before I could really engage John with something like that because I'm way out of my depths in some of these things when I talk to him. But there's something weird going on in the world in terms of our agency. And this relevance realization, there is sort of a machinery and I can understand it sort of mechanistically in some ways. But when it comes to group B things, persons, agents, those types of things, it's sort of black box-ish and sort of this reason, capital R reason as Lewis writes in miracles, that is manifest in colonizing us when we're doing it. So yeah, it's a good question. I don't know, Iron Turtle, you're in the room. I don't know if you have the freedom or the desire to follow up in any way. But I think that's the question. I think that's the question. I think that's the question. All right, we'll continue. Have you talked about the abortion ban in Poland? No, I don't know anything about it. So I'll leave that. And that's another cool thing about this Discord server. I mean, all the Europeans and Canadians and Aussies, too bad about the time change in Aussie. I know they miss out sometimes, but I've grown to love, well, made friends in Australia because of the trip and grown to love some things about Australia. So I hope to get back there. I know Warren Mills wants me back, but of course COVID will have to be sorted out. So I don't know anything about the abortion ban in Poland. Inquiry from San Pablo de la Santo Sacramento. What anti-right book did you once recommend to Jordan Peterson? I recommended all of his books. And I think Jordan told me when he came to Sacramento and a very generous contributor bought me a VIP ticket. And I told him, hey, I got 30 seconds with Jordan Peterson, gotta make it count. And so I said, hey, read and he write. And he says, I have his books on my shelf. Hey Jordan, you're gonna have to slow down and do some reading. So I wanted him to read. Now I remember what I want. I wanted him to read the resurrection of the son of God and his book on the resurrection. Because again, I also wanted Jordan to read miracles because again, I really do believe the resurrection of Jesus Christ is, all this other philosophical stuff we talk about. The resurrection of Jesus Christ is the thing. It's the thing in Christianity that makes me a Christian. That changes, that makes Christianity in my opinion, different from every other religion. And so I don't think you can really get Christianity without understanding at least how the resurrection plays in this. All this other stuff, you've got big overlaps with other religions in other ways. But when it comes to the resurrection and incarnation, life, crucifixion, resurrection, ascension, second coming, that whole core of the story, it's right, that core of the story is the kernel, is the seed of Christianity out of which everything else grows. That is the revelation. That is the thing. It's not just the ideas because ideas that are not, are not rooted in the earth. And that's the thing that the resurrection does. It's not that we go off to have nice experiences after we die, it's that heaven and earth are finally joined. So I recommended the book on the resurrection. Every time Peterson did an event, he would leave there with an armful of books. People were giving him books all the time. He could start his own bookstore, I'm sure. So, early on when I first heard about Peterson, I wanted, I was gonna get on Amazon and just send him a copy of Miracles. This is actually in some ways how the channel started. So I was really excited about Peterson. I listened to him talk and I thought, I want him to read C.S. Lewis' book, C.S. Lewis' book, Miracles. I'm gonna send it to him. And I paused and I thought, wait a minute, he's not even gonna see it. How can I get Jordan Peterson to read C.S. Lewis' book, Miracles? And hey, I'm from New Jersey, I've got a big nose. It's like, I gotta be a little bit of an asshole here. I'm gonna start making video commentaries on Jordan Peterson and I'm gonna make some noise. And I'm gonna make enough noise that I'll get to the point that he's gonna have to pay attention. And I didn't realize just how big Jordan Peterson would get or just how busy or messy his life would be. But that's in some ways how my channel started because you see me poking at the Weinstein brothers. Some of that's intentional because there's lots of ways to ignore people and sometimes someone can be an asshole enough or a troll enough and okay, all right. So now I got your attention, well, let's talk. So yeah, I do that sometimes, I play those games. So I wanted him to read the book on the resurrection. Fairly simple, similar to Maps of Meaning, and that it's fat. Well, the NT Wright's book on the resurrection is a lot easier to read, it's a lot more history. And again, the IDW needs more history. They need a more competent grasp of history, which is why Tom Holland is so important in this conversation. I'd like to read it through, given the length of his scholarly work, I'm sure it'll take a degree. So yeah, it's also the New Testament and the people of God, the first. So NT Wright has his scholarship level books, his Magnum Opus, the big four series, they're actually huge books, that's his academic stuff. And then he has middle brow books, which are in the middle. And then he has popular books like New Testament for Everyone, this commentary series, that's on the bottom. And so the commentary series is very readable, How to Understand the New Testament from NT Wright's point of view. Then the middle brow books, I have so many of his books. The middle brow books are, here it is, this book on eschatology, oh, you can't see me, I keep forgetting, Surprised by Hope by NT Wright, Rethinking Heaven, the Resurrection, and the Mission of the Church. I don't agree with NT Wright on everything, especially in terms of emphasis of some of these things. Simply Jesus, so he's got those middle brow books, and then he's got his academic books. But the New Testament to the people of God goes in, what is the story? So it's really prologue and some of that stuff. So he is, right now in terms of evangelical Christianity, he's up there on the list in terms of most important New Testament scholars. But scholarship is sort of a blood sport, so there'll be lots of disagreement. Any follow up or questions, or anybody wanna pick on that a little bit? All right, I'll keep going. Grim Grizz, in the Stefan Moll and You Got Deplatformed video, conversation with Adam, he said, OCD makes you blaspheme the Holy Spirit, and you laughed and agreed. Would you please explain? It's because I spend time with people who have OCD. And so here's the thing about someone, if you've ever watched Monk, the TV show about the detective with OCD, if you've spent enough time with someone with OCD, and you walk into a room, and you kind of know what their fixations are, you can bet what they're gonna grab onto and get obsessed over. Ah. Gosh, I wanna tell stories, but many of these people are live, and one or two of them might hear this, so I'm going to refrain and be a good pastor. But you get to know what they get fixated on. So you're reading along in the New Testament, and you hear about an unforgivable sin. Anybody with even a little OCD is gonna look at that and say, uh-oh, have I done it? Have I done it? Have I done it? Then they're gonna think about it, and then they're gonna think about it, and the more they think about it, they're gonna do it in their mind. That the words, what would blasphemy of the Holy Spirit sound like? What would be those words? And then they think the words, and oh gosh, I thought the words. Is that enough? And then they're gonna say the words, oh gosh, I've said the words, is that? I mean, it's just going to happen. It's just what OCD is and does. And to think that God is just waiting up there to damn everyone with OCD? No, no, no. So that's, it's like, oh, oh, there's a, I watched Silicon Valley, the HBO series, and so the Richard, the kind of the protagonist of the show has this thing about this one girl in high school, and whenever the girl comes up, he can't not think about the girl and then talk about the girl and get defensive about something the girl said. It just goes on and on and on and on and on and on. We're that way. If I tell you don't think about the white rabbit, whatever you do, don't think about the white rabbit. Now, please, please avoid thinking about the white rabbit. Certain number of you, you somewhere later on today, you're gonna think about that darn white rabbit. That's just how we're wired. So that's what I mean. Let's see, Grim, you in the group here? I don't see you. So, yeah, anybody wanna follow up on that? Anybody identify with this? Maybe I'm more OCD than the rest of you. All right, November 4th. All right, we're into November. Did the sixth century BC kingdom of Judah deserve the exile it was harshly cast into? How should I know? What I know of it, I know of it by reading the Bible. The chronicler certainly thought so. I assume he had more information than I did. So the Hebrew prophets certainly thought so. Well, I'm gonna sit here in the 21st century and say, no, it was wrong. So sorry. I don't know, Clepa, if you're in the room, a follow-up, did Canaan as well as the other great empires present in the Old Testament deserve the violent and merciful judgment it received? How am I gonna do that math? Deserve according to what scale? So that's, those are, you know, I don't know how we can answer those questions. All right, Max of Meaning. Great name. Suppose it's true that global elites worship the Canaanite god Molech through effigy burning rituals at the Bohemian Grove. I think it was Andrea that asked about that the other day. Does this type of worship work? Ah, can it be said that the power still exists in the same spirit as antiquity, asking for a friend? Ha! Oh, I love this question, because this gets into all of my videos about spirit. What are they doing when they're worshiping that big owl? What are the, what spirits are they creating? You know, when I use the example of school spirit, I'm, does it work? Yeah, it works. Well, what does it do? Well, that's a lot harder to say. It's worked enough to prompt this at some random Discord server in the middle of question and answer thing. What, you know, this is, if C.S. Lewis was a firm believer in the idea that what we do matters, and that we are spiritual agents. And again, you're high school principal or teacher or football star or cheerleader or nerd. You're contributing to school spirit. It might be a small contribution. You might not notice the outcomes, but you are shaping the hearts and minds of generations of people beyond you. Now, there's so much shaping going on, and human beings are such followers. We're such sheep sometimes, and sometimes such goats. Oh gosh, Jerry, boy, what a gift you gave me. Yeah, it works, but what do we think of as working? See, again, so much is, so in my, again, I thought the conversation with Vervecky and with JP was so excellent because they asked the question of kind or degree. And, you know, those are always really hard questions to answer, but what C.S. Lewis does in miracles is basically narrow the gulf between natural and supernatural, and again, I'm a skeptic of the supernatural in some ways. Oh, what do I mean by that? Well, didn't I tell John Vervecky that I believe that humanity without rebellion might have the capacity to walk on water, and that this is a capacity we have lost? That just sounds crazy. I mean, just look at his face when I told him that. It's just kind of like, oh crap, why am I talking to our Christian minister who believes this stuff? And believe that Jesus walked out of the grave, you know? Sam Harris backs Jordan Peterson down into, almost certainly not, and if I had been on stage, I'd say, nice job of bullying here, Sam. You know, how do you know? And for goodness sakes. So, yeah, this stuff works, but what does it do? Has that reverberated through the halls of power in American politics and shaped our world in ways we have absolutely no understanding of? You know, the Christian Reformed Church had a ban on you couldn't become a member of the Christian Reformed Church if you were a Freemason, and that was one of the big divisions between us and the Reformed Church of America, and because the Freemasons are nowhere near what they used to be, we sort of snicker at it now, but there was something in that ban that said, you know, your little secret rights, and all of this, what you're doing, there's a reality to that that ought not to be too readily dismissed, and I know that when I talk about spirit in this way, some people get nervous that I'm somehow reducing its ontology, I do not believe in any way, shape, or form that I am reducing its ontology, and I very much believe that there are older and stronger and very relevant spirits that are at work in this world, and that some of the spirits that we manifest and get involved in today are not necessarily so much coming from us, and so that's where, hey, let's give Frank Peretti his due, and only some of you will know who Frank Peretti is, but Paul Ann Leitner knows who Frank Peretti is, and probably Nick Freerillian knows who Frank Peretti is, Read This Present Darkness, it's a fun read, I remember reading that book for the first time, and it was like, wow, this is such a, that Frank Peretti's This Present Darkness, write it down, it just, that book will screw with your brain if you've been raised a Christian, and it's kind of a fun screwing, so, but yeah, this stuff works, but what does it do? Well, I don't think we know real well, but that's sort of the woo here, so asking for a friend, well, there you go, it's recorded. All right, can't look at the chat room, or I will laugh and get distracted, and it'll trigger my inner, yeah, yeah, Rick's scrolling it in front of me, it'll trigger my inner troll, all right, Jack Susa, oh, anybody wanna say anything about Molek or any of the, I've been, last week I just went on a tear on spirit stuff, I don't know if that made any sense to anybody. Could you be kind and write that book recommendation down, so I could search for it later? Oh, okay. Just write the author or the title in the chat, and I'll be really happy. Hey, you know, if I can make you happy that easily, that's really something to do, Frank Peretti, P-E-R-E-T-T-I, we wrote children's books too, unseen realm, well, David, Michael Heisner's book comes up with that, let me see, oh, this present darkness piercing the darkness, oh baby, there's a three book set for $18, let me, I'll just drop that in the chat room. There it is, Frank Peretti. And again, they're wild books because they're, so there's people down below, but there's like these angels and it's like that, in the 80s, it's like that Carmen song, The Champion, and it's all in that line of stuff, and I don't know, is it, are there problems with it, theologically and philosophically, yes. Is it fun? Yeah. Let's not be too uptight with ourselves. I know, is Nick in the chat room? I don't see him. All right, because I think Pentecostals are awesome. So many of us who are not Pentecostals, we're just kind of mousy, and so Bill Johnson and Bethel, hey, good on you to have some boldness. Now, I think there's other issues there, but hey, the church could use a little boldness. All right, Paul, are you familiar with the journalist Chris Hedges? Yeah, I read his book about war a few years, quite a few years ago. I haven't followed him very, very much, but he is a progressive critic of American empire like Mike Taibbi, yep. Also a Christian and deeply moral man, yeah. He believes that the moral rot and decay of the elites is what gives rise to a figure like Trump. I think he's right. But also that a person like Biden, who is deeply a part of the systematic corruption and corporate pillaging of America, won't do much of anything to ameliorate the suffering of the Americans poor. I agree completely. Thanks, you're welcome. Also his suggested reading list, very similar to Jordan Peterson's Dostoevsky, Solzhenitsyn, Orwell books. Books of his I would recommend that I thought of watching your interview with Chris Arnotti, our America, the Farewell Tour and the Days of Destruction, Days of Revolt. No, I like Chris Hedges. And that's where this whole YouTube experience has been weird because politically, me and the Weinsteins, I'm there in some ways. And with Chris Hedges, I mean, Chris Hedges is kind of playing on all your houses. I don't have any more confidence in the Democrats than I do the Republicans. But then what do you do? Maybe try to be the change. And that's again, part of why I always say I'm a religious believer and a political skeptic. You're all, I don't believe in the resurrection. Oh, okay, well, I don't believe in Republicans or Democrats. I don't believe in human beings to manage and run the world well. So there's my politics. But vote we must and who did I vote for? Who did I vote for? Where is he? I'm gonna run, don't give a troll something to tease you with. I mean, that's just dealing with trolls 101 because nothing trolls like to troll is to tease. And I love teasing. It's probably an unchristian habit of mine. Okay, anybody else? Any other Chris Hedges fans or Chris Hedges haters in this group? Nope, we might get through all our questions. Maybe that should make a goal. It's 1144, I've been having so much fun. How the time has flown. All right, hey Paul, hey Nick. My former non-denominational pastor posted this to Facebook and it caught my eye. Peacekeepers call for compromise, but peacemakers are willing to call out racism, sexism, classism and every other oppression, oppressive ism, even when it makes people uncomfortable. Oh, okay, that's probably true. This calling out business, there's certainly some truth to it. Jesus called out, prophets called out, but you gotta be really careful if you wanna be a prophet. And I see a lot of shallow prophetism out there in this. Oh, I'm calling out. Oh, okay, good. Why don't you, to throw back one of the cliches at you, why don't you be the change? And what's so disturbing to me about so much of the so-called prophetic talk today, I watched people in the 60s and 70s actually put skin in the game instead of what I see today. And I don't mean going and holding a sign or putting your fist in the air or looting or burning. No, I mean taking years of your life to devote it to loving and caring for an impoverished community and trying in a very daily, day by day, item by item basis, trying to make that poor community better. You wanna be the change? Start there. Start with an individual, start with a family, live in a neighborhood, be downwardly mobile instead of upwardly mobile and pour your life into trying to help the poor. And what you will discover is that a lot of these political slogans are a load of crap and that to actually try and help somebody is one of the hardest thing in the world. And it's going to involve, sure, systems of oppressions. All of those are going to be there blocking them, but there'll be plenty of internal work that's going to have to happen too. And that's why I look at so many of these movements and I have no patience for them because I think Orwell's critique is dead on. And I think Peterson nailed it too, because if you really wanna help somebody who's poor, then help someone who's poor. Get involved in their life, commit to them. And you will have an exploration of not only, yeah, you'll get to know your own privilege. Yeah, it'll become painfully obvious to you. But the bonds that are both internal and external, we're not lacking in bonds in this world. So yeah, a lot of that sloganing is easily, there's truth to it. I don't wanna stick my finger in the eye of your former non-denominational pastor, but why don't you throw away your Facebook account and move into a neighborhood and work with a family or a community and see if you can make their life in some small degree or another a little bit better and then come tell me what you've learned. That's how I feel about this stuff. Sorry about that. Now I'm doing a Jonathan Peugeot. Jordan Peterson, people like ranchers. So anyway, what's your favorite letter by Paul and why? Which ones are really by Paul? Doom, doom, doom, doom. I, this might not, Jacob might not like this, but I love the book of Philemon. And I think I'm gonna have to think about what Jacob had to say to me about the book of Philemon, but I think it's an astounding book, the way Paul says, all right, here's Onesimus and he's over by me. And he's become a Christian. So Philemon, now he's your brother. And I think he should go back to you because who knows the circumstances under which he fled his slavery, but he wronged you and he should go and he should make amends to you. But Mr. Philemon, he is now a brother in Christ and you have to deal with that. Wow. You know, and when I, just as a pastor, knowing how complex people are in terms of the things that build up between them, restoring bonds, dealing with asymmetries of class, or power, this stuff is so hard, but it's so real. And this is why I say, I see so much cheap sloganing out there, because if you actually get involved, and this is what I love about Chris Arnotti's story and his book, and I love it even more after talking to him because I can completely relate to that. And I think that's the way that he's been, I'm talking to him because I can completely, so he, you know, what's his story? He grows up, first of all, and that's part of the story I didn't fully appreciate. He grows up in Jim Crow, Florida. His father understands a little bit about racism, having been a Jew who had to leave. And, you know, again, read Timothy Snyder's Black Earth and Bloodlands about what it meant to live in Poland in the early part of the 20th century. Americans whine, but oh my goodness. I mean, the Poles, oh. And then a Polish Jew, even worse. And so first goes to South America, and then winds up in a little, you know, just looking for a job, he's an academic, he's a book guy. And so, you know, goes to a Jim Crow town in Florida, and, you know, hey, American slavery, that's not on his docket, but sees the blacks and the Mexicans and the whites, and it's like, oh, this is stupid. The games you all are playing out with each other, and, you know, helps start an NAACP chapter there in the town, and of course, little Chris growing up in this, like I, growing up Stan's son in Patterson, yeah, I'm down, I'm in, and then Chris gets to sort of be the racial reconciler in his high school. Oh, there's an awkward situation, and, you know, the stupid gym teacher lets the team split up black and white, but again, we have a lovely woman in this church named Marshall Mitchell who grew up in all of that, and, you know, my kids used to have a high school assignment where they had to talk to someone who grew up in like the Jim Crow South, and I always send them to Marshall because Marshall is such a storyteller, but when you listen to the real life, it's way more complex than just these propagandistic views now from 50 years later, that's how life always is. So Chris Arnotti grows up there, and then, you know, has a crappy high school education because the school is crap, and then goes to college, and son of a God, he's good at math, and then goes to Johns Hopkins studying, you know, physics, and, oh, but he's not the top tier, so he's never gonna be that kind of physicist, so then goes to Wall Street and makes money, but he's not really into money, but he's sort of fascinated about all the other, I mean, when I talk to Chris Arnotti, I see a lot of my story in his too, but he's fascinated by the other cultural groups, and so he starts walking around New York City because it's a smorgasbord of cultural groups, of course, I grew up just outside of New York City, and it was there too, it's just a smorgasbord of it, and then, you know, Hunt's point starts to take his camera, and when he just, you know, I knew exactly what he's talking about, taking his camera, because that was my father had his camera when he'd go to day camp, and all the kids would take my picture, take my picture, my father couldn't walk around Patterson with a camera and not have people begging to have their picture taken, and they'd never see the picture taken, it was just sort of a way of saying, hey, I want to be seen, I'm important, in this world I'm a nobody, but if you stop and take my picture, that's something, and so I totally believe that Arnotti says, he's getting crap from people, but why didn't you put my picture in your book? And then he gets involved in the people's lives, and he tries to help, and he's got, you know, all these different ways of helping, and then he gets to the point of saying, I can't do it anymore, he's just getting submerged by it, and I think, okay, but I grew up watching my father do this, and we had a community around us, and it was a whole different thing, but in some ways, and I didn't talk about this with him, my story in the DR is like his story, because part of why I left the DR was, I couldn't take it anymore, I couldn't, I, unlike Patterson, I was far more distant from the Haitians than I was from the people in Patterson, or here in the people in Sacramento, and I just felt so inept, and watching their suffering, it was just crushing, and so, yeah, you wanna save the world, pick a person in trouble, if racism, you know, someone of a different race, enter into a relationship with that person, move into a neighborhood, and devote your life to, to trying to make their life a little better, and you will begin to discover, yeah, you'll get in touch with your own privilege, yeah, you'll get in touch with your own racism, and you'll begin to see some of theirs, and you'll begin to see that, yeah, there are structures and systems, and structural racism, and these things out there that really inhibit some of them from doing some things, but there are also some advantages, especially now, that their race is giving them, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and it doesn't end, because it's way more complex, and that if you actually want to help somebody do a little better, it's enormously difficult, and the fact that my father spent, again, listen to the eulogy that I gave for my father, he spent 36 years in Patterson trying to make it better, and when I went back in 2013, it wasn't renovated like Brooklyn, and Manhattan, and Queens, and certain elements just around New York City, Patterson was, in fact, more decayed than when I left it, and you might say, well, did my father make a difference? Yeah, he made a difference, he made a difference, but we still live in the age of decay, so I don't know that we will know the difference my father made until we get into the age to come. Paul, what's the funniest aspect of the election cycle? The memes on the Bridges of Meming Discord, I've loved it, and the memes and the election memes, that's the funniest aspect for me. You guys made this whole election nightmare fun for me, and so, because you're not taking it too seriously, there's political diversity, there's European and Canadian perspectives, there's Asian perspectives, there's Australian perspectives, I love it, you guys have made it what was kind of a crappy situation, you guys have brought joy to my life, so that's what's been fun. Oh, Eric, you might even get your question in, it's 1157, here we go, regarding Nick D's question, how much of the issue about call-outs and judgments are complicated and derailed by conflating judging and sentencing? Yeah, that's, yep, yep, yep, yep, yep, excellent comment. And you have that, you know, krin, which is the Greek word for judge not that you be not judged, the lexical range of that word is discernment, and it's also condemnation, and I think when Jesus says, judge not that you be not judged, he's saying condemn not that you be not condemned, because other places he leads us to and invites us to discern, so that's right, we have to use our judgment and languages, language is imperfect, we can call out for help to correct our brothers and sisters, but we aren't at all called, you see, part of the problem is that it's seldom, especially in our context, it's seldom productive to just simply call someone a racist, what you usually set up is you trigger their defensiveness and nothing will happen, do you really want to influence a person? Love them, if I had hair left, I'd pull it out, okay, so you've got a bigot or a racist, you want them to mend their ways, love them, because people don't care how much you know until they know how much you love, it's so stupid, and I see churches doing this and I think, have you forgotten? Do you know, have you learned nothing from Christianity? Have you never met a human being? Don't you know how human beings change? And that's where Davis, the guy who did that show on, the black guy who was loaning his bus to the church, did that show on the black guy who was loaning his bus to the KKK, Daryl Davis, you want to rescue someone from the Klan, real white supremacists, the real article, befriend them, get to know them, deconstruct their facile stereotypes of what a black man is by letting them see you close up, you want to fight racism, try that way, because getting in someone's face is mostly just personal selfishness, because you feel better about yourself, because you've built it on self-righteousness, so you want to fight racism, love someone who's different from you. That's what the incarnation is about. All right, it's 12 o'clock. I'll ask Rick to end the recording.