https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3puz1KXcBpw

 you you on Bang we're live streaming It is Friday morning. This is our usual time usual place at the bridges of meaning Discord server if you are seeing this on YouTube live right now YouTube streaming I'm not looking at the YouTube comments. I know this is different from how YouTube usually works But I'm not even looking at the comments. So go ahead and free, you know, you know have your comments together Rick is reading them actually but I'm not looking at them and Rick will just keep dropping a link into that to encourage you to come over to the bridges of meaning discord server and part of the reason I do the question and answer in this way is because I like having some back-and-forth with the people and not just reading a question and responding to it and So if you want to engage in the conversation, come on over to the server. You can always drop your Question into the text section questions for PVK. I They folks have been figuring out the system and keep putting questions in and so I'm actually going to start with the backlog and Even if you put a question in today, we might not get to your question. Maybe I should try to be more succinct I don't know but but we usually intersperse it with Questions from the voice chat or follow-ups from the voice chat So that's what we've been doing for a while we did we have also this thing we call randomizing randos that we do from time to time, which is Which is you know a sort of a panel discussion about things and the last one we did that was that was excellent I learned so much where we're talking about Pentecostalism and miracles and orthodoxy and symbolism That was really a terrific conversation So I'm looking forward to doing more of those We do those sometimes and we do this sometimes and this is sort of an easy thing to do which is just Don't need a lot of setup. It's sort of easy to do. So thanks for joining us if you're watching on YouTube again Rick put in a link to the discord server and you can join us there and You might get a chance if you have a question audible question You'd like to ask you can there probably be a time in the next two hours to do this We usually take about two hours to do this and here we go so dark rider 9876 and I'm all the way back on November 20 2020 Rick usually you got to scroll back Rick Rick sort of tries to see now he's Poor Ricky sees he's only one guy and some of you don't even Don't even believe he exists All right dark rider 9876 asks any advice for walking the fine line between getting sucked into bullshit and being open to others other ideas Thinking fast and slow time is your friend You know, this is this is part of the reason that we should be a little bit more gentle and merciful with people who give bad answers because Minds change ideas change To be human means to get sucked into bullshit and bull amusing bullshit and the vervec in way To be human means to be fooled to have a bad idea to try something in and Get get it wrong and so we should continue to Work through our thinking listen to people. I mean, it's all the same advice about Becoming a good human being be gentle be patient be humble be open But also but don't be flying in the wind be resolute Figure out what are some things that you're going to keep and what are some things that you're going to be flexible on? And keep that list of things that that you're that you're really committed to Of a reasonable size and be open to others understand That you and other people are not the same thing have good boundaries And I think those types of things are really helpful for navigating in the world, but now Understand what kind of a world we live in None of this will necessarily save your life or keep you from getting coveted or a heart attack or Die at the hands of an idiot or a car accident This world is by its definition I think I think watch some people that you think are doing this well and learn from them, so That's a good question and The the answer to that is I think it's a good question And I think it's a good question I think it's a good question I think it's a good question I think it's a good question So that's a good question and the the answer I don't think the answer is necessarily something that you sort of write down as much as Picking up on the patterns of wise people and emulating them All right night Ani cringe walker With uh with a lightsaber there Any thoughts on the thinking behind god calling the jews to plant gardens in babilon the city of gardens? Oh, I never thought of that That's a that's a really cool idea I think that's there's something to that And I think it's sort of obvious That's really cool my thought is that's really cool thought and i'm gonna have to think about that a lot more Some rage some rage hard Hi paul if you've not already covered this and even if I have because things bear a lot of repeating often How do you see the application of ian mcgough chris theory in the modern church? Application of ian mcgough chris theory in the modern church I believe his theories are desperately important and are a revelation when I read his book But I have difficulty community communicating his ideas to fellow christians It's a good question. I I won't say that i'm a mcgough chris Expert by any means my understanding of his theory for those who Who don't know it the title of his book is the master and and his emissary that this form of intuitive Fuzzy thinking Is one is what one hemisphere of the brain is devoted to and the other hemisphere This is roughly speaking the other hemisphere is for taking that and digesting it into Rules and systems and Logic if you will and I think that's a tremendously good insight because If you think about what is required in the world, especially given what has been learned in cognitive science and you know religions have been saying this for a long time the world is too big for us to actually be able to fully map and exhaust the map and I think part of at least what I heard from Jordan Peterson and his Introduction to his new book that is coming out bears that in mind And this is a constant theme with Jonathan Peugeot And I found this to be a very helpful theme. The world is too big to map and but yet we must live in the world and Systems and structures are really important and helpful for living in the world. Therefore. It only makes sense that Part of our approach to the world has to be this humble intuitive This is bigger than we know sort of the spirit of finesse type approach to the world that's Very important and very helpful. And so we need to have that capacity to approach the world The other hemisphere the other side is the spirit of geometry where those are pascals categories which I think are are really helpful and pretty much map onto this where Once we systematize certain things. Well now we can employ them and wield them and use them McGillchrist's theory is that This the systematizer is the servant of the broad intuitive Open aspect of the brain now How about the church? well Churches are created to maintain systems Churches are created to remember and to instruct the youth and to create communities that Maintain and perpetuate and also continue to Recalibrate what is learned and known There will be a natural tension in church this tension. That's and again jordan peterson So just says chaos. That's the intuitive implicit Perspective from one side of the brain and order. That's the systemic system of the other side of the brain. Okay Churches have to navigate this dynamic and And churches do so now Here's the thing Let's imagine you've got ian mcgillchrist's idea of the brain and you add amnesia a brain that forgets That's a problem for both sides of the brain Because it's really important to learn and remember systems. In fact our entire educational System is there to To perpetuate knowledge. All right, so think about the fact that the romans knew how to make concrete and The idea the formula for making concrete was forgotten for I might get this wrong, but it was forgotten for a thousand fifteen hundred years What a tremendous loss that was It's it's better to not lose these things and so Institutions and communities are set up in order to remember things to remember what has been learned but now Also, what's genius about a church is that not only are these things remembered? they have to be embodied and lived and right there you get the You get this line between chaos and order. Let's say Because well, here's here's a here's a really important thing Um, you know, i've been thinking a lot about this carl lenz and his affair that he had it's all over the news and Now that these things as a pastor There are you'll know plenty of incidences of adultery that happen in real life I can't talk about these things publicly because that would be That wouldn't be right To all the parties, but these people are already in public there are you know in the sense they've they've offered themselves publicly by being High status high profile people. Okay, so Here's a here's a nice little system Don't cheat on your wife It doesn't go well Most of us aren't going to debate that okay Now you live in a community And that community might be his nuclear family might be his extended family Might be his church and Okay, so he cheated on his wife What do you do now? okay, there's going to be a whole lot of spirit of finesse going on in terms of Do you stay together? Do you work on the marriage? Do you fire him? Do the kids just basically hate their dad? well They probably part of them hates their dad and what he because of what he did But another part of them will never hate their dad because he's their dad and if they decide They're going to hate their dad for the rest of their life. That's going to destroy them in some really crucial ways That is in fact going to poison their relationships both romantic relationships and parental relationships that they have in the future so On one hand you have a rule Don't cheat on your spouse On the other hand you have all of the messiness of life that is way too big to categorize Now that doesn't nullify the rule But the rule is insufficient to actually deal with everything that is going on so, you know, I was reading an article and Of course you have to sort of take with a grain of salt Everything that the mistress said to good morning america because you know, there's lots of layers on that too Oh, this was the best sexiest best sex he ever had. Oh his marriage is boring I mean to what degree is the mistress telling herself this because she's trying to Manage the fact that at some point she discovers she's sleeping with a married man And then she says well, I never really meant to hurt the wife and it's like Well, you know if you really didn't mean to hurt the wife a good thing would have been to cut off the affair when you Learned that he was married Or even maybe when you suspected that he was married or maybe in fact if you had gone back to an older mode of human Relationships you might have decided to date him before you and to get to know him before you went to bed with him so suddenly all this all these things are getting exposed by You know this one little situation and there's this one rule. Well one rule would be You know if you're married don't cheat on your spouse by sleeping with another person A rule that might have served her would be Um How about no premarital sex if she hadn't had premarital sex with him How would this sort of story have been different? Oh, well, she might have he met her in the park and she might have said well Let me get let me get you a cup of coffee and they might have gone out for coffee And get to know each other and maybe there'd been some feelings on both sides, but maybe they would have waited Okay. What does that waiting afford? Well now the waiting is affording Well before I actually sleep with you, maybe I should know you maybe I should know a few things about your life Like if you're married That's what seemed to be kind of an important thing to know But now that now we have all these systems and all of these systems have been displaced and changed and all of that So, okay Well, how does this how does magocris theory deal with the modern church? Well, the modern church or the ancient church is sort of the same the church on one hand tries to remember a bunch of things and in that sense Gives a nod to the side of the brain that believes in systems and organization On the other side because the church is trying to embody this in the messy lives of real people That means that there's always going to be plenty of messiness And all right, he committed adultery. So they fired him. Okay So he's no longer a christian and no no church should ever have him now the church doesn't do that Well, what are they doing? Well, we're doing therapy. Well, what do they mean therapy now? We've introduced a whole other system into this. Okay, and but basically what they're trying to do apparently is Let's see if the marriage can be saved. Well, why do you want to save the marriage? and then daily mail came out with a picture that Um his wife had posted on instagram and she was happy and daily mail's like oh no She's smiling on this picture on instagram. What does that mean? You know on and on and on and on once you embody something You begin to expose the limits of the systems now that doesn't mean that the systems are evil or wrong or bad You just understand that the systems are limited and so What you have in a mature system, and this is why jordan peterson says that ideologies are crippled religions. What do you mean by that? Well a religion a full-fledged religion is far more 360 degrees Because they've been over time there's all these Systems that have developed systems within systems within systems that that can begin to address something like adultery and the complexity of human of humanity So carl lenz talks about you know, how you know, he's bored with his marriage. Okay. Why is he bored with his marriage? Well, there's probably some good reasons that he's bored with his marriage if you've ever been married You know that marriage can be boring and your spouse can be boring Okay, so what should you do when your spouse is boring well you should go out and sleep with someone else Uh, probably not a good idea um, why not well all of these reasons so Maybe you should make your peace with a little bit of boredom in your life and discover that Maybe some of the boredom is coming from your spouse. Maybe some of the boredom is coming from you So maybe you'll talk to someone and someone say, okay if your marriage is a little boring Um, maybe there's some ruts you two have gotten into maybe you should go and have a date night Or maybe you should surprise your spouse with something delightful and maybe your spouse will surprise you with an unexpected response to that and you know, so one of the things that i've You know, my marriage has had its ups and downs pretty dramatic ups and downs over the years I've been married 32 years and you know over the last couple of years actually covid has been sort of good for the marriage Why when we spend a lot of time together and the kids are home and well kids kids and marriage are a whole other dynamic because on one hand For most people the the time of of least marital happiness is when they are raising young children Which seems crazy, but it's completely reasonable because young children are incredibly demanding and You can't do all the kind of Fun things that used to do before the young children came so Again back and forth between this map territory unmapped territory back and forth between here are all these rules So here's a little rule, you know do something romantic or delightful for your spouse sometime. That's a good rule Here's another rule be kind just before we started this Someone noted that my temperament in the morning is quite cheerful But one of the things I had to learn in my marriage is that I am like a golden retriever I burst out of bed in the morning and i'm happy and I embrace the world and I love it I want to be loud And my wife is not that way in the morning And one of the things I had to learn was you know golden retriever has to learn to be quiet in the morning So that uh doesn't annoy everybody else in the house And so yeah, these are all the things that you learn so Yeah, there's lots of application for the modern church Um, but now you're the second part of your question in terms of I have difficulty communicating his ideas to fellow christians well, that's that's actually a pretty way pretty good way of saying it because Probably if you find new ways to communicate it, maybe other people will be interested in it Churches also have built in with this within them a resistance to certain new ideas That's not a bad thing resistance to new ideas because new ideas are dangerous. That's sort of a that's in some ways spiritual warfare and that's why Churches are resistant to it modern churches are far more open to new ideas than ancient churches and so What that means is that? I think part of what we are all suffering from is the fact that we have been molded and formed and shaped by 18 minute or 42 minute or two hour Or narratives by which a problem arises and it's resolved within 18 minutes or 42 minutes or Or an hour and 45 minutes or something like that The real world doesn't work that way. There's a there's a little right there's a little left brain thing The real world doesn't work that way churches are highly resistant to our influence for very real and important reasons If the world was simply plastic out there and we could continue to remold it and reshape it according to what we thought in the moment Well very quickly you'd learn That's not a good thing. I've told this a number of times tim keller I remember in his earlier 50s people would say why aren't you writing books? You're this celebrity pastor in new york city and you've got great ideas and great sermons yada yada yada And he said anything I would have written in my 20s. I'd want to burn now Anything i'd written in my 30s and 40s Uh, I wouldn't be satisfied with now now that i'm in my 50s. It's probably pretty good time to try to write some things. Why? because Well, the longer you live if you're paying attention You should gain wisdom And what wisdom does is manages both The mapped territory and all of the blessings that can be found in it But it also learns to manage the unmapped territory and have humility so you can both integrate the spirit of finesse And the spirit of geometry And to the degree that you learn these things Maybe you can bless your institutions and your communities with what you learn and That basically is the human project how we create culture How we bless the world and create a better world for each other, but it's uh, yeah so there's uh there's a treatment of it and I'm like I said, i'm by no means an expert in mcgillchrist or Or even a novice in some ways. I have a basic idea of what his thinking is about and that's how i'd approach it any comments or pushback or feedback on that from anyone who wants to jump into the The voice chat channel I have some thoughts paul go for it so, um This has kind of been my experience in the church uh And I remember the first time I talked to you. I was saying this is kind of like what tends to happen Is that and it's really like a peugeotian? uh fringe periphery center thing is that when you when you systematize things when you set up confessions and creeds and systems and statements of faith what happens is is that you you bind and blind as hate says height and and then what ends up happening is that if you have a Conscript conservative church or if you have a liberal church you automatically Systemically exclude the periphery from whatever your confession your creed is and then your your systems the very thing that you intended to protect yourself You automatically exclude the fringe and and that's essentially what's created the culture wars. I would say And uh, and I think that's what mcgillchrist is saying and what's ironic is that within america and within churches, I think within Liberal and progressive churches the spirit is the exact same thing, which is exclusion of the fringe. They just want to normalize The fringe and then exclude the former center But the pattern is the same I think that's true And and that's one of the the huge blessings that that peugeot has has given me in terms of his His hierarchy and fringe and center and understanding that and understanding that in some ways The fringe is the fringe and the center is the center and You can try and invert it but Often with a lot of fringy things If you understand if you put them in the center Well The the order breaks down but usually what happens when order breaks down is new orders emerge. So yeah, no, it's good observation the the problem is though is that The the liberal that started with the conservatives by excluding the fringe initially And because I don't know I tweeted like back when I was on twitter three or four years ago the conservative impulse is to exclude and Not even acknowledge the fringe while the liberal impulse then is to want to normalize the fringe and both are wrong so like if you and and I illustrated that with like my My worst church experience in the evangelical church, which was when I no longer believed in eternal conscious torment I could not become a member of the church and I and and I personally in my own experience experienced what happens more broadly is that people who are Who maybe would be potential for reformation in the church and repentance and a moving back toward what is potentially Correcting errors that have manifested in the church and solidified and ossified over time they're systemically excluded from being able to do that and there's a spectrum within that some of that stuff should be excluded because You know its periphery and it shouldn't be normalized. But sometimes the center Is misaligned and isn't the true center and if you automatically exclude what you perceive to be the fringe Like you've you've started you've started this whole ball rolling And so, um, that's kind of my that's always been my big beef with the conservative groups is I would say they started it What joey isn't joey isn't in the room right now, but joey had You know a really good insight He basically made the argument that today's progressives are actually the conservatives of the 1960s And what I mean by that is today's progressives are trying to conserve The 1960s you're always going to have this dynamic back and forth and by its very nature The center of an organization is going to try to preserve what the organization has been through time And so time always has this dynamic and now it's it's if you wish to change a center of something you're going to get resistance it's it's sort of like It was sort of like eric weinstein complaining about institutions resisting change and it's like You don't understand what an institution is an institution is set up in order to instantiate Something beyond individual human consciousness and to give it a manifestation in Real time in the world So To to complain that an institution is excluding is sort of like complaining that water is wet it's It's the nature of the thing that it wants to instantiate some things and not other things now even by the way that you Switched let's say the word hell for eternal conscious torment Okay, but is hell eternal conscious torment? That's the question, isn't it in many ways? And by I mean I had never heard of eternal conscious torment even though I knew all three words I'd never heard that Praise until maybe a year or two ago now once you Once you forefront eternal conscious torment you have now in a sense Modified The understanding of hell I mean is hell gehenna is hell hades is hell Inferno as in dante so and and so and so then when a church say let's say Okay, luke you can't be a member of this church because you don't embrace hell Well You don't embrace eternal conscious torment So is hell eternal conscious torment though, so then you begin to have a conversation and part of what has been gained in the west Was that we created some We create we were able to create some space between Certain ideas so now in the west If you go to geneva and you stand in the street and say I don't believe in the trinity The geneva city council is not going to lock you up and the chief minister of geneva is not going to burn you at the stake And most of us would say that's an improvement And so now we have all these nested institutions that will say you know, let's say I I don't know what it takes to join the national rifle association Even the name national rifle association Why i'm gonna i'm gonna go to the national rifle association. I'm gonna say I think we need a ban on handguns throughout the The united states and i'm gonna start a movement to repeal The amendment of the constitution that talks about the right to bear arms And they would probably kick me out of the national rifle association because they take Go ahead luke well this This gets into the question though I think this is what tillich was trying to get at when he said all institutions are inherently demonic though and this gets into the question of Should the church be the institution because what you're essentially saying and with the whole weinstein thing is that institutions? That's what they do is they exclude things But if you do that you're going to exclude the fringe and if the church excludes the fringe It's going to ossify around a center and if that center is wrong, it's going to basically Systematize its inability to repent in a sense Okay, but in a sense when you say exclude the fringe It's really helpful to understand what you mean by that because Exclude does that mean not allow the fringe into the center or does exclude mean? Yeah agreed You know at what level is exclusion because let's say You can't be a deacon or an elder in a particular church because you don't believe in hell because you define hell as eternal conscious torment but I dare bet they would let you in the service and let you listen to their sermons and they would shake hands with you and they would feed you at a potluck and they would take care of your children in the nursery and and and and and and that hardly seems like a tyrannical form of exclusion No, it's it's it's much more passive, but this gets into like what tyler I think articulated really well is that the church has become a Masculine space with feminine language versus a feminine space with masculine language. And so the exclusion isn't Masculine it's feminine. And so it essentially passively mutes you and prevents you it prevents any dialogue But like that's what's manifesting in the waste around identitarianism, which I would say came from the church Is it really preventing dialogue? In my experience it is if you would if you would go to church and eat at their potluck and put your kids in the nursery And they wouldn't let you serve as deacon and elder And now if you decided you were going to go to church every day with a placard That says eternal conscious torment is evil. Um, they might yeah at that point they might exclude you but They would probably let you hang around all knowing that you didn't believe in eternal conscious torment and um You know and again it would the manifestation and the embodiment of all of this would be highly nuanced and Uh granular and that was my point about mcgillchrist in terms of the two forms of the brain. So on one side of the brain You know the church says here We have a position of saying hell is real and you're in danger of it if you don't embrace jesus Okay, so that's what's on the books But how do they act it out they act it out with a whole world of nuance and they might say Well, you know luke we really like him and he's a good father and you know Even though he's not a member of the church or even though he'll never be a leader in the church He throws a 20 in the plate sometimes and we like having him around and when someone's in trouble He really helps so we think he's a good guy. The only thing is he's got this Hang up about defining hell as eternal eternal conscious torment. So we're not going to let him in the church I mean, that's an enormously nuanced approach to you, which is exactly right But the church has been set up to instantiate and preserve certain bodies of knowledge and information and you might say, ah I'm offended that they are trying to preserve certain bodies of information but if in fact you sat down with the pastor and won the argument and won the whole church to your position And where little church of some place minnesota began You know putting up signs on the highway and say eternal conscious torment is a myth And luke wins the day and someone comes in and says you're all going to hell And you would say we got to keep this guy out of our church You know, basically the argument is these dynamics are always going to be there Which is what's at the heart of peugeot's argument and you can you can Flip around the name tags and you can flip around the propositions that the groups are holding But the dynamics are going to lay themselves out in the same way Yeah, I mean I agree but there's but there's a way I would argue that there's a underlying spirit that leads disagreement over ideas which manifests in schism and one that doesn't Because here's because like I agree with all the stuff that you're saying Raised it will manifest in schism because I agree and you don't schism is part of the system You can't both embrace eternal conscious torment and be against it and have that manifest itself in a community So you you don't think that it's possible to have a community where there isn't Confessionally bound Mandated agreement about the the three christian positions on hell I don't like you have to choose one. I don't think it's possible to have a community that doesn't have a confession But around the three positions on hell because like well I would argue like well just for example like orthodoxy doesn't Okay, but that's one position And so here you have a church that doesn't take a position on that let's say Let's say we have a community I don't think it's i'm not going to say it's not possible to have a community that doesn't take a position on the morality of car ownership Now, I don't know any church right now that has a stated position on car ownership with the possible exception of the amish Where if someone in the amish community buys a car They're going to be kicked out the vast majority of churches don't have a position on this They're going to be positions on various different things and some some communities are going to take Basically take stands on things and not others and in fact Part of what happened in the wake of the reformation around confessionality was that they decided We need to limit the number of things that we are going to take positions on And that's where Confessionality arose after the reformation by saying for example in the christian reform church You have the belgian confession the canons of door and the heideberg catechism and they said these are our confessions You can have freedom about a whole bunch of other things including car ownership, but now what happens during the 2020 election? Well some churches it doesn't seem they're they're really struggling with having freedom about what to think about donald trump Because if you love donald trump, oh, that's not part of our three forms of unity Another current debate in the christian form church is what do you think about same-sex marriage? Is that part of our three forms of unity the church is currently working those things out what i'm saying is there are always going to be elements of both sides of the mcgill chris theory that manifests themselves in churches churches are going to bind some things and loose other things and vice versa And whether that's revolving around hell is eternal eternal conscious torment or not That will depend on the particularity of the historical context, but there's always going to be binding and loosening All right, any other anybody want to push back on that or join in on that before I move on Okay Okay Wow, it's this getting more and I want people to understand that luke is a regular here Anybody who's not a part of this community doesn't know that luke's been luke and I have talked before and And you might say well paul was kind of aggressive paul usually doesn't get this aggressive Well, actually I only generally get this aggressive if I have an understanding that There's the relational Foundation with which to disagree fervently and I believe that with luke and I I deeply respect and appreciate and enjoy luke So that's why we can that's why we can go at it like this And I think this is part of the reason and part of what we're lacking in society and part of why the internet Is difficult because when two people really go at it over an idea and there isn't that foundation of a relationship I don't think I don't think the interaction is anywhere near as productive or pleasing or enjoyable. So Yeah, paul, and I always want to say i'm not offended at all I'm just trying to not dominate the conversation because I would keep pushing back I know you would And I because yeah, this is my one dead horse that I continue to whip That I think the whole problem in the west is deeper than we're ever getting at And I think that it's started and was rooted in the church and I tom holland says as much I think it's just he says it Positively i'm trying to say the negative part of it um and and I you know This is what I want to like the conversation. We're happening is what I would love to happen in church Without then people saying well, i'm going to leave and start my own church Because we can passionately disagree about things and not have to get divorced You know, yep So, all right good anybody else before I move on I have a quick comment. Um I thought maybe the institution of knowledge is sort of Misses a piece of this because There's something in her. I mean, I know I know your knowledge is but there's something inherently dynamic to the fact that Christianity is not just passing on um You know These are sort of our You know, these are sort of our institutional values and so on it's passing on this dynamic story and trying to embody the spirit of its founder in its modern context and so There there's sort of that that um, you know You have sort of jesus hanging out with tax collectors and sinners and you have jesus doing the sermon on the mount So you have the both of those dynamics always within the church? Pushing it in different directions um, and I think that's a healthy dynamic but um I think the big problem with the church today is we're not really having that conversation we're having ideological culture wars arguments where Different tribes want the church to be the engine of their particular culture war. Um you know Take on on on the culture war Instead of this kind of healthy liberal conservative dialogue Wow, that's really good. That's really good dark rider sounds like a certain welder. I know in a certain place in a country north of the united states, so Can I possibly ask father eric to give his views because I think as a catholic That might Actually be a really good good place to hear a Very different view. Oh, yeah. Yeah father big mac if if you're available and you want to chime in go right ahead Maybe he's not available Well, how about you jake he's typing he can't talk. Oh, okay. Okay. All right So if you're curious about what he thinks you can read the um, you can read the convo recording Chat which is a function here part of what we do and again for those of you who are listening to the youtube live stream I'm not looking at the the chat the live chat and youtube at all. So I can't answer questions in there If you want to participate in the conversation Rick has put in a link to the bridges of meaning discord. I know for some of you Learning another platform is a little bit difficult and discord is not terribly intuitive, but that's part of why I do this in discord is that We can have people like luke and others push back and offer new ideas in real time Which I really like so that's part of why we do this the way we do this on fridays Okay Okay Next question is techne a bridge for meaning Yes What does he what does he mean by techne techne is this um It's beneath technology it's it's doing things it's it's the how to it's procedural knowledge and Part of what part of why we are skewed in some ways in these In a in a forum like the discord server, which is better than Just youtube chat for example is We have to put everything into words Now words are an amazing tool and those who can use words. Well have an amazing power of Of conjuring up images and pictures and narratives and stories dramatic liturgical imaginary But there's a reality to three-dimensional in real life physical space that That cannot be fully Realized by mental images or words And now when we say a bridge of meaning Thinking about well bridges of meaning that's the name of the discord server but in some ways we're downstream from jordan peterson's work and jordan peterson uses meaning or the the the experiential Participation in meaning as a gyroscope for Orienting oneself in the world and deciding what to do in the future I write on my desk right here. I'll show it I have a lovely gift from From mary joe. She sent me a little pendant and she's an artist And she's been on my channel and she's in the discord server and she made a tiny little estuary there And see if the camera will focus focus camera focus And well this has weight this has leather and i'm gonna get hung up in my cord but This is a this is a this is a lovely little instantiation and the the process of Of making something like this. This is techne I if if if Someone would say duplicate what she has made for you Oh boy, i'd have to do a whole bunch of learning a lot of that learning would be meaningful because As c.s lewis notes with real things what I mean by real real is all of the layers coming together Okay with real things. There's an element to this which is Which is extremely durable So let's imagine heaven forbid that some suicide bomber In some Let's say some let's I just was watching Jonathan peugeot and rationality rules. I haven't had a chance to finish that video, but let's imagine that some fanatical fan of rationality rules decides he needs to silence the pastor of living stones church in sacramento and so he's going to fill a rider truck with Explosives and blow it up in the parking lot thus snuffing out my life and rick's life On this friday morning because he knew we'd be here rick's like why are you involving me in this story? And You know, and so paul vanderkley at that point would physically be blown apart and we'd have no more Paul would make no more videos, etc, etc, etc This little piece would survive the blast There's a reality to this And and a lot has been built into this piece and and meaning will tend to Meaning is swirling around all of this right now. And so yes tech nate is a bridge to meaning which is why artists are Are amazing and valued and uh should stay with us. So yeah, that's a good question And anyone want to jump in or make a make a follow-up point on that? All right, i'll keep going Laswell Hi paul. Hi laswell. I came here following your video response to peugeot and sargon Because well, I could pretty much copy and paste his religious trajectory on my own Harris to buddhism to jordan peterson to rebel wisdom to verveke to you Trying to see if I can get involved in a church community But it like many others seems difficult for me to find a footing Yeah, and some of those issues might be the kinds of things that luke was pointing to Um, there were there's probably lots and lots and lots of reasons why it's difficult to find a footing and and you know I have always maintained and will continue to maintain that what we're doing here on bridges of meaning Discord server is not church Because it is disembodied But that doesn't mean it doesn't have value part of the thing that churches have been doing for a long time is they survive basically by Attracting people who sort of already get it Okay, but there's layers and layers and layers and layers of this and so part of what I think And I show myself to be ardently protestant in this even though A lot of people are finding themselves most attracted to orthodoxy or roman catholicism in this journey Which I think there's some really important reasons for this, but I show myself to be an ardent protestant in that I think it's important to continue to create spaces that embody and modulate And so Not much of a question. I just wanted to give you feedback on what on what you're doing Yeah, so thank you for the feedback and and i'd say Uh, so so my friend john van donk has started a Basically a not a support group but a a group for helping people He's doing it on zoom and he's got I think three groups going now Of talking to leaders and potential leaders of small communities that are Being created around these spaces and these kinds of ideas now again. I'm not going to call them churches but What I do know as an experience of the pastor is that lots of different groups provide Some overlapping needs that churches have fulfilled Let me use a historical idea such as a a a is a type of group That addresses started addressing alcoholism Alcoholism They used a lot of different church means and church dynamics, but a a is not a church I know a number of people some of whom are pastors and they'll say a a is better than church Okay, a is better than church often at helping people No longer lose their agency to alcohol Alcohol But a is not better than church at and then I can make a whole long list of things that a is not better in church but some people say but there's an aspect to a a that Church should have and should manifest and it doesn't A sort of radical inclusion and you know, luke was pointing at some of those things a doesn't care if you believe in the eternal conscious torment Or not some people in a will say alcoholism is eternal conscious torment. What do you mean by eternal? Is eternal forever or is eternal now? um So there's a this goes a lot of different ways and so Laswell, I would say keep doing what you're doing. You're on a trajectory and i'm glad you're here in the bridges of meaning discord and And and I agree with you know when luke and I you know when when added a little bit here You know, I agree with luke that part of the reason I started local meetups and have been involved in this community is that there are aspects of this community that i've always wanted to see integrated in church but Have never been manifest in church. I want to have the kinds of you know conversations I was having with luke and with you and with atheists and with people from other religious traditions and and and I want to engage in these conversations more and That hasn't happened in church and now you get to ask the question. Well, what are exactly the boundaries of church? Well, suddenly you have to ask well is Bridges of meaning is not a church. It's certainly not the church But is it downstream from church? Well, if it's an estuary it is So and some of you say, oh I saw what you did there paul Well, and I didn't even know I was doing this but I was acting these things out and I was manifesting these things so You know, I was I was really happy to see the conversation between jonathan peugeot and rationality rules We need more of these conversations and what i've deeply appreciated about what i've seen on this discord server is that not always but but but we've been able to have the dialogos that Verveke talks about we've been able to we come to this Conversation from two different points might be a point within christian doctrine might be a point Outside of christian doctrine and maybe we both luke luke and I leave our little interchange Luke still is, you know a little annoyed at eternal conscious torment and its positionality within church and i'm less annoyed And but have plenty of my own nuance along a lot of these lines or luke probably wouldn't keep following and participating in this community But here we're having these conversations and here we have a space where people can talk and think and work out and there's enough commonality in language And community that we can actually feel that we are making progress Both individually and as a community. That's a really special thing And I really like that so laswell It's a great comment and you are most welcome here and i'd encourage you to keep being honest and keep asking questions and Yeah, you might not be terribly excited about luke and his eternal conscious torment or maybe you are and I'm glad you're here and I want to see not only Online spaces like this but also in-person spaces and now with covid it's a little hard but part of the Goal of this has always been Let's let's build bridges with people different from ourselves And find productive ways to explore the differences And find commonalities and embody those in ways that we can so Anybody else want to jump in on that? From the voice chat Hey paul, yeah, luke At the time of at the risk of dominating again, which is not really a risk with me it's kind of a certainty But uh The so this would be a question that I would have with that is that Because like even the eternal conscious torment thing to stay on that example. It's just an example. I don't particularly Care, I mean really that people believe in eternal conscious torment. I don't think They have good reason to And we can have that conversation if people want to have it It's more just the binding and blinding and and I want to be able to have the conversation without both me Becoming the new cult leader and starting my own group and saying everyone must agree with me or without the already Establishment center saying no, you can't have that you can't have the conversation. You are automatically excluded And that's kind of my whole question is like what is the what is the under Current the spirit that manifests the inability to have the conversation without excluding one or the other Because I would argue that people that are in the center Excuse me can be The center can be schismatic as well as the fringe And in the christian form church right now there, you know, we're having this conversation about same-sex marriage many in the center want to change the position of the christian reform church And Okay Uh when that's tried to be done from the center what usually happens is that the the organization itself loses an enormous amount of We don't even have the word for it of something why because Every time that the center of the christian reform church tries to make a big change it loses Tens of thousands of people who no longer want to participate in that So I think that's an issue. But another part of the issue is I don't think we appreciate How difficult what we're doing is let's imagine so you've got carl lenson his wife sitting with their marriage counselor and Let's say carl says I don't want to talk about the affair. I just want to talk about how how how Boring, you know why I thought our marriage was boring and why I decided to step out and um, and You know have a five-month affair with this other woman And he's probably wants his wife to Talk about this stuff theoretically That's probably the last thing that's going to happen in that room. The wife is like, you know Screw you and your boredom and you did this to me. That's how we are we are you know, we are attached and bundled and you know, so being able to have the reason a conversation about Eternal conscious torment or hell or any of this stuff Is difficult is because it is meaningful and it is tied to Deep things most of which we are not even conscious of in ourselves in the community. I mean There is in a sense, you know, i'm going to sound pretty union here, but there is a collective There's a collective unconsciousness unconscious reality in any community that By virtue of how we are we are only marginally aware of Which is why at least in the history of the particular church that I serve right now One of this it happened before I got here one of the storied Fights of the church was when they were going to carpet the stage in front Were they going to make it blue or red and it nearly divided the church now most of us would say That sounds completely incidental Ah But it wasn't why wasn't it? Well, you could spend Probably a long period of time trying to figure out why it wasn't But most of us in the story of carl lenson his wife Could probably completely understand if he wanted to say well, let's let's let's not be too upset about the affair Let's just try and dive into it and figure out like why can't we have that conversation? Well, I think we all have a sense of why they can't just have that conversation as such We could have that conversation in theory because none of us are tied to the realities deeply beneath It because we're not we're not interested parties a therapist would sit in the room and work hours on that Trying to get both of them to that point because actually it's when he says to his mistress that my marriage is boring Well, there's plenty there to work on and some of it's hers and some of it's his but that's the way community is So it's a good thing that we're all in this together All right anybody else Okay, let's go on Adela darling Adela darling Hi paul. I was under the impression that you have read pistas of sophia and I haven't read it since it was brought up before um So I can't comment on it and thank you for listing it and linking it there I don't know that i'll read it between now and the next time so You can ask the question again, but you might get the same answer All right iron turtle Is jesus the manifest unity? Of aspect god number one and god number two By virtuous physical imminence and spiritual transcendence respectively i'd say yeah I think so and and again when I talk about god number one and god number two Again going back to the ian mcgillchrist We've got this intuitive side of us that is just always playing with stuff really messily Then we've got this systemic side of us that wants to systematize And so my god number one and god number two framework is very much in the middle of those things because I listen to jordan peterson describe What do you mean by god sam harris asks him sam harris who was annoyed? Well sam harris doesn't even understand why he's annoyed and threatened by jordan peterson, but they're on stage and it's fun for us to watch and so jordan opens his opens up his um his microsoft surface book and Begins reading all of these things And I remember listening to them. It's like wow, this is really interesting And so I transcribed it actually because first I got these bootleg transcriptions of the of those debates and looked at them and I thought Yeah, that's that's I as a as even a protestant With some understanding of our theological tradition. I can recognize that stuff as god And then sam harris just goes off. No, that's not god What does sam harris mean? And so what what god number one and god number two became were basically two little cubbies on my Theoretical Mental workbench and I throw things in god number one and god number two and there's so there's eminence and transcendence That's one of the polarities on there another one is sort of the The the arena and the agent there's another polarity that I threw in there Through all these little polarities in god number one and god number two and obviously when you get to jesus as divine As fully god and fully man and all of that Christological Conceptualization that the councils the early councils put together so jesus would be god number one and god number two as in fact would but jesus would be a gosh, I gotta really be careful when I start talking about some of this stuff because I am You know, I I can't in my system You know, and so I have a fair amount of understanding about luke's frustration in my system I can say the wrong thing here And be brought up on theological charges in the christian reform church and lose my credential That is a real possibility. You might say oh, that's horrible God, it really isn't horrible because Actually, that's the way the system should work now fortunately if I would lose my Credential in the christian reform church. They wouldn't establish a stake outside of grand rapids to burn me on fortunately but um Anyway back to back to the question Because actually a question arise arose in my head spawned by your question that i'm worried if I ask it I could get myself into trouble Because in so when you think about so, you know, we have sam in this community and sam I usually pick up I pick on as sam adams as we call him. I pick him up as our our resident heretic Because he is a in his description a biblical unitarian. He doesn't believe in the trinity How is how is the divine reality manifest in christ? That at least in a spatiotemporal framework had not been manifest before you might well Maybe it was manifest in front of abraham with the three strangers, but but something happens in the incarnation Which is critically foundational to the story And so i'd say yes We see god number one and god number two and their unity manifest in jesus And that is manifest when he stills the storm When he stills the storm why because the storm stealing the storm stealing miracle is a really clear miracle about agent and arena and in fact, there's an aspect to our humanity in which we We both create the arena so many arenas we create with these institutions and things and we're agents within it And now the agent arena relationship is a is a you know suit. I mean so much of that verveki stuff I've learned so much from him is, you know super helpful Because it shows a duality And the dualities are are are really powerful and once you see a duality like that They're like these forks in the road. We can't unsee them So that adds complexity to our universe and so what we see in jesus christ is Is It's just an astounding thing and and we now thousands of years later of trying to put words around this and conceptualizations and understanding dualities He's got his human nature and his divine nature You know and they're they meet in him. I mean, it's just It just doesn't seem to end in terms of what it's offering us. So yeah, great question And anybody want to pick up on that from the chat room I'd like to chime in real quick. Okay on kind of what you and luke were talking about i've One of the things i've noticed because i'm up in the Northwest in washington state and there is a lot of freedom up here to talk about things in church And I was lucky enough to grow up in an evangelical church where my pastor engaged me on many of these topics engaged me on many of these topics mostly in private But I think one of the reasons a lot of churches don't do this Is because of the risk to the weaker sheep I think Those of us who are here In the discord server, it's because we want to be here having this conversation and we want to think And I think there are a lot of people in the church though And just the world in general who don't want to think or who don't want to think deeply about things So it's very easy for them to be swayed to one opinion or the other and I think when churches in the past have let people in who have had Views that were very different from their own That's kind of how cults would start and things like that So I think there's that risk that they're trying to avoid and I think it becomes a much more delicate balance. So you can't Have this kind of discussion at all times in a church now I do think there's a place for it and I think it would be really good for churches to have To really go back to an educational classroom function for believers so that there can be a place where people can go to have these discussions in certain Times and places so that it's it's it's there and everybody knows these are kind of like new things that we can talk about But they're not You know what we're going to say is truth in this church or or whatever, you know But it I think it's good to have the dialogue, but maybe just in a time and place restricted area Um That's a great point. Yeah, it's just protecting people who are weaker I think and I think that's part of what we do And I think that's a new testament Teaching to us is that we who are more mature when it comes to like the You know eating meat sacrificed idle kind of a thing Is that the stronger can do that? But for the sake of the weaker let's not do that And I think a lot of churches maybe take a more authoritative stand on that rather than a more community-based Let's all just respect each other kind of stand Yep. Yep. No, I think it's a good point and and you know paul used stronger and weaker and I think when we take that in our language, we sort of create a pejorative element to it, but it's you know, I think about this will probably get me in trouble, but If I did one way if I was worried about getting in trouble I wouldn't be doing any of this um I don't I i'll not use that example. I was just thinking about I think there's there's I I agree with your point completely and as a As someone who is responsible for a community You have to deal with these things Because we don't know what ideas ideas are powerful things And we don't know what ideas will do in a community and so We're quite an open society. I think in general that openness is healthy, but I can think of a number of ideas That I could speak right now Which could devastate this community? now we think about You know you think about magic and spells and you know, you see harry potter and they say these words and they say them in latin Well, why do they say them in latin in harry potter? Probably because if you were to say some of them in english, you might actually do damage to a community And to an imaginary And this is what this is what words do They are magic in a sense that they they are magic. They are spiritual. They change reality and There's a dozen things that have just popped into my head right now that I could that I could say which would transform my life utterly and completely And also transform and potentially devastate the lives of people That are around me and some of them that are around you Now now i've just you know Made you all think what is that cs lewis and the magician's nephew? I remember as a kid reading this the deplorable word and I I just kept thinking Well, what is that word because you know The this this this which goes into this world and utters the deplorable word and the world is destroyed That's true And you think well, what what word would I argue now? Fortunately? there's a lot of buffers around but If you look at just look at the current political climate that is all about That is all in many ways about language. What is it that so infuriates? So many people about donald trump it's because he doesn't sound Presidential so then of course biden gets in and biden makes all the he follows the liturgy When he comes in and a whole bunch of people just sit back and say oh We're back to this now And then other people like yeah, but what is that going to mean in terms of yada yada? And there we go So no, you're exactly right. Great point eyes on the truth. Great point All right, i'll keep going Mayo tick may my my o tick. I don't know how to say a bunch of these things. We've got a head on a stock here Um a brand on a stock paul vanderkley. I've heard you say that when humans try to bring about utopia They also bring hell closer. Yes Could you please explain this thoroughly? Could you please explain this thoroughly in respect to god's will and human desire for to right injustice Well, first of all, I you note this Where are look around for I I think actually you know, especially you know right now in my mind having the new Announcement of jordan peterson's book jonathan peugeot peugeot's work that i've been, you know following quite closely Peugeot talks about the fringes and I have to I really want to make a clip of this because it's still ringing around in my head And if anybody finds it wasn't a recent question and answer jonathan peugeot did a treatment on basically things that are intentionally hidden and unspoken And and he he wove into that a An understanding of The good the good place of that in our culture For some good reasons we have a We have a belief that anything and everything should be brought to the surface right now and be Accessible to all that's a radically egalitarian democratic and in some ways naive idea and What's interesting is that well, let me use let me use a Reference and peugeot. I believe use this reference in the question and answer Let's say you go into work and well i'd say let's say you work in a Office environment with lots and lots of different people. Okay. Well certain numbers of those people will be physically more attractive sexually than others of those people so let's say you're a man and you go into the office and And you see a woman and she's very attractive and you say you look nice today Or you make other comments about what she's wearing and how what she's wearing accentuates certain features Yada, yada, yada, yada. Let's say you keep doing this now We judge it as progress that You're not supposed to say these things. There's a there's a saturday night live sketch I think it's saturday night live with with tom brady, which is absolutely hysterical and it makes the point that we all know whereas If you're tom brady and you go into an office and you start verbally If you start saying wonderful things about how some other woman looks She's going to find that terribly welcoming and then some other schlub comes around and says the same thing and you know He's in trouble with the hr department. Well, why is that? Well, because there are things that are on the surface and rightfully so and things that are below the surface and rightfully so And wisdom is about figuring out the time and the place and the when and the where Now what happens with utopia? Is we imagine and this this gets into you know, i'm going to take a peugeotian Make a peugeotian move here right now Because there is a certain and at some point i'll probably figure this out sufficiently that I can talk about it And I don't think i'm there yet Part of what's making peugeot so helpful right now is a certain move that he makes which Is part and parcel of modernity and post-modernity I know something that's going to disturb some of you but so what happens If if you listen to I'm going to just pick up on sam harris because he's so well known. That's why I pick on these people because they're They're common to all of us For sam harris, the way the kingdom comes is Surface direct rational Wielded Okay So we look around and for sam harris. He thinks that Good and evil are obvious surface direct Manifest wielded So here's the good. Here's the bad so let's just choose the good and let's employ the kinds of The kinds of spirit of geometry that we have Decided upon are true and bring about these good things. And so an example of that might be Well, there's mosquitoes and Mosquitoes are vectors for all sorts of diseases So let's decide to get rid of all mosquitoes. So let's Get ddt or whatever modern Pesticide and spray all the ponds and let's let's eradicate mosquitoes Well, then we discover that oh, we've just been eradicating bees. Well bees sting, too Let's why what's so bad about getting rid of bees? Oh bees also pollinate. So well pollination is oh, oh And and so actually what we've been in the process of for a very long time Is saying this is good and this is bad. Let's pursue the good directly obviously overtly and Give ourselves the world we've always wanted by eradicating mosquitoes Then we discover that We didn't just eradicate mosquitoes. We've changed the world in a whole bunch of different ways and What we often find is that we've eradicated mosquitoes at the cost of bees and now in fact Trees and the the normal biological reproduction of plants in our world Of plants in our world including the food supply that we have developed over the last 6,000 years in terms of the agricultural revolution. We've just cut our own throats And so now suddenly in our pursuit of utopia which in just a small ways of there being no mosquitoes Now we've brought famine and hunger and famine and hunger didn't just bring oh my tummy feels a little bit bad Now we've got communities of people robbing and well when they go into rob, you know I'm coming in here looking for your food. But hey, your daughter looks pretty good I'm going to take her as well as your food and i'm going to take her to my house and i'm going to use her for Whatever ends I want her to be used for so I might employ her as my cleaning lady I might make her available to my son sexually I might you know and on and on and on and on and on and on And and this is a function of the peugeotian when you get rid of the When you when you try to bring and sam peterson you try to bring too much order You get tyranny And now okay. So here we have a system of order. So we want to introduce chaos to it When you bring in too much chaos you get Disorder so you have all these polarities um With respect to god's will and human desire to write injustice The bible Is very clear That I'm going to use more theological language the eschaton Which is this age to come? Which is the and the bible talks about in these beautiful terms when when all eyes, you know when when there'll be no more crying When there'll be no more hunger When on and on and on that the sum of all of our dreams comes This will be the work of god Well, what does that mean? It means that this isn't something we can achieve ourselves now if you look at almost any And and and this theological debate is going on in churches right now and in my own denomination in my own tradition is this kingdom something we participate in something we bear witness to or something we Ourselves deploy I think the biblical answer to this is always this is something beyond us This is because the world again the world is too big The world is too complex. It might have seen very straightforward to you know bomb the Environment and get rid of all these pests these ants these mosquitoes. We didn't really appreciate How these things function in the systems That we are reliant upon So Yeah, that's when you try to bring about utopia You bring up hell and peterson used well, you know in some ways The soviet union was an attempt at that. Well, we know what's good and bad. Oh, do we? always in every situation I mean, let me use a let me use a really Is it is it was it good or bad for sorry to use these You know, I use these people because I think the odds of them actually listen to this are quite small But maybe in our internet connected reality not so much Was it a good thing or a bad thing for carl lenz to go and have an affair with this woman? Now most of us would say well, that's a bad thing that's easy and You know, I think 99 probably true But let's imagine that she got pregnant and A child was born and then you asked that child was it a good thing or a bad thing that This man who was married to another woman Had sex with your mother and you were conceived and bond and brought into the world And again, this is we don't know the future maybe I think this I would find this sad carl's marriage would end Maybe carl's would at marriage would end because of this woman maybe both of the individuals go on from this marriage and Their lives are better because the marriage ended What do we mean by that? The point here is we are only human beings we can't do the math And there will be Good and bad things the parable of the wheat and the tares There will be good and bad things in this world and we can't sort them out And too much and too aggressive human wielding Will bring us to a point where we can't do the math And too much and too aggressive human wielding will bring into our world unintentional consequences And and for all of the the thing that bothers me most about So much language I hear on the political right and the political left is We have way too high We think too much of ourselves We really think We can know everything and by our own power We can Bring about the kind of world that we want and yet All of that despite the fact that In almost any system when people do things the right way Many times when they do things the right way, they're blessed by it But you can find case after case after case Of people who did things the right way Where outcomes were not as they desired And were in many ways what most of us would say would be bad But then there'll be a good aspect to it and life is like that and so The whole idea about when we try to bring down heaven we bring up hell The problem is us and That's the heart of the story in the bible the man and the woman The satan satan looks around and says, yeah, the only reason he doesn't want you to eat from that tree is You'll be like him they're like I want to be like him I think being like him would be a good thing I'd like to manage this world and the astounding piece of the story that People don't get is that in many ways? Is even in their moment of disobedience god gives them exactly what they ask for you want to run the world? Okay And you know, it's the same story in the parable of the prodigal son You want your chunk of the inheritance? Okay And and god keeps giving this to us You want to cheat on your wife? Okay You want to get that job? Okay You want to do this? Okay And then we discover This isn't what we thought Here's the story All right, any any other comments on that Uh, i'll go i'll go ahead again First of all, I want to say I think that was really well done paul. I totally agree with every everything you said there um there is in my view, I think there's only one way to get to to utopia and Unfortunately, it's a catch-22 because the solution is not to force it on anybody but for all of us to be that person who gets their room in order and takes responsibility and loves others and So on and so forth and so all we have the power to do is be the steward of ourselves in that Um, but I think the temptation most people have when they realize this Oh if we were all just good to each other, then it would be utopia And so they take that big idea and then they force it on everybody But once you take the choice away from people, that's when you lose the battle. Yep. Yep and at the same time some choices are best not given to people and we learn that with children and Yeah, it's it's it's enormously complex. It's enormously complex. It just really is and that's why you know the the book of job and the bible is just brimming with wisdom because Job is you know, hey, he's been wronged. He has been wronged. He's full of himself. His friends aren't any help I want god to come down God says all right I'll come down Tell me tell me how to run the world You know, and the truth is we think we know how we should run the world and We just look at each other and see how we're running our own lives All right Okay the magic wagon Hey paul Since I haven't yet encountered the following elsewhere in your videos. I'd like to know if you have a theory on what generally Universal on what generally universal life stages exist This varies some culturally geographically and per major life world events along with other factors Even so what stages and trends have you have you determined to exist in your life that you've observed? To likely be present in other lives. For example, if you're familiar with ruth van reken's work, I'm not Um, you may have stumbled upon her rough outline below zero to 20 We're being formed and um, we're being formed and know it all I think there's lots of little stages in there too. Like There's there's there's lots of little schemas like this You know like from zero to six you keep telling children You know, you're safe. It's okay mom and dad are omnipotent omniscient and invincible And then seven to twelve you're like You know, there are systems out there and you know, you find these, you know piaget did these developmental stuff. So there's there's actually The the problem with this isn't that there are too few schemas There are so many of them because there are all these different stages and there are also You know, this this is where we get into When we try to study for a few years ago, they So psychology part of the problem of psychology is it was okay This is science. Well, what do we mean by science? We mean that it's like physics It's like if you go to india or germany or argentina Gravity works in the same way. Yeah, there's there's the context But if you study psychology in india germany or argentina and you run all these different psychological groups What can you say about a human being We don't know what a human being is and part of the problem is we are Patterns looking at patterns and looking for patterns. And so this is enormously complex, but these schemas are nice So zero to twenty we're being formed and know it all twenty one to forty life and identity aren't what they seemed Forty one to sixty revise the dream and find our groove sixty one to eighty delight in life grieve at lost potentiality Pass on the torch eighty one plus hope to keep our mental and physical faculties Yeah, that's a good one. I like it one of the things just reading it off the top of my head. I think about So I I spend a fair amount of time with individuals who Are categorized in our Current world as having mental illness There's so much built into that categorization it isn't funny and I think about that a lot because I You know, I think we have some understanding what general intelligence is But I think we have a cultural bias around it Because I spend a lot I spend a fair amount of time with people who are Because I spend a lot I spend a fair amount of time with people with low iqs And I find a fair amount of wisdom in them Because they might not be And I think about here's an analogy So i've I've followed this computer of this evolution of computers for a while and The first time I bought a pc I had to decide whether I wanted to pay a little bit for a 286 or a little bit more for a 386 and some of you will remember those terms And so then and then pentiums came along and then You know dual Intel processors with You know dual processors and then the core i3 i5 i7 i9 processors and now we have the apple mac 1 processors And then you know we were I was always buying computers with more ram and more processing speed But these spinning hard drives and then SSDs came along and it was like oh I can have a slower processor but an ssd And that architecture will produce some more desirable results than a faster processor and a spinning hard drive And now the m1 chip has come along with apple and that's making big waves. So all of this stuff going on So I I spend time with people. Let's say someone who has down syndrome Okay, what capacities they're clearly limited in certain capacities But what does living 50 years as someone with down syndrome produce Someone with down syndrome produce There's a lot going on with this stuff some people and and part of my bias against a lot of stage thinking You know, I I I laughed my head off when I saw Jonathan peugeot with the rebel wisdom crowd and he got the integral question. It was so funny. That was so funny And and but part of me i'm I don't know if I would have been gentler than jonathan peugeot was but it was hilarious part of what always Annoyed me about these things is that they are setting up hierarchies and peugeot of all people shouldn't be too annoyed by a hierarchy but I think what annoys both peugeot and I about some of these hierarchies is that They are they are seen that they are put too high on A certain set of hierarchies among hierarchies In that the integral ideas Once you create that hierarchy you have now and this so this is the egalitarian democratic side of me You have now biased certain things in the system against other things and almost always It almost always what is biased are and now i'm going to sound terribly post-modern Almost always what is biased are the things that are convenient and Convenient for the people setting up the hierarchy and and I see this like in fowler's developmental ideas about faith Because Fowler's developmental ideas about faith sort of bias someone Who the same people that ken wilbur's ideas about integral theory bias They bias people who are high in openness. They bias people who are high in intelligence they bias people who are fast processors of information And and that they tend to bias people who with our contemporary democratic weird western uh industrial Educational, you know on and on that weird I can't pull them up all all right now they bias those people and then when I meet people who let's say perhaps our trades people And they work with their hands And I listen to them talk about their faith And they talk about they have a great amount of respect for the law of the lord And they stick to elements of god's law very rigidly Now in terms of fowler's hierarchy of the development of faith, these people would be low But then when I watch how these people live their lives, you know what I discover often They're really reliable They're very honest They're very loyal They tithe They're faithful to their spouses if if if If the shit hits the fan I call them why because their life is put together And you would look at fowler's hierarchy Of spiritual development and they would be very low But I look at them and say well, you know They might have an iq of Maybe a hundred If you got an iq of 60 you're really debilitated But you know 90 100 the the difference, you know between let's say 95 and let's say 150 And then let's say 15 They're they've got average iq But they're really well put together because they have held on to a certain system and they have worked it well and it has produced wisdom and benefit and And stability and really wonderful things for their life and fowler's developmental schema of faith Is unaware of that because then I look at people who would be high in openness high in intelligence um sitting atop uh Institutions religious institutions churches perhaps and their marriage is a disaster and their finances are a wreck and And their kids are a mess Yes And I look at all these people who were lower on these imagined hierarchies and scales and I think i'd rather have their life I'd rather be less intelligent a little less open Part of me wishes I could look at the world in black and white like they do now someone some smart person might come around and say ah, but that That black and whiteness only works in a system of relative stability Where they're holding on to I mean all of these the this whole argument that brent weinstein has against You know trusting the scriptures and the bible And I'd say yeah, there's there's there's a point to that but You're not living any old place. They're living there And and it could be that if if chaos hit they would simply begin Their epigenetic treatment of the genetic code of the bible would would shift and they would start reinterpreting other things but their basic disposition of of rather black and white thinking and of Of real firm holding on to certain things that might endure and that might bless them, too In other words if we say that the world is so large and so chaotic and so and too difficult for us to systematize That then certain embracings of certain systems might outperform much more flexible Embracings of certain systems and so that's part of the reason I I I think there's a lot of validity to these systems and hierarchies, but they tend to They also tend to have rigid embrace. They tend to also tend to rigidly embrace certain other value hierarchies In other words They sort of sneakily do what they are complaining about in their overt system and And that's in a sense the entire lie about certain forms of post-modernity Because they say there are no There are no dominating narratives and and By saying it they just created one and so That's no I I like these sort of things and and I think these but it's all again The theme of this video would be the migilchrist stuff that These these are all left brain instantiations of Observations of patterns and that's really cool and they're really useful and they can be really handy but They are also themselves Limited often by their own thing So that's that'd be my take on that Any any comments on that All right, i'll continue We're up to november 25 and today's the 27th or night we're gonna get to today another 15 minutes or so So what we usually do for those who are watching on youtube again We're streaming these on youtube now because i'm lazy and it's easier just to stream them than to have me Do all the other things after rick laughs because he knows it's true um, and rick nods because it's true for him, too But uh, so if you you know, we do these most friday mornings at 10 o'clock and I'm not reading the youtube Comment stream at all. I don't have that in front of me if I read that in front of me I would be totally distracted So i'm just managing what's here in the discord and if you'd like to participate live you can do it from the discord And we're going to end this at noon california time the top of the hour And then we have unrecorded conversation in this space. I usually at that point sort of take a back seat Um, I might stay in the room 15 minutes or a half hour or so to answer any follow-up questions and then I usually go and sit with rick and we leave it on in the background and um Just uh do other things so and and what's really been nice about this and again The world is too complex to understand how this works But we kind of get a critical mass in the room here on friday morning and at least friday morning california time And the conversation just continues to go on throughout the day and that's been a really cool part of what we discovered by doing this so Okay, um Father big mac eric father big mac is a member of this community and he is My understanding he's not yet a roman catholic priest, but he's in preparation to become one and and again, this is what's been so cool about this is that My life is busy and where while there are roman catholic priests in this city around me I never spend any time with them. And so i've been deeply enriched by the wisdom of Many in the roman catholic church, I know that sounds like a betrayal of the iconic last protestant anti-catholicism that unfortunately gripped our tradition for many years, but I I I love learning from My roman catholic brothers and sisters and so it's been good So if it is possible to embrace an ancient religion and an overwhelming is it possible to embrace an ancient religion in an overwhelmingly? secular context Yes, it's sort of the same answer to can you be a buddhist in america? that Aspects of An ancient religion Continue to change and this is part of the really interesting dynamics of how jordan peterson launched a a the growth of the orthodox church in america I mean you just think about that. It's just Wow, how could that happen? Well, and you continue to dig into it and you can find it because We're we're still processing a lot of the stuff from the protestant reformation and the italian renaissance and the scholastic movement and and and and and so yeah but what's so interesting and terrifying and I think about this sometimes because protestants tend to do this rather disingenuous trick of And I don't mean to be flippant about that But on my shelf I can pull off a book that was written in the 1960s by the christian reform church And when I read that book, it's like here's the new testament. Here's the protestant reformation Here's 1960 in the christian reform church in north america. It's just boom boom boom. It's all one of a kind If I could go back and converse with uh jacob's nemesis the apostle paul There would probably be things in my life that the apostle paul would be horrified at And there'd be things in the apostle's paul apostle paul's life that I would be horrified at Partly because we're separated by all of this time at the same time there would be things that We would be we could find unity around and so a a roman catholic believer in 2020 Is going to be It would be very interesting if you could take that believer and in a 300 degree way compare that person to someone in um 1390 in france Tremendous there'd be a tremendous difference so Is it possible sure What is it going to look like? Those are really interesting questions How can one tell the difference between possessing a religious worldview and possessing a secular? Gosh, this is a good question And possessing a secular religion with a religious accessory overlaid on the surface. Oh, yeah And that's where tom holland's book was So helpful for me once I began to understand his thesis it's like Oh so much of what because those why why? Gosh this, you know So much of of how this has developed has for me has been I look at people in the church and I look at people outside the church and in a tradition that has a fair amount of antithesis like my own People in the church are supposed to be really different from people outside the church because of the preaching of the world word because of the the means of grace because of because of and in some ways people in the church are And in some ways they are not and so that's why I say those of us who Believe in god are way more secular than we would care to admit And what tom holland does is sort of flip the script and say all of you people who are atheists out there You believe in god way more Than you you act as if I mean jordan peterson had the guts to say it and he could say it because he Wasn't within a religious tradition and so that's sort of where jordan peterson and tom holland come together because what they do Is that they is they recognize that? a lot of these really important instrumental categories That we use in our world today to organize Are both enormously valid and have limitations on their validity And so There is as a dutch reformed person. There is a ton of the western church inside of me and part of the reason that when a woman A married woman winds up dead the first suspect is her husband Well, there's so those dynamics between protestants and catholics Because we're so close to one another that you know the the the potential for explosive conflict is great I used to notice this in the dominican republic when I was there that puerto rican's could minister to haitians But Dominicans had a hard time ministering to haitians because dominicans and haitians were too close Puerto ricans had a hard time ministering to dominicans because they were too close So dominicans and puerto ricans are quite close, but they're divided by the fact that all puerto ricans have american passports and dominicans don't And the history of the dominican republic and the history of puerto rico in many ways was quite close They're both caribbean islands had spanish. Um, or spanish colonial territories yada yada yada but They're far enough away that So there's the issue of close and far and that's the same thing with secularity And I think tom holland's observations that he brought to us about How close secularity is? To religiosity and we're discovering this now. I can't tell who's got the noisy mic in the room um I muted one of you already Okay, um So in india I caught an article in india The government is I don't know if they're censoring There's a so there's a show on netflix in india where a family where a hindu and buddhist basically There's a lot of tension between I snicker every time people are like all those abrahamic religions the world would be much less violent if we didn't have these abrahamic religions I guess you don't read news coming out of india very often do you about the Kind of tensions that they have between buddhists and hindus So there's a there's a show on netflix which has I don't know if it's a marriage I'm gonna have to dig this one up between a buddhist and a hindu and it's a happy marriage And the government of india would like to suppress this Why well because This is what we do. These are how these things lay out and what? Secularity afforded and again tom holland has example after example about this, you know, basically how British colonial power suppressed the islamic slave trade and forced islamic countries to outlaw slavery Okay, is that a good or a bad thing Is colonialism good or bad? Is christianity good or bad? Come on people We're smarter than this We can do this kind of math so Yeah, we are secularity is a product of christianity Oh it's a and and and so ironically when Someone who is orthodox or roman catholic Embraces what is an enlightenment idea of religious tolerance within a state government They're being protestant And i'm not saying that to put it in anybody's face I'm saying it to just recognize that We have these categories and and I have to recognize them too. There are some real There are some real tensions Yeah, okay, let's use this example should adultery be illegal Tolerance for adultery Why do we have it We we we're increasingly intolerant with respect to opinions about same-sex marriage or behavior But we're tolerant about adultery But we're tolerant about adultery Why Wait Those are hard questions to answer should we be that's a far harder question just like getting rid of mosquitoes Should we get rid of mosquitoes? I'll tell you if you're laying in bed and you hear that buzzing around you And you think about the zika virus or malaria or dengue fever or any of those things you say Yeah, let's get rid of mosquitoes All right Is it worth getting rid of mosquitoes if we also get rid of bees? Well, no, oh, okay Well, what if we actually got rid of mosquitoes only to discover that Mosquitoes are fulfilling a function in our ecosystem that we had zero understanding of and now we've gotten rid of mosquitoes And we're going to have to try to bring them back So, yeah, the world is big and complex and and so i'm this person that's very high in openness and certainly not as smart as the Weinstein brothers or Jordan Peterson, but Maybe a little maybe my iq is I don't even know my iq and I don't care to know it. Maybe my iq is a little Above average, let's say that's what I would guess it would be a little above average I'm all those things and so certain kinds of religious and non-religious people like to listen to me But there are other religious people who see much more in black and white And they listen to my videos and say paul vanderkley is part of the problem because paul vanderkley is paul vanderkley is watering down the black and white And I would have to listen to them and say they probably have a point But then they might turn around and say that's because you're high in openness, aren't you? You're so high in openness. You don't even have a problem with antithetical people Yeah, that's probably right But I also see their value And i'm glad they're in the ecosystem And even as a high end openness person I should have a stronger appreciation for the antithetical And my life would probably be better served if I had a few harder and richer and more legalistic And ideological rules than I do So life is like that, all right, that's a good way to close this out Um rick says good, so i'll just give a little i'll just give a little Thank you for listening. Thank you for joining on the youtube live stream It's thank you for coming into the bridges of meaning discord server And participating in this and asking questions. Sorry. I didn't get to all your questions but we'll probably pick them up next week if Lord willing see there's one of my little I like saying lord willing the bible says say lord willing and Why does the bible say lord willing before we say we're going to go and do something because I don't know if it'll happen. I could have a heart attack this week that um rationality rules fan with the Truck full of fertilizer and explosives could detonate in the parking lot and rick and I would be gone Rick's like why do you keep taking me with you on these? On these rationality rules terrorist plots But here we are so thank you for listening and rick's gonna end the transmission and I'm gonna run off to the bathroom because i've been sipping tea this whole time That's probably more than you wanted to know but um And then we'll have some chat in the discord server. So thanks for coming. All right, rick