https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Nymn1gIuMVo

 Action! Oh Rick, he's got those hand signals down. Oh, but that's not getting recorded. Rick never puts himself on camera. Rick never says anything. He's laughing at me now. See, Rick is real. I think I'm gonna have to make a sign. Rick is real. So welcome. We're recording this just because you only get one chance to record it. So like last week's, I didn't post last week's, I don't always post them. I can't really tell you why I do or don't post them. It's just kind of a gut feeling sometimes, or I get negligent and sloppy or I have other things to post. So we don't have a lot of comments and a lot of questions, which is totally cool. Rick is mousing over some questions that I don't know if... What is your favorite civilization game? Why do you enjoy these games specifically? I like the, usually like the latest civilization game. There was a civilization game, Call to Power, which I enjoyed and that had only one edition. I usually play the Sid Meier civilization games. Why do I enjoy those civilization games? I don't know. I don't, I go in, I'll play civilization for like a few weeks or if I can get my sons to play civilization with me, I'll do that because it's fun playing with them. I don't know why I like them. I just kind of do. They're a nice distraction, but they're terribly time consuming. So I'll do it for a while. Then I'll say, oh, I've spent all this time on a computer game. What has this profited me? And then I'll abandon it for two or three months. And then I'll be like, I feel like playing civilization. And then I'll play civilization, or I'll talk Ben or Jared, my sons into playing. And so it's cool. Why? I have no idea. Are you seeing a shift in your, I'm going to go back to the civilization game. Are you seeing a shift in your, I'm going in reverse order. Are you seeing a shift in your tradition in the direction of affirming same-sex marriage? Oh yes. There are more people in the Christian Reformed Church that affirms same-sex marriage than there were 10, 15 years ago. I think that's definitely true. And that's simply part of the movements in culture. I doubt however, that that will move the Christian Reformed Church to an affirmative position. It's more likely to end the Christian Reformed Church than to yield a church that is affirming. And that's because of some of the dynamics with this movement that has tended to Oh boy. I think about this stuff a lot, but actually figuring out how to articulate what I see is really challenging because I'm just struggling for metaphors to try to capture what I see. So many of the people who begin affirming same-sex marriage in the church are also often the people who are at high risk of leaving the church. And that's why I say churches split right and leak left because there was on the video that I just posted earlier this week, I read from this post Calvin blog. And many of the issues that this woman raises are some of the classic deconstruction issues. And the same-sex marriage issue has been, if you listen to almost all of these deconstruction stories, this comes in. Now, and I don't want to be, and then people in tribal opportunism then jump in and say, aha. Well, I don't know about aha, but there are some things going on far below the presenting issue that are causing these correlations, I think. And that's why I'm deeply interested in questions of secularism. I'm interested in Stephen Smith's thesis of immanentism with respect to paganism. And so in my last video where I read some of that blog post, I'm trying to get to a level below. Now, this morning, Julian had pointed me to some conversations between David Cayley and Ivan Illich. And Ivan Illich was a Roman Catholic priest. He basically was kicked out of the church for heresy. But he's got some really interesting ideas about secularization and institutions and the impersonal nature of institutions. And if these, I'd say there's a likelihood that some of this stuff is gonna appear in some of my videos coming down the road because whereas again, like with many ideas and theses that I see presented, I might not completely buy the whole truckload that the thinker or the author is presenting, but they often have some insights and some ideas that are right and true and I want to integrate into my thinking, into my worldview. So, and if nobody can tell, what seems to be so obvious, I'm just using my YouTube channel as sort of a thinking out loud. Oh, see there, my smartphone just went off with the thing playing. All right, there it goes. But distracted me. So the thinking out loud I'm doing as I blog and as I think and I'm trying to integrate what I'm learning and I'm doing it in real time and y'all are listening and y'all are helping me and sharing ideas that you have and perspectives that you have and it's a way of us all thinking together and in some ways being a body, like the church talks about being a body and that's a really cool thing. So that's why I think this thing that we're doing here is really cool. So yeah, in the CRC, it's our thing the CRC, it's our turn to wrestle with this. In 2006, there was a church in First Toronto that they actually didn't ordain that elder. Someone corrected me on CRC Voices today. I do, there's a listserv called CRC Voices that some of the randos have gotten onto since then because anybody can get on it. You don't have to be a member of the Christian Form Church to be in that group and it was mostly a dying little listserv but sometimes I like thinking out loud with my lips and sometimes I like thinking with my fingertips as I type and so lately I've been doing a lot more writing and thinking on CRC Voices and especially processing now what's happening in the Christian Reform Church and I'm not, some people are very, everybody's entitled to their own politics and their own opinions and their own emotions and I think part of being an adult is recognizing that if you want your thinking and opinions and emotions to be respected and that you kind of have to allow other people to do so too and part of the idea behind liberal democracy is that we allow ideas and opinions to range and roam and we allow things to change. That's a very dangerous thing because ideas are very powerful and people are very powerful but that's kind of the trade off that we work with. So in the CRC we're about to have a church fight, a denominational church fight about same sex marriage and that could end the Christian Reform Church as I've known it and loved it and many people are anxious and angry and scared or hopeful about this and like with all wars, none of us know where this thing's going to go. Will I be a Christian Reform Minister five years from now? Will there still be a Christian Reform Church? What will happen to Living Stones? What will happen to my job? What will happen to this classes? I don't know any of those things and as with wars, this could be determined by events across the nation. When you think about how World War I started, these rather incompetent anarchist terrorists tried to assassinate someone, they botched the job and then amazingly it happens and this horrible war ensues. A few weeks ago, Ruth Bader Ginsburg dies just before the election. And then this morning, my wife got out of bed a little earlier than I did and she's sitting on the couch and she's got her phone in her hand and big letters on the phone. Trump and his wife test positive for COVID and it's like, oh, wow, 2020 just keeps giving. And it's, and again, I wish the Trumps well, I hope they recover, but whoever's the true Christian wins in Civ V, Andrew says. So it's a crazy thing. It's a crazy thing. So yeah, CRC is going to have its fight over same-sex marriage. And I think these fights are in some ways fairly inevitable and even though they can be highly destructive and painful, I think it's part of the process. And just as I think a culture war is a good time to bear witness to Jesus Christ, a church fight is a good time to bear witness to Jesus Christ because usually in a church fight, lots of people behave badly. And if lots of people are behaving badly, you have the opportunity to not behave badly and that'll usually happen in a costly way. And it's usually costly good behavior that creates the starkest, most powerful witness. Now, if you think about human beings as individuals, that's hard because we love our lives and we should love our lives, but a deep part of the Christian narrative is that we are not our own. First question, answer the Hedover catechism. We in some ways belong to this far larger story that we participate in. And then we would say, yeah, but each individual human life is precious and sacred. And yes, it is, which is why there's a resurrection and why there's divine judgment and why there's a narrative that says that this little biological life that we enjoy on this present stage is just a little bit of everything that God has in store for us. So yeah, let's see. Which translation of the Bible is best? Tyler answers that. Tyler asked that question after I posted two plus hour video. Thanks, Tyler. What do you make of Biden pulling out the Irish Catholic card against Trump? I didn't hear him do it, so I'm not gonna comment on it. Do you see the role of pastors staying the same in the next 10 plus years? Wow, that's a good question. I've got Andrew Root's book on pastoring in a secular age rattling around in my head. The role of pastor has changed dramatically and it is deeply impacted by secularity. Pastor is not priest. You have prophet, priest, and king, that's kind of the trilogy in terms of offices of Christ and therefore in Protestantism, officers of believers, and pastor isn't one of those. Pastor is in some ways a riff on overseer, a riff on overseer, Episcopoi in the New Testament. And it's an overseer of Feed My, it's a legacy of Feed My Sheep, Jesus' command to Peter. And it's interesting in Acts six, the apostles say, we need some of these Greek speaking deacons to take care of the Greek speaking widows and so that we don't spend all of our time waiting on tables and so you have job differentiation there. We should devote ourselves to the ministry of the word and prayer and doing apostle type things. And so, yeah, we're, pastoring continues to change and part of what's fun and also frustrating and crazy difficult about pastoring is it's so many little jobs all rolled into one. You're sort of, lately the biggest change in the pastor role in some corners of the church has been pastor's entrepreneur. Eugene Peterson pushed back on that quite a bit. In the Reformation period, pastors were sort of caretakers, but also scholars and was Martin Luther an activist, a reluctant one, but sort of became one. Pastors today are kind of, are sometimes CEOs or small business managers or entertainers or counselors or plumbers or, or technical help and, for helping old ladies with their computers get on Zoom for their small group Bible studies or sweepers of sidewalks or people who help move refrigerators for people who don't have cars or trucks or strong backs or, I mean, the kinds of things I do in the scope of my job is often breathtaking. A lot of it is, one of the interesting things if you read something like the book of Timothy is the virtues of these elders that Paul writes about are shopkeeper virtues. In other words, what I mean by shopkeeper virtues, people who are reliable, steady, have their lives in order, are competent across a range of things. And there's just some wisdom in there in terms of keeping a small group of people together, because so much of what it takes to, to allow a little group of 50 or 100 or 200 to actually have a healthy community together is just a lot of common sense. And how do you gain common sense? I just picked up a used book from a footnote in Peter Brown's book on money in late antiquity called Local Knowledge for their essays on interpretive anthropology. And I wanted it because there's an essay in here on common sense, because what on earth is common sense? And at least from the little quote I grabbed from that book, common sense seems to be like this hodgepodge of little sayings that are not really systematized but sort of float around a culture and in some ways define the culture. And now some common sense sayings can be really stupid and destructive, but wisdom is all about knowing when a saying is appropriate. If you look at the book of Proverbs, for example, it's this 31 chapters of little common sense sayings. And they're not rules, they're not laws, they're not commands. They're just little navigational aids that can be helpful in knowing how to navigate life. And if you're, so I had a friend for a while, he was a pastor of a church plant here and sailing was his hobby and he's a real crafty Dutchman. So he figured out how to get into a used sailboat, mostly by renting it out to other people and that sort of paid the mortgage on the sailboat. And he had it in the San Francisco Bay and he and I would go sailing together on the San Francisco Bay sometimes. And that was just a delightful thing. So I learned a little bit of sailing and spent time with him talking and had other colleagues and friends out on the boat sometime. It was a delightful thing. Where was I going with this? Navigational markers. So the San Francisco Bay is actually a very shallow bay. It's sort of the mouth of the estuary, the great estuary of the California Delta. And the Bay is very shallow. And so they have to continually dredge it to get ships in and out. And so then you have all these markers and well, a marker is a very important thing, but the context and location of the marker and the interpretation of the marker is vital because what a marker is in the middle of the Bay is just this buoy, just this floaty thing sticking up out of the water. And what does that communicate? Well, all of its power comes from its context and people having the local knowledge. And so common sense is like that and wisdom is like that. And leading is full of those kinds of things. So yeah, Charlie says, I don't like mega churches. And that's, mega church is a very different organism than a church like mine. And now my church is changing. And I'm hopefully over the next couple of weeks gonna try to figure out how I can incorporate more estuary and Living Stones online things into the church, maybe start a little Zoom group or something like that. We've got two or three people from outside the church, one in Australia and one in Northern Ontario who are participating in our little Living Stones men's group. And I've kept those numbers quite low intentionally because Living Stones is a very small place and it can very quickly be overwhelmed by people online because online is huge and in person is small. But I want to figure out how we can use these connections to bring life to both. And so I'm happy with the way the men's group has gone with a couple of individuals, but it just takes a lot of wisdom in a church. Just let's take it takes wisdom and family and leadership is really all about wisdom, knowing the time and the place to do things and not do something. So yeah, that's a role of pastor is going to continue to change because the world is changing fast. Is there anything you think pastors need to shed or grow into in their role? So much of it depends on the context. And it's also the case that every pastor like every human being has strengths and weaknesses. And so in many ways, this church suffers from my weaknesses and this church profits from my strengths. And so churches very quickly begin to, especially small churches that have solo pastors, very quickly begin to reflect something of the pastor. Now, hopefully what happens in a church is that other people express their gifts and make up for the deficiencies of the pastor in certain areas. And pastors actually count on that. So it's always that sort of thing that I see. Yeah, priests are very distinct from pastors. The priestly role is an intermediary. And so, sometimes people will call me a priest and I'll say, I'm not a priest, I'm Protestant. And I don't mean that in any dismissive way, but the difference in language is telling a Roman Catholic priest, they're often pastors and they do pastoring often, but the difference in the wording is significant. And yeah, so let's see. Anybody here in the room wanna talk or have something, a subject they wanna bring on the table and have us discuss it? I have a question. Okay, Andrew. So I really enjoyed your conversation with Andrea and Ryan, and I found it very fun and interesting. And so I was wondering if I could ask you a bit more about your thoughts on sort of Ryan's take on scripture a bit and how he had this more artistic thought and also how that relates to the potential shift in religion and art and how that also changes traditions. And maybe lastly, if you can get to it, if that artistic form, how you feel about that artistic form being a start of religion, which is sort of like a more Petersonian thought. Well, why don't we begin by telling me what you heard Ryan say about scripture in terms of how you're thinking about it. And that will help those in the group that maybe don't know too. Yeah, so from what I, I'll try and do my best job. He mostly thought of the, basically the Bible was in that specific region. So like Israel, that conglomeration of scripture was the best poetry out of that region. If I remember that's sort of what he said. And so that's sort of like the ranking that they had for the religion. That's how they made it. I think that, I thought that was an incredibly helpful and perceptive comment. I think, I thought it was particularly helpful and perceptive in the way that he was talking about it. I mean, that was actually very, it was very, very game intensive because it used, the question is always what do you mean by best, that somehow this material in the eyes of communities, over both horizontal and vertical over time and across distance have thought that these particular text stories, poetry were of enduring value. We know, you know, there are hints in the Bible of this. We know that the Bible, the Old Testament and the New Testament was basically emerged out of communities over great, great amounts of time. Numbers of people contributed to it. We sort of see that in the development of the canon of the New Testament. And so I think it's a really important thing. Also in the Old Testament. So you have these prophetic books and in Deuteronomy, there's this rule in Deuteronomy 18 about a prophet. Basically, the thing about a prophet is, someone gives a prophecy and they're saying basically, God says this. Well, Deuteronomy 18 has a high bar. If it comes to pass, they're a real prophet. If it doesn't come to pass, stone him. So it's a high stakes on that prophetic game in Deuteronomy 18. So that'll I think if we I'm not I'm not recommending a rule like this for places that like to like to do prophecy. But it's a little bit of accountability is in order. And I think that's part of what Deuteronomy 18 says. And I've often noted that when people write books like 1980 Countdown to Armageddon. Well, when 1980 rolls around and Armageddon didn't show up, at least an apology is in order. So we'll forego the stoning, but at least an apology is in order. So the point, I think, is really a good one. And the point also the point also suggests something of the God number one dynamics that and this is always really difficult. And it's often quite present in a tradition like mine, where there's a very high view of God sovereignty. And that if something comes to pass, well, you know, either God is responsible for it or God had hand in it or or or. And again, I don't think we quite know how to language this. So, yeah, that's true. Now, where this will get interesting is that Christians say, well, what do we mean by canon? Well, this is this is the rule of life in our community. So you can understand that a lot of different ways you can understand that in a rather libertarian way or or contractual way that this is that this is the thing that binds us together. Now, in saying that, it doesn't mean that we can't recognize wisdom in other religious traditions. We can't recognize wisdom in secular texts. We can't recognize truth in science or truth in people from other religious or cultural communities. Canon says this is our standard. This is our rule. And we will, to one degree or another, hold each other accountable. By this rule. And so his sort of secular approach to scripture in terms of all this, these are the greatest hits of of of communities all around the world. That's not a that's not a bad perspective. What it doesn't afford is the one thing that religious communities are designed to afford, which is some liberation from the old. Because when I say something like the Bible is the word of God, that means that I am not. And that means that I will have to submit to this canon. I'll have to submit to this rule. And I submit myself within a community. I'll submit myself within a community. I'll submit myself within a community to to this thing. So part of the liability of the sort of free range secular perspective is that. What's your canon? Is that the Bible? Is it a mouse read book? Is it J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter? Is it the is it the fan fiction of Star Trek? Let's you know, and you can kind of crowdsource it and say, well, I'm going to go and I'm going to look at the things that are bestsellers. Well, that's kind of hard because, again, at least according to some lists, mouse little red book is the number two book of human history. Well, why would that be? Well, I think it's because it's the number one thing that's kind of hard to do. And so the mouse government had incredible power and was tyrannical and so saw to it that hundreds of millions of copies of his ideas would be published. I don't know anybody who has ever told me they've read mouse little red book. The Bible is the most published, translated, examined, and published. The Bible is the most published, translated, examined book in all of human history and nothing else is even near it. Now, you could look at that with the same criteria that you look at mouse read book and say, well, that's just because of of Christian privilege and the invention of the printing press and colonialism and yada yada yada. Fair enough, but it begs the question. How do you assess the best? And it's well, what I think is the best. And that presents us with the the most common human problem, which is. The captivity of me by me and the limitations of my little 57 years of human experience and all of the biases that have been built into the production of myself. It's interesting in Christianity that in many ways. The greatest rival we have to God is our own selves. And in some ways, one way of understanding final judgment is sitting down with God and God saying, OK, Paul, is it finally going to be you or me? I like me. I was telling Andrea before I have a big ego. I'm very low in neuroticism. I like me a lot. And God says, it's going to be you or me. Which one do you want to have now? And I'd say, I don't know. What are my options? What does this entail? And let's say God would say, OK, well, I'll tell you what. I'll send you to a place riffing on CS Lewis's great divorce here. I'll send you to a place where you can have anything you want just by thinking of it. Wow, that sounds amazing. That sounds like exactly what my ego wants. And then God says, the other place is where actually the whole place is all about me. And so in CS Lewis's great divorce, it starts in this gray city where anyone can have everything they want. And the streets are filled with these enormous mansions. And you hardly ever see any people because, well, in almost every one of our relationships, it's me or not me. And all of you are not me. And so maybe I'll accommodate myself, but maybe in kind of a suspicious way, I'm trying to organize myself to manipulate you to do something. I'm trying to organize myself to manipulate you to make you subservient to me. And there sort of we are. And so then the question of, OK, what's my canon going to be? Am I going to choose my canon? I'm going to. And now we have this Internet thing. Am I going to go out on the Internet and on Amazon and say, I'm going to collect the canon of what I think are the best things ever written in all of human history. And I'll crowdsource them. We'll see what Reddit votes up. I'll see what publishers put out. I'll read the New York Times bestsellers list. I'll do all of these things and I will compile the best things that I've ever written. And that will be my canon. Now it's just all you. So I think, Andrew, there's the first part of your question. I forgot what the rest of the questions were. So you want to you want to respond to any of this or push me in another way or just tell me what you think? Yeah. So I then I sort of was wondering how you think that plays into art and tradition and how it might also affect the formation of religion. We've clearly got a. It was funny, my wife this morning, she's putting together these materials basically for students for the whole school to do. It's like all this homeschooling material. And there's this one lesson. Of course, in our in our contemporary way, there was a there was a comment. There was a quote from Fred Rogers in which God was mentioned. And of course, Fred Rogers, Mr. Rogers was a Presbyterian minister. It was a very it was not a very sectarian quote at all. It was it was very broad and talked about gratitude. Then there was a Buddhist proverb. And then there was a and then there was Rumi. So an Islamic person. And then there was another quote from seemingly a secular source. And this was all kind of put together in this curriculum thing. And someone pointed out what starts out talking about God. I don't know that we can do that. And it's like, yeah, but the Buddhists and the Islamists and no God in particular got all in there. So that we certainly are we certainly are in a a time which has a fair amount of allergy to what we call sectarianism. And so an idea like like Ryan's will will be celebrated in many ways. And in fact, many of us, even in the church, we've been in the church for a long time. Even in the church, we've accommodated our language to this kind of thing quite a bit. We talk about traditions. And one way to one way to say that is one way to look at that or judge that would be say, oh, we're we're we're watering down the the antithetical aspect of Christ's demands. And fair enough. Another way to view it is we're extending hospitality. That's true, too. And get back to the wisdom thing. We don't know when to do what. So, yeah, it's going to have an impact on art. But there's so many things built into Christianity that you don't notice very readily that are part of its success and part of what makes it so durable and part of why it it. I don't think it will be put away anytime soon. And part of that is, again, the understanding is true of Judaism as well. Obviously, the understanding of God and God isn't one agent within an impersonal system is not one actor within the meta divine realm. God is agentic and also arenic. And in him we live and move and have our being. So, Abraham Kuyper, this Dutch reformed polymath who was both. He started a newspaper he started a university he wrote theology became prime minister of the Netherlands. There's not square not one square inch over this creation that the Lord doesn't claim this is mine. And so I think at the banquet of the lamb, we will be enjoying not just Mediterranean cuisine, but the best foods harvested from the cultures of the world. And I think Isaiah 60 points to that. So, yeah, this is. I think in many, you know, part of what perhaps we are doing is working on a 600 year correction of some overreach in the church. And there'll be overreaches in the correction there always are. But God will have his way. And so, yeah. I don't know any any any rebuts or comments or any follow up on that Andrew. No, that was good. I think you should go to Tyler's question. Tyler's question. Okay. And then take a drink of water. The contemporary focus on the gender ratio in churches seems to only address the lack of masculine appeal. One thing you should know about Tyler he's a statistician so he's always got a lot of these fun kind of things. The contemporary focus on the gender ratio in churches seems to only address the lack of masculine appeal, with the implication that the church should find ways to be more attractive to men. However, since the church has always been majority female, perhaps the problem is not a lack of masculinity, but a lack of. But a lack of traditional femininity. This could track with a wider culture, which appeals to be suffering from a crisis of femininity, with the additional problem of women replacing men as the stewards of masculinity. If women are if women have historically been drivers of growth, either by enticing potential suitors to join the church, or by marrying non Christian men and baptizing their children into the church, then shouldn't the attempts to address the stagnation focus on Christian with the stagnation focus on Christian women, not men. Does the preaching in conservative evangelical churches tend to emphasize feminine virtues like chastity in a way which implies that Christian women are competing for the dwindling number of good Christian men, rather than on being the gravitational force which attracts and subdues pagan men. Yeah, that's, that's quite a question. Oh, lots of good things in that question. That's such a, that's such an interesting conversation that that the church just well that the church just keeps having. On one hand, men complain that the church is too feminine. And then there are all kinds of complaints that while the church is dominated by men at least in terms of formal leadership structures. There are books out there on trying to teach male preachers, how to preach more to women. And, but if you looked at the, if you looked at the demographics one might say that, well, is, is, are these men preaching in, in exclusiveistic ways that are, you know, keeping men out. And there's the fun things about statistics as Tyler will readily addresses that boy you can play these games so many different ways. And now Tyler adds the, the idea of, you know, say the Peugeot Ian idea of, you know, men are the head and women are the neck, and the neck turns the head. And, and I mean we have this so many ways in our culture. Well, what is head turning? It's the redirection of attention. And for men that's often too because men are, you know, sexually visual creatures they, men's heads turn to look at women, whether they ever say anything or even think much it's just sort of built into us. This should track with a wider culture which appears to be suffering from a crisis of femininity. Well, I both, there never seems to be any shortage in, in crises of either masculinity and femininity. And I think part of what the IDW space and Jonathan Peugeot's most popular video on the topic has been that women have in some ways, and I love talking to Mary about this. Mary Cohen is just so much fun to talk to about these issues because you just got so much history and wisdom and she's been around the block. I mean, there's just such benefits to, to having some experience. Well, you know, how is it liberation for women to go into the workplace? I mean, last night I was talking to my wife about it's like, oh, you know, who knows, I'm at the Christian Reformed Church or Living Stones or all of this stuff. And I said, I don't really worry about, you know, will I be able to find gainful employment for the next 10 to 15 years to hopefully make it to my pension and Social Security? If Social Security is going to be there probably in retirement, I'll do what I do now, at least cut out the parts I don't like doing. But, you know, and my wife's like, well, can you find a job that pays enough to cover both of our jobs? I would love to stop working. You know, have this whole sexual revolution to, you know, make sure women are thriving in the workplace. I can't tell you how many women that say, I'd like to not work, thank you. And I don't know how many men that say, gosh, men don't really get a chance not to work, do we? Isn't that, isn't that unequal? Isn't that inequity? You know, you raise that inequity flag, I've got a long line of gripes. Yeah, but that only works if you, if you at the beginning exclude certain classes of people saying their, their gripes have no validity because it comes from them because of their genitalia or their skin color or their nation of origin or on and on. So, oh, there's plenty of crises to go around and women replacing men as stewards of masculinity. Yeah, that's very, that's very true. Because for some reason, women can tell men exactly what they're doing wrong. But if a man tells a woman what she's doing wrong, well, that's mansplaining. Okay. The truth is most of these games aren't shutting a lot of people up anyway. It's, it's just more fodder for the, for the symbolic, dramatic, liturgical, imaginary and, and morality and how that plays in it. If women have historically been the drivers of growth, either by enticing potential, I'll tell you, I can't tell you how many, how often it isn't the case that men have gone to church because of women. Look at C. Everett Coops story. C. Everett Coops was a, he was an atheist and his wife starts going to this Presbyterian church and he loves his wife and she probably nagged him a little bit so. And, you know, if you, if men want, I was having a conversation with a woman yesterday and she was talking about the younger generation and kind of training up these women and saying to these, these women saying, you know, you should really learn how to cook. Well, why? Because I'll tell you something. If you want to keep a man happy, put food on the table. Put good tasting food on the table. Putting good tasting food on the table doesn't mean that just you get to eat good food, but you can get a lot out, you can get a lot out of a man with some good tasting food. And I said, you're darn right, men are, we are simple creatures. We like food, we like sex, we like, we like a little bit of promotion of our egos. You can, you can move a man a long ways with a few simple things. Am I right, Rick? Oh, the kids camera's frozen. He doesn't, I don't, I don't see him anymore. But so yeah, women have been bringing men into the church for a long time. In the, so before the same sex marriage war, which is impending in the Christian Reformed Church, we had a 25 year war on women in office. And I've, even though I'm, I'm not looking to, I don't like excluding women from church office. But I've known a lot of women that have told me, you know, once you let women into the offices of the church, pretty soon, there's only women in the offices of the church and the men are lazy. And they're like, gosh, now I don't have to go to that council meeting. Gosh, now I don't have to do all this stuff in church. You want to do it ladies? Go right ahead. And so there have been varying degrees of MGTOW that go on. And so some women that I've known have basically said to me, I'm against women in office because if you, you know, because these men are simple creatures, give them a little job title and they'll do the work and they like it. We got plenty of other work to do. Let the men have the title and run with it. And I'll tell you, I can't tell you how many churches, churches that have, churches that are, that, that would never think of allowing a woman as a preacher. But boy, those women run the church. Boy, those pastors listen to those women because the real work that those women are doing, that's the work that runs the church and everybody knows it. And there's this joke among Christian reform churches of, you know, these councils in the middle of the women in office fight these, these conservative churches where we're against women in office and then they're having a council meeting and they're debating a point and somebody, somebody, one of the men says, well, I don't know. No, I'm going to have to pray about it. The pastor whips out his cell phone and hands it to the man says, come on, give us a break, call your wife and tell us how you're going to vote. Because it's an open secret that, that many of these men that are so against women running the church, well, those women are running the men and then the men are running the church. So, you know, now Rick's camera is live. So, so am I right, Rick, are men simple? He doesn't want to answer. Yes, we are. Men are very simple and a man can be, a man can be lured and managed and kept happy with some fairly simple things and ladies that learn this and enjoy. I mean, when you think about now, I got to be careful with this analogy, so don't push it too far. When you think about the ways that our pets mean my dog and my cat have free room and board, free food, free health care. And what are they, what do we get from it? My dog is worthless as an animal. My cat is worthless as an animal. They're cute and they're fuzzy. And look at, look at how we've got these humans wrapped around their little paws. So yeah, women have historically been the drivers of growth either by enticing potential suitors to join the church or marrying non-Christian men and baptizing their children into the church and shouldn't the attempts to address the stagnation focus on Christian women, not men? Well, I think actually in some ways, Boy, there's this question can get me into problems in so much trouble, but why not get into a little trouble? I think I suspect and Tyler is a statistician, but I suspect if you were to, if you were to look at, If you were to look at, let's look at the present crisis about same sex marriage, I suspect that women would be slightly, now again, we're talking statistics here, okay? But there might be a slight leaning of women towards affirming same sex marriage than there would be of men. That wouldn't surprise me if that's the truth. I think, I think women are, tend to be a little bit higher. Well, that's what Jordan Peterson says, they're higher in agreeableness. Women tend to sometimes go along a little easier than men. Men are lower in agreeableness. And I think in some ways, often change happens. Women are often, in my experience, usually more vocal promoters of change in the church than men. And men are kind of simple creatures and men kind of get into their ruts and they like things the way they are and they don't want them changed. And it's usually the wife that starts poking and prodding and say, let's change this and change this. And sometimes the change is for the good. Sometimes it isn't. So I think churches already cater to women quite a bit, even churches that don't allow women in leadership, just because men aren't stupid and neither are women. And the interplay of influence and authority and change is very subtle and complex. And so I would say that it's probably the case that there's way, way, way more data in these areas than we can ever track. And so it's probably our intuitions, which are always fallible, but which might lead us to say there's a reason. Stable church structures have generally been, men have been in positional authorities and women have had incredible influence and power now. And those have proven to be fairly stable structures. Now, is it true that when women don't have any positional authority, sometimes women are taken advantage of and abused? Yes. I don't know that just giving women all positional authority will somehow fix the world. I think you'll, you're probably just going to trade some, some problems for other problems. It's always been interesting to me how, so when I lived in the dorms at Calvin College, you know, when men, when men, so you have a whole group of men living together and a whole group of women living together. When, when men got sideways with each other, hang on, there's someone at the door. Pause recording, Rick. Well, my life's about to get complicated again. Gosh. So where was I? Women and men, women and men. Yeah, just finished the phrase of when men got sideways with each other. Oh, when men get sideways with each other, they yell, they push, they hit. Andrea knows this. That's how boys fight girls. Girls fight so much more devastation. That's, you know, Jonathan Haidt talks about that in terms of girls and social media and reputational attacks. There's this Amy, Amy, is it Sumer? She's, she has got this, has this great, it's this great video about, you know, basically women verbal combat. She has this group of men and she tries to teach them in the ways. And it's like, we men, we live in terror, Sumer. Yeah, that's her. We live in terror of you women. Because we can't, we can't hold a candle to you ladies in so many ways. So that's, let's see if there's anything I didn't address in here. Probably haven't addressed any of it. If women have historic men drives. Does the preaching and conservative evangelical churches tend to emphasize female virtues like chastity? Oh yeah, yeah, yeah. In a way in which implies that Christian women are competing for the dwindling number of good Christian men, rather than on being the gravitational force which attracts, attracts and subdues pagan men. You know, it's really interested in the, in the Epic of Gilgamesh how Enkidu gets tamed by a woman. That's fascinating. Yeah, there's no, there's no end to this struggle as long as we have men and women. We're going to be, we're going to be playing our tricks on each other. And, and I think that's Yeah, yeah, but let it be so. I don't know. Hey, we got some ladies in the room. You want to yell at me for being a chauvinist or? No, I want to applaud you for being a chauvinist. What are your thoughts Sherry? Oh, I, I, well I agree with everything you said, especially I was thinking about the, the fact that men are lazy. And if you let women in the door, then it'll just be women. That is absolutely true. I never thought of it like that before, but it reminded me of when I moved up into a very remote area in the bush. And all the ladies gathered me in and they gave me wise advice. The first thing they said was never chop wood. And I said, why? I can chop wood, you know. And they're like, because if you start chopping it, you'll always be chopping it. Oh, oh, okay. Oh, yeah, I get it. Never get wood, never chop wood. And wet wood is grounds for divorce. That was their, because we cooked with it, right? So, and there was constant demand for wood. And if I, you know, there were times when I would really think, okay, I'm just going to go do this myself. Right. But then I'd remember that what they said. And it was very true. I knew women who did it, and they did it. It was their job. They did it. Yep. Yeah. That's so true. I look at my daughters sometime, and of course my daughters, they went to these women's colleges and they're so, you know, they're so woke and they're so, but how do you know that women are so, you know, it's just so darn predictable. You know, they have a little car trouble. Who do they find? They have, you know, certain areas of life, you know, it's me and their brothers. And it's like, you know, I don't, I don't, all these ideas you have, you know, I'm, you know, you're going to have to show me by your acts that, that, and, you know, it was so classic because both of my, both of my girls did well and all of their subjects in school, including math and science, and they were good in science. And, you know, oh, women in STEM. Well, why don't you go into STEM? Well, I don't want to. Okay. Who are you to tell other women to go into it if you don't want to? So it goes round and round and round and round. Yeah. It's, you know, I think really what it boils down to is we're made to compliment each other. And so everything that we do should be a coordination. Yeah. Right. Yeah. And, and, and all it just, maybe I'm simplifying it too much, but everything nowadays just feels like a status game. Yeah. You know? Yeah. Yep. And, and our world has, our world has changed so much. There's no more wood chopping to do. So, you know, it was so funny because growing up, my father didn't have a lot of jobs around the house. And that was because, you know, he grew up in an age when women did everything. So, you know, when he went to college, he lived in a boarding house and a woman did his laundry, a woman cooked on those few occasions when my mother would leave town and leave us kids with dad. Food was grim. They didn't have a lot of money for restaurants. And, you know, it was, my dad was terribly inept. At one point after we'd had, I'd had a couple of kids, I had one kid in diapers. And so we left my father to babysit his grandsons and Jared needed a diaper change. And we got back to the house and looked at the sad state of that diaper on my son. And my son was like, my father couldn't do anything, but my father did do, you know, he washed the cars. He took care of the cars. He took out the garbage. He lugged things. He carried things. He, you know, and he was always, and he shoveled snow. He always loved to shovel snow. And then when he died, you know, my mother, you know, she, mom used to have to do most of the stuff, but she sure misses him doing some of those few little things. And yeah, yeah. Yeah. Well, you know, if my husband passed away, this place would fall apart. And if I passed away, this place would fall apart. Yep. You know, we are equal in that sense. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Any other subjects? So what are any questions or we don't have to be questions. If you want to come into the chat room and make an outlandish statement. Rick and I will throw a bunny with a pancake on its head if it's out of bounds. Rick's got him ready to go. Or maybe there isn't anything. Maybe. Maybe we're done. I don't know. Well, I was, I was talking to someone this morning, actually, and we were talking about the influence of Greek thought on Christianity. And, you know, he mentioned this person mentioned that the book of Daniel prophesied that, you know, that this would happen, that the Greek Empire would be successful. And it just made me wonder, maybe you have some thoughts on this as to whether or not part of that success was the success of Christianity. That's interesting. Well, the Greeks, you know, the Greeks colonized the Roman Empire pretty, pretty dramatically. Of course, Alexander conquered and spread Greek language in Greek ways throughout the empire. The Persians, of course, were deeply influential as well. And they're too often forgotten in terms of their influence on Christianity. And I think Tom Holland has done a service in raising some of that awareness. So, so the Greeks, you know, you gotta, you gotta give the Greeks their due. They, it's a pretty remarkable, pretty remarkable. Human beings are just remarkable. I mean, why is it? There's a book, Charles Murray has a book about greatness. There's another book that I was reading that was basically went through. Human genius is not spread out with equity over human history at all. There's clumps of it. Now, someone might look at that and dismiss it as bias. And of course, the problem with bias is not that it's there, it's that there's way too much of it to to notice. We can't live without bias. So, so the Greeks. Yeah, yeah, the Greeks colonized the, the what would be the East. And then the Romans came and in some ways were colonized by the Greeks and continued to spread, adding probably some more administrative and pragmatic wisdom to it. And then Christianity took all that over. So, and then in some ways, you know, you know, Greek ideas rode the coattails of Christianity, then into, you know, into Europe and colonized Europe and through the colonial period colonized the rest of the world. So, yeah, yeah. Yeah, you know, like I'm thinking specifically of Neo-Platonism and, and Aristotle. I just watched a really good thing with David Bradshaw. He's a theologian. He wrote a book called Aristotle East and West. Just how integrated that kind of thought was in the early Church Fathers and Augustine. And how that, you know, I mean, yeah, how that is actually helped Christianity in a sense to to colonize the rest of the world. We don't, we don't realize, I mean, so our Protestants tend to like to jump on this thing about, you know, the Bible. Okay. We don't realize how much other stuff around and beyond the Bible we use to employ the Bible with. It's politics, the traditions. I mean, it's just life is so big and complex. So, yeah, yeah, you got to give, got to give the Greeks credit. They've contributed a lot. I had a thought question thing, and I don't know if anybody really has an answer for it. But with the Peterson effect on people getting back into religion, a lot of people seem to be interested in going into orthodoxy, which I thought was kind of odd and strange. It's more that they want the form of religion rather than the religion itself. Did you have any thoughts on that? That's a good, good question. The question is, what is the religion itself? And in some ways, you know, the Protestant, the Protestant Reformation made religion very psychological and abstract. Seven sacraments were reduced to two. Now, I wrote this chapter for Vervecki's book, and maybe at some point I should read it on the channel. You know, I started reading my my blog post. But. So if you go, if you go. So I began in some ways with the question. The Tom Holland's observation that, you know, the Greeks, the Hebrews, they didn't have religion. Well, what were they doing with these sacrifices and temples and stories and gods? Isn't that all religion? You know, post-enlightenment, we look back and say, oh, that's all religion. They didn't see it as religion. Well, what was it to them? What was how the world worked? OK. Well, what does that mean? Well, so just as today, a plumber who, let's say there's a broken pipe under some cement, they'll have to get a jackhammer and they'll have to break up the cement and then they'll get a shovel and then they'll dig down and then they'll expose the pipe and they'll figure out what's going on. And they'll figure out how much of the pipe they want to replace and yada, yada, yada, yada. That's just how the thing works. Well, the animal sacrifices and the oracles and all of this stuff. Well, that's just how the thing works. Why was it that? I mean, these these emperors had read it in the Book of Exodus, Pharaoh and his magicians. Now we think about a magician as someone who entertains at children's parties or in Las Vegas. No, these were the New Testament. We'll call them wise men. These are these are people that it was their job to assist the emperor in reading the patterns of the world and knowing how to make decisions about their empire. That was their job. That was their job. And the sacrifices and the temples, these were all vital parts of that whole machinery. Well, what has changed and what has replaced it? Well, in post enlightenment, science and technology have replaced it. Oh, OK. That's how the world works. OK. But is it really how the world works? Because this is where Jordan Peterson's point is devastating because he and many others, David Sloan Wilson as well. The world is so full of people. And in some ways, that enlightenment perspective forgets people and ourselves who are wielding it primarily. So so if you think about it in Barfield in terms, this alive, enchanted place sort of gets boiled down into sacraments where there are limited ways. You know, again, I quoted I read some of Peter Brown's book. I have to get back into that book on on late antiquity and money. And he's got some good treatment of Constantine. And OK, so what was really going on in Constantine's head? That's a really good question. We tend to and this is a constant problem with historical material. We project back onto the past, our own value systems in order to determine what was not not a vervekey relevance realization. We we project our own relevance realization back onto history and say this is the real cause of that. Well, reality is so multivariant. None of us have time in our lives to actually express all the variables. So. But but we have to do this relevance realization. And so what happens is that Constantine, one of the things that he was really anxious about, which is why? Well, there's all these divisions in the Christian church and Constantine's kind of like, you know, you all got to get your act together about this stuff. Tell us the truth. Well, what does Constantine really want to know? Well, how to keep his new client God happy. So his new client God will bless him. So his empire will flourish and so his son will get the throne and and and and and because Roman emperors were going in and going out and going in and going out. And without a democracy that like recycles them every four or eight years, you know, it's a it's a bloodbath and it's just chaos. And so Constantine wants to know how to keep the God happy. And now he stumbled on this God, which seems to be working in terms of quelling all the other gods. And so it's a it's a really smart strategy. And so then he calls all these councils and it's like, you all got to get this act together. I mean, three in one. I mean, how does this work? Because if you don't get this work, our empire depends on it. Well, we look at that as strange because, well, we got people over there who don't believe in any God. You got other people over there who are believing in all sorts of gods. Well, how does the universe work? And the Enlightenment comes along and says, well, it doesn't really matter what theology you have. You kind of, you know, you can kind of let things go. But don't forget the process before that. Well, what's happening when the why are the priests wearing special clothing, saying special words, doing special things? Why are the priests elevating the host and partaking in communion while the rest of the church looks on on the other side of the rail? None of that is incidental. They are, you know, maintaining heaven and earth, not unlike what the Aztecs were doing with their human sacrifice. You had to, the Aztecs or the Mayas, you had to have this many sacrifices. Actually, if Rick has the other stream up, I can't watch while I talk. I get distracted. But these sacrifices are maintaining the world. And so, well, Christianity comes along and even and see, this is this is part of the this is part of the difficulty when in a sense, as the Reformation did, your you're trying to intentionally limit yourself to a text. Oh, I can't think of his name right now, but he's a he teaches in New York City. He teaches at a Christian college. He's written on this stuff about ritual. So part of what is recorded in the Old Testament are some descriptions of ritual. But you know, you're trying to limit yourself to a text. So part of what is recorded in the Old Testament are some descriptions of ritual. But you can't really if let's imagine let's imagine that some radical element of Judaism suddenly takes control of the Israeli government and they blow up the Dome of the Rock and they rebuild the temple. And they decide they are going to go back to sack of the sacrificial system. Could you reconstruct the practices and Solomon's temple. Based on the Torah. Probably not. So much information has been lost. And okay, so fairness to our traditions that believe in things like apostolic succession. We humans are communicating things to each other in ways that we can't articulate or fully comprehend or appreciate. And so, you know, there are elements of my father that are in me right now that I am not aware of. My mother can see it. My sister can see it. My family can see it. But I can't. Because I'm too close to it. But I inherited these things from my father. Some of it's genetic. Some of it's from watching him. The world is that complex. Okay. So what is the relevant aspect of religion? Is it the ceremony? Is it the liturgy? Is it the vestment? Is it the words? Words in what language? So I was making my sermon this week and used the crucifixion story. Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani. The gospel, Matthew decides to leave it in Aramaic. Boy, there's a world of information he just did by leaving that in Aramaic. A world of information. Why does Jesus quote Psalm 22 in a translation? It's the Aramaic translation of the Hebrew. Why is Jesus speaking the word of God in Aramaic? Why does Matthew leave it in Aramaic? There's so much there. So part of the Peterson wave, potentially revolution, but we'll have to see. There's no way to discern that within our timeframe right now, is a recognition of the richness, not merely the psychological aspect of truth. By virtue of its birth, there's a weakness in Protestantism, and it's this psychologizing of the church. Now, I remain a Protestant. I have no intention of changing, but let's be fair about our weaknesses. So it's not surprising to me that people are attracted right now, given where we're at with respect to modernity, to pre-modern forms of church. Both the Orthodox and the Roman Catholic traditions are old and rich. They would not be surviving in the world without the truth. So what is religion? Is it what we think? Is it what we do? How are we to think about this? And actually, this always just sort of throws me back into my Calvinism, because I look at it and say, nothing my hands can do can save me. My hands are simply too small. I am simply too short-lived. I am simply too compromised. I'm simply too sinful. So I will trust on God in Christ to rescue me in every way I can be saved. And so I have friends who are moving towards orthodoxy. I've seen a generation drift in that way, just like we began with the question of, are there more people in, you know, affirming same-sex marriage? Yeah. I don't think any of us believe we're going to see the Roman Catholic priest or the Orthodox Church sanction same-sex marriage anytime soon. So I'm not offended that people are going and deciding to submit themselves to the Orthodox Church or the Roman Catholic Church. I still have my own thoughts and agreements and disagreements. I, as long as there is a Christian Reformed Church, I hope to remain in it. We'll see how long there is a Christian Reformed Church. Maybe Paul will be a minister in some other denomination in two to three years. Who knows? But I'll likely not be a Roman Catholic priest nor an Orthodox priest. I doubt that that will happen. But what is religion? Well, if you ask about the only instance of the word religion in the Bible is in the book of James. And it's, well, what is religion? Well, it's doing some things, feeding widows and orthodox and holding true to the faith. So, yeah, great hard questions. But this is why I'm glad that only God is judge, because no mere mortal can really judge because there's just way too much to know. It's got to be God. That was really well thought out. I guess from your answer, it was obvious that my understanding of religion was a little shallow. And it was fascinating hearing your thoughts on it all. And I wasn't trying to be derogatory towards orthodoxy or anything like that. I just I just was not seeing the connection except for the symbolism. And I was like, there's got to be more going on. And there was. There's more than we can tell. So and again, you know, orthodoxy is old. How has it survived? Well, it's got plenty of truth to it. So, you know, it's I loved what what's his name? Tlaib said about, you know, you want to you want to you want to do something that endures, you want to tell a story that endures, find something old. So wise. That's so smart. He's a guy from, you know, an old orthodox tradition. But he says, you know, basically, the point under that point is we know so little. We're so shallow. We're so dim. Well, you want to beat the odds, find something old and hit your wagon to that thing. And that's so countercultural today where we so prioritize the new and the recent and the current and will likely not be remembered because of that decision. Good point. Let's see. Eleven thirty. Any other? Any other topics or comments or anything you want to throw into the mix? I'll be here another half hour and then Rick and I probably have a few more little projects to do. Rick and I always have projects. Rick's like, why on earth did I ever turn on that Paul VanderKlay video and show up at his church and give him that darn poster and poor Rick has been roped into all sorts of things. What do you make of the separation of the sheep and the goats? Now, let me let me open up the text. Because I always have to read the. I always got to read the text in context and and one of the things I know about myself is that my memory is low resolution, which is exactly what memory should be because things have to be stored in in bits and things that are connected and retrievable. So close that. Matthew twenty five. This is a series of parables that Jesus tells. So, Matthew twenty five. Let's let's scroll back. So no one knows the day of the hour lessons of the fig tree parable of the ten virgins. Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins who took their lamps and went to meet the bridegroom. Five of them were foolish and five were wise. So when the foolish took their lamps, they took no oil with them, but the wise took flasks of oil. You know that you always have to read these things. You know, don't store up treasure in heaven, but he's asked, store up a little oil. As the bridegroom was delayed, they all became drowsy and slept. But at night there was a cry. Here is the bridegroom. Come out to meet him. And all those virgins rose and trimmed their lamps. And the foolish said to the wise, give us some of your oil for our lamps are going out. So much for generosity here. But the wise answered, saying, since there is not enough for us and for you, go rather to the dealer and buy for yourself. I don't know. I don't know why these bride. I don't know why these. I don't know why these virgins need lamps. But while they were going to buy, the bridegroom came and those who were ready went into the marriage feast and the door was shut. This is like one of these. There's so many of these parables that Jesus tells of shut doors and and parties inside and darkness outside. I wrote a blog post about this years ago. While they were all going on afterwards, the other virgins came saying, Lord, Lord, open up to us. But he answered, truly, I tell you, I do not know you. What? Because of the oil? I mean, people are upset because of sex things. This is this is lack of oil and preparation. And watch, therefore, for you know, for you know, neither the day nor the hour. It seems so arbitrary. And so, you know, everything else we know about Jesus, we know it's not arbitrary, but Jesus is making a point here about shut doors and outer darkness. And then we have the parable of the talents where, well, there's, you know, and the guy who plays it safe. Well, so the talent. So take the talent from him and give it to the one who has 10 talents for everyone who has who has will be more will be given and he who has and he will have an abundance. But the one who has not so much for equity in this parable. So the one who has not even what he has will be taken away and cast the worthless servant into outer darkness in that place where they'll be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Now, this is Jesus. OK, this is Jesus. When the Son of Man comes in glory. And all the angels with him. Then he will sit on his glorious throne. Before him will be gathered all the nations, and he will separate people one from another as a separate as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. And he will place the sheep on his right and the goats on his left. Then the king will say to those on his right. Come, you who are blessed by my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. God is so crafty. For I was hungry and you gave me food. I was thirsty and you gave me drink. I was stranger and you welcomed me. I was naked and you clothed me. I was sick and you visited me. I was in prison and you came to me. When the righteous will answer him saying, Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you or thirsty and give you drink? And when did we see you a stranger and welcome you or naked and clothed you? And when did we see you sick or in prison and visit you? And the king will answer them. Truly I tell you, as you did it to one of the least of these, my brothers, you did it to me. Now here the NIV doesn't have brothers and sisters, just as brothers. Well, why? When I was in seminary, you know, we had to preach on different texts and one of the students got a text, signed this text. And of course, this text was very popular as this this vision of radical inclusion where but it's also a vision of of of moral meritocracy. And now the thing about human beings is we always game these systems because it's like I remember when one he was actually a founding member of the church just says, Well, just just tell me what I really need to do to get in. I get that question regularly. Give me the minimum requirements to making the cut and getting getting Santa Barbara in the next life and not, you know, some slum in Calcutta. And so, oh, well, here it is. Well, you know, give your money away. Doesn't Jesus say to the rich young ruler, go sell all you have and give to the poor, yada, yada, yada. But then the seminary student was assigned this text said, You know, when we study this, these brothers that one was generous towards, that's very Christian pointer. It's saying you shared with Christian brothers, not you shared with anybody out there. You shared with your own religious tribe. And people start getting worried and concerned. But Jesus has plenty of other sayings about sharing to the poor. But because of how this story is told and because of what we want, our relevance realization says, you know, the Christianity is just too broad and, you know, loving enemies and stuff. Just just tell me what I need to do. OK, well, here we have a list. Hungry. You got to feed people. You got to give people stuff to drink. And you got to welcome the stranger. And when you see naked people, give them clothes. And there's only been a handful of my times in my life when I've seen naked people out on the street, usually in the Dominican Republic, there's someone with mental illness who escaped from their family and they're running naked down the street. Oh, OK. That are a toddler who escaped from their mom is running naked down the street. And sick or in prison and visit. So you got to visit people. You got to give clothing. You got to give food. You got to be courteous and welcome and you got to give drink. Well, there it is. That's what you need to do. And now again, I'm reading this Ivan Illich stuff and David Cayley. So now we're going to institutionalize it. And Ivan Illich says, once you institutionalize it, then you betray it. Oh, boy. Then those on the left. Depart from me, you cursed. Oh, that isn't very nice. Depart from me, you cursed into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels. Oh, boy. For I was hungry and you gave me no food. I was thirsty and you gave me no drink. I was a stranger and you did not welcome me naked and you did not clothe me sick and in prison and you did not visit me. They also will answer. Lord, when did we see you thirsty or hungry or thirsty or a stranger or naked or sick or in prison and did not minister to you? Then they will and then he will answer them saying, truly, I tell you, as you did not do to the least of these, you did not do to me. And these will go into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life. Take that, universalists. What is this parable about? Well, when you read something like this, it's helpful to. Oh, here's the thing. We're asking for a summary. We're asking for relevance realization. We're asking. We're asking, what's the thing about it? And so then as an exegete, you look at context. Read the next verse. When Jesus had finished these sayings, he said to his disciples. You know that after two days, the Passover is coming and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified and Peter bites his tongue because it got scalded Satan last time he said, we're not going to let this happen. Then the chief priests and the elders of the people gathered in the palace of the high priest whose name was KFS and they plotted together in order to arrest Jesus by stealth and to kill him. But they said, not during the feast. We don't want to. We don't want anybody intervening and causing trouble. So what's this story about? Well, the salient aspects. Well, what's the salient aspect? Is the list the hungry and thirsty and naked and clothing and visiting and hospitality? Well, that's certainly important in the story, obviously. What's so interesting about the story is that neither the righteous nor the wicked have gained the system. The righteous seem to be doing what righteous do. That's what sheep do what sheep do. The unrighteous are doing what unrighteous do. The goats do what goats do. Now you might say, well, this is a Calvinist reading this. But, you know, this story could have gone in lots of different ways. And now pay attention. It's told after two other stories. And so those two other stories are important. So here are the context of some some young women. Now, when we say virgins, again, we in our culture think these women haven't had sex with people. Probably not. But the point is that they're young women. They're bridesmaids. And they're supposed to fulfill their duties as bridesmaids. And in order to fulfill their duties, they should be prepared to fulfill their duties. And some of the bridesmaids were up to the challenge. And they thought ahead and they prepared and they bought oil and they were ready to go. And so when the bridegroom came, bang, the party is about to begin. They're worthy to enter the party. They earned their way. Sounds terribly un-Calvinistic. And then the next group, well, a man was going on a journey and he called his servants together and he distributed he distributed talents according to probably you don't want to give the lazy idiot who never chops wood or shovels snow. You don't want to give him too much responsibility because you know how your servants are. Can't forget the screen while I talk. You guys are too funny. And and and so to the capable servant, he gives 10 talents to the less capable servant. He gives five and to the incapable servant. He gives one. Now there's a there's a tremendous amount of stuff going on in there because on one hand, he gives them. He gives them talents dependent on what he's already assessed their capacities to be and his assessment is correct. But he's the same time. He's also giving them an opportunity. So the one talent guy, I know this guy's a worthless servant, but let's give him a chance. So there's free will and free agency in there. And lo and behold, the 10 talent guy gives does does exactly what the master imagines he'll do. He does 10 talents worth of of and the five talent guy does five talents and the one talent. He was a schlub and okay schlub. I'm done with you being a schlub out you go. And so the people are who they are. And that's true of the parable of the virgins. And it's true of the parable of the servants and the talents. And now we're to the sheep and the goats. And in a sense, that third parable builds on the first two. And well, this test, the test has been done. The this world, you know, as much as sometimes I will sandbag this world as a trial period, both of these stories are about trials. Will the will the bridesmaids be ready for the party? Will the will the servants of the man who goes that the boss, the master who goes away on a long journey be faithful even when he isn't present looking over their shoulder or telling them, yo schlub. Get out there and chop wood you'll you'll you worthless piece of servant. And now, well, what about the 10 talent guy? Well, he's probably always been a 10 talent guy. He was raised by 10 talent parents. He, you know, he had all that privilege and he'll be rewarded for it. That's the way life is. And so here's the sheep and the goats. And yeah, there we are. And, you know, again, we bring our filters to these. And so on one hand we say, I want, I want the universe to be meritocratic, I want to earn my way in. And in some ways all of these talents say all of these these three parables say, yeah, earn away. Be prepared, be diligent, be generous. Who earn away, go for it. All right. The other parts of it says yeah but wait a minute. We're not all equal we want second chances. Well, all of those bridesmaids had chances to buy oil. All of those servants had chances to invest the money. All of the sheep and the goats had a chance to, you know, the poor are all around us. What are you doing with them? Are you are you using institutions? Maybe that's the best way. Are you giving it giving handouts directly? Maybe that's the best way. Are you figuring it out? Are you are you doing it? So do we want meritocracy or do we want universal safety and security? So I think in some ways because of how this passage is set up and the ways and the questions we bring to it, we're such pragmatists. You know, and in some ways the parable itself undermines this this this transactionally motivated coming to the parable because you come to the parable and say, okay, I don't, you know, I don't really like God and I'm really annoyed that he's God and I'm not. I'm not, but I I really would rather have Santa Barbara than the slums of Calcutta to spend eternity in. So if I've got to do something in order to get the upgrade, just tell me what the deal is and I'll do what it takes. Well, do you really want to party forever with the father? If that's how you feel about him now. Or maybe you'd prefer the gray city where you can go off and have everything you want, because isn't the point of your transactional approach to this relationship that you just want to get what you want? Do they have goats in that in Santa Barbara? And and that's where so many of these questions, you know, reveal ourselves. And that's why in some ways, do we want God or do we want me? Are you giving me hand signals, Rick? Oh, he's unscrewing his Coke bottle. I couldn't see the Coke bottle. It's a strange hand signal. Sorry. You know, do we love Jesus? You know, let's say you came to your somebody did a meme. Gosh, Rick, you got to take that. I got I got to turn this channel off. I can't I can't watch this as I talk. I'm too distracted. You know, if we would go if we would go to our spouse and say, I'll tell you what, just just just give me the minimum requirements so that you and then make your list of whatever it is you want out of the relationship so that you go to work and put me in a house that I like and, you know, setting aside enough money for retirement and give me the car I want to drive and I'm going to go to work. I want to drive and, you know, at least let me do the kinds of things I want to do. Just give me the minimum requirements. I think the spouse would say, Oh, but, but am I, am I just a. Am I just a provider of goods and services. I want you to want me. And I want to be wanted by you. That's the relationship I want. So, to come to God and say, I want Santa Barbara with goats. There's always a mercenary side to us. And in fact, Jesus isn't even dismissive of that side. You know, so you look at you look at Luke 15 and you have these you look at Luke 15 and you have these amazing stories of the lost coin and the and the lost son and the lost sheep. And then you go to Luke 16 and you got this dishonest servant who, you know, he's been embezzling. He's been cooking the books and he's found out and. Oh, what's wrong with the master that didn't walk in like anybody and and say, give me the books. Give me the seal. You're out today. I know what you're doing, but, but the matter, the matter, the master is sort of lazy and he leaves the guy with the seal in the books and the guys like, Oh, the jig is up. I'm I'm too weak to work and I'm too proud to beg. Jesus, that is parables. And then he says, All right, I know what I'll do. I'm going to find all of the I'm going to find all of the people who owe my master money and I'm going to go to them and I'm going to cut their debts in half. So when the master finally gets around to firing my sorry ass, I can go to these other people and say, Hey, remember when I cut your debts? You know, you owe me. Let me let me live in your compound and, you know, eat from your table and take a goat every now and then. And, you know, any of us should say, boy, it wasn't bad to begin with. He's making it worse. And the and and the and then the master says, Wow, wow. All right. And it's like, No, no, not wow. Wow. All right. He's an embezzler and a thief. He deserves and he's totally mercenary with you. He doesn't respect you at all. And so how do you interpret that? I like I like Kenneth Bailey's take on these on these parables. And the king, the king is so secure and so generous and so magnanimous that even the thieving qualities of this dishonest steward, the king says, Hey, he knows me and my reputation. He knows my he knows my the zealousness by which I protect my glory. I'm going to give this guy a break just for the sheer audacity of of what he knew about me. And I just think I hear these parables and I just you just see God through them and you see this shine and you just say, Wow. And then the question is, OK, is Jesus the image, the icon of the invisible God? And so, hey, everybody has to decide a God or no God. What kind of God? And even if you say no God, OK, what kind of universe? Because God is a gentic and God is a gentic and God is a reenac. And what kind of universe am I living in? And I'll tell you, I want to live in Jesus world. You say, well, this is the same Jesus that's just been, you know, and consigning people to eternal fire apart from me. Depart from me, you curse it into eternal fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. That's the same Jesus, the same Jesus that just told the story that said, Lord, Lord, open up to us. We're young women. We didn't we didn't manage our oil well. Truly, I say to you, I do not know you. Watch, therefore, you know, I don't know you bridesmaids, your crappy bridesmaids out you go. But the shrewd servant gets honored by the king. I'm sorry, I'm a Christian. I look at these things and I say, yeah, Jesus is my guy. Jesus is my guy. And so then and so you get to Judgment Day and. OK, Paul. Who do you want to be with for eternity? Tell me what storyteller you want to hang with. I want to be with Jesus. Well, that means, Paul, you're going to have to sacrifice some things. There's some parts of you that are going to have to die. And actually, that Judgment Day is the day of the Lord is always with us. And so there's some parts of me that have to die. And yeah, some parts of me are going to have to die. But Jesus is worth it. And, you know, when I married my wife, some parts of me had to die. And in a long term marriage, some parts of me have to die regularly and some parts of me don't want to die. And those become problematic. I won't. Jesus, give me a medal for Job. I think Jesus is going to give you one big old medal. I want to I want to I'm looking forward to seeing Job and Jesus together. So, you know, I. That's that's who I am. That's how I am. And so I think. I and I think it's the best way to live, which is why I'm a pastor. And some parts of me have to die by being a pastor. And so, yeah, here I am. This is what we do. I don't know any responses to that. We only have 10 minutes, so it's kind of a nice closing. But, yeah, anybody. Good question, Job. Thanks, Paul. The reason I asked is I was reading this book by Trent Horn. Let's see which one that is. That is counterfeit Christ's finding the real Jesus among the imposters. And it's just, you know, all these different ways that Jesus gets constructed through history and, you know, through these questers and various atheists. And I like the book because he basically makes a strong point. He says, Yeah, we say that New Testament Jesus is so much better than Old Testament God. No, New Testament Jesus is pretty harsh if you start paying attention. So that's that's why I wanted like, OK, if you take these these these parables that are about separation and selection, then yeah, what does Jesus really mean by that? But yeah. Yeah, yeah, that's true. That's true. Do Christians go to heaven? Sure, they go to heaven. They just get new bodies and they live in a new heaven and a new earth. Peugeot knows that. He was just he made a point. He made a point. And I'm glad he made the point because him making that point caused a little little bit of a ruckus and allows us to make the clarifying point that we're not we're not looking to float on clouds. We are. I am. I am. I am anticipating the resurrection of the body. I believe in the resurrection of the body and the life of the age to come. And I believe. I believe, you know, God is a reenac and a gentic and God has become flesh in Jesus. And so he is our master and he is our brother. And, you know, Jesus is going to have some things to say to me that I'm not going to like. I know that. And that's not going to be fun or easy. Tolkien has this wonderful little short story. Tolkien has this wonderful short story, Leaf by Niggle. And if you haven't read it, pick it up. It's an interesting little story. It's basically about, you know, basically a story about purgatory and and Niggle, who was this weird little man who loved trees and, you know, focused on leaves and and God, God makes him, you know, God makes him into being who he wants him to be. And, you know, this is this is what he's doing with us. He's making us to be who he wants us to be. And so part of what he's doing with us in this world of challenges and dangers and and all of those things is he's shaping us for the next chapters of the story. And we don't know a lot about that, but I think it's I think it's I think it's an awfully good story. And so we'll live into it. That's a good way to close. So I don't know, Rick, you want to end the recording? Rick says yes. All right. And he will give me some kind of signal when the recording is ended.