https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=icZZaEFZlCw

 Hi, this is Paul. And part of the problem of being such a person who loves routine and rhythm is that when I break it, people really notice. And I noticed, some of you noticed. Live from Sacramento. It's Friday morning. Oh, they're going to clip that. Yeah. So Sam noticed this morning that my upload was late. Actually, if you paid attention to what I was wearing, you might have noticed that it was from earlier in the week. I had a very busy day of conversations. And I made the other video about the day. And so there's going to be a bunch of, so if you don't see a video released at the usual time this summer, maybe I'll explain some of the reasons why summertime is different for me. Number one, my wife is off of school. And when my wife is working at school, her schedule is very routine, making sure that she's on time for school. Her schedule is very routine, making my schedule very routine, making my schedule a lot more predictable. When my wife is, because she is a school teacher, she works Monday through Friday. And because I'm a pastor, I work Sunday. Saturday is the only day in the week we both get off at the same time. We don't get long weekends. We don't get any of these things. So summertime is usually when we sort of try to make up time that we haven't been able to get during the year. And what that means is because my schedule tends to be quite flexible. Well, we will do things. My schedule will vary in the summer. And because, for the most part, videos are down the hierarchy of how I can spend my time, video production will tend to differ. So that's part of the reason. Another reason why sometimes you see slowdowns in production, and again, you won't be able to tell this from your side without me talking about it. Another reason is I usually, as you know, am quite fluent and prolific. But sometimes things get stuck. I mean, you might call it constipation in some ways because, I mean, the stuff going on in the Christian Forum Church is delicate. I can riff on CS Lewis. I can riff on this or that. I can riff on all sorts of things. But when I start talking about the Christian Forum Church, I'm talking about my job. I'm talking about my denomination, my church, my ecclesiastical family, and in many cases, my biological family. And so the videos about the Christian Reform Church are quite a bit more laden. You might notice that there is a video that I have made that is an hour and 24 minutes long that I spent precious time this week doing. And I am still on the bubble as to whether or not I'm going to release it. And that's because I often tell people, people with not a lot to lose can be on YouTube. Well, in a lot of these areas, I could talk about CS Lewis or this or that. I don't have a lot to lose. But when I talk about the CRC, I do have a lot to lose. And so I have to be a little bit more careful. But that care in talking about the CRC also has to be balanced in terms of transparency and honesty. When I look at a lot of what's going on in the CRC, and I talk about it in that video, part of the big moment of dealing with what we're dealing with now in terms of the move from mass media to micro media or social media, the supernova of personal information and perspective, I don't have anything to lose. Grim Grizz. I do. I praise God for Grim Grizz. I really do. Grim Grizz is a voice. It sounds so woke. Grim Grizz is a voice for the voiceless. Sometimes I wonder if he'll lose his voice as he's choking through a video. That's why he's got the branding to play in the middle. But so on one hand, things with the Christian From Church are high stakes because they're real people's lives. And they're not just real people out there in internet land for me. They're real people in my church family. And whatever they believe, or however they're living, or whatever they're doing, they're still family. And there's extended family and yada, yada, yada. And it's family. Can you really have a family of 230,000 people, most of whom you haven't met? So in that sense, one has to be careful. But part of what this transition from mass media to social media requires is honesty. I mean, a big part of the Peterson moment was honesty. Jordan dared to tell us what he thinks. Now I know some people watching him, especially on Twitter for the last couple of days, are like, could we have a little less about what you think? And sometimes when Jordan is doing an interview and he won't let the person he's supposed to be interviewing talk enough, we think, well, are you that frustrated of a university professor that now this poor person has to be subject to a lecture on your podcast? But I still lament the fact that Jordan Peterson lost in some ways. He's kind of getting it back with some of these video things. But lecturing, talking to video land is not like talking to a classroom full of people that you are developing sort of an appropriate professor-student relationship. That's a very different thing. Whereas out here in video land, it's cool, it's relational, there's stuff. These face-to-face in-person relationships are foundational. Speaking of that, this livestream might end at any moment, depending on when Rick gets here. Let's see if I can pull this up. OK, I'm not sharing it. Good. Hang on. I don't have all the cute branding numbers like Grimm Grizzda. Da, da, da, da, da, da, da. I got that branding in my head. All those saving throws have been worthless. The dude has the mind control has set in. So come on, little NAS. You can wake up. Show us the pretty picture of the pretty parking lot. There we are. See, I got to, when Rick comes in, I had to end the livestream because these are all the kinds of things you can't see behind the scenes. Because I joke with people sometimes, if you actually knew how this entire YouTube thing is strung together with shoestring and bubble gum, you would laugh that the thing has endured for five years at all. So we've, as many of you, those are the things those of you who watch Sunday morning know, we've been, just, oh, OK, Paul Chad's videos lately have been hysterical. And I'm Sodi, ADHD. So Sunday morning, we've been struggling with our network. And so Rick's going to redo the network this morning. And hopefully, that's going to solve all of our stutter problems on video for Sunday morning. And so today is Friday. So Pete comes in to do bulletins. And so when Rick comes in, this whole thing will end. That's why I wasn't sure if I was going to do a livestream. In fact, I told Rick I wasn't going to do a livestream yet. Here we are. So now that I've interrupted and redirected myself, yeah. So there may or may not appear this video on my channel, or it may appear in a different way. Because it, yeah, it has to do with the original title when I woke up in the morning is what CRC progressives have to do to stop losing and why they won't do it. That's a pretty click-baity title. But I talk about just the pain of all of this and why in the minds of many in the Christian Reformed Church, I should be progressive, and I'm not. Maybe it's the story of my red pilling. Maybe I have YouTube to blame, how YouTube goes in and radicalizes young men and maybe this old man. So yeah, we will see whether or not that video sees the light of day. But as you might, oh, there's me in my chat. This video came out this morning, and I have downloaded it, and I might do a commentary on it. Because one of the things I can't do in terms of the CRC stuff is be there, because so much of this stuff happens in Grand Rapids. And so there was a meeting in Classes Grand Rapids East, post-Sinod, sort of a town hall meeting. Over 500 people showed up, which surprised the organizers, which is an interesting thing in and of itself. And so these guys reported on it, and I think they're doing a faithful reporting. And at the end, Cedric makes a comment about membership, which is important. So yes, there will be more CRC content coming. Last night, we sort of had a very small, old school Jordan Peterson meetup group meeting at one of them. It was actually at Joey's house. You know Joey. So we were meeting at Joey's house, and Rick was there. And other people were there. And again, one of the other people there, he watched all of Senate, and he has thoughts. Now, this person won't be appearing on the internet. He doesn't even appear on photos that we do when we do the meetup, because he works in net security, and maybe he's smarter than us all and tries to stay off the grid. But again, the way that people have shown interest in the Christian Reformed Church just absolutely baffles me. And in some ways, I find affirming in my own way. But this drama is, I think, part of the reason it's so picked up by some of you is in the same reason Jordan Peterson's drama was so compelling. We find, so we used to sort of identify with mass media movies. And now we sort of identify with the drama we're finding in each other's lives. It's part of the reason reality TV came to the fore, because there's so much complexity and reality when it comes to even just the Christian Reformed Church that people find their own stories in it. And it's in some ways much easier to feed off of the drama in someone else's story than to handle the drama in your own. So yeah. So there will be more Christian Reformed content. But now I am going to be between vacation and the event in DC. And there is going to be a month of even more awkwardness on the channel coming. It'll come after like middle of July. And my wife has all these ideas about how I can make videos on the road. And that's coming from a woman that never watches any of my videos. And sometimes it's like, do you really know what I do in these videos? So we're sort of inspired by Grim Grizz's traveling to Anacino videos. I was inspired. So yeah. I don't quite know how to understand. Fat people shouldn't be in church. And pastors shouldn't have broken bones. Old Testament would make him disabled. And no one would see God. But I have absolutely no idea. And that's part of the weirdness of the internet is that, yeah. Oh, evangelicals. Yeah. Yeah, better with a camera person. My wife, I don't think, wants to appear on camera. So she will be the camera person. Yeah, short updates. Yeah, yeah. The channel itself is weird, partly because part of the unintended consequence of doing all the synod videos was picking up a lot of CRC viewers who sort of come in and are like, what? What is this? Because they've never seen this before. And part of being in the Christian Reformed Church is that, because I'm a Christian Reformed minister, there's a thing called the yearbook, which those of you who've come onto CRC Voices have met David Snapper, who for him, the yearbook is Revelations from Heaven. And in the yearbook, basically, there's a directory of all the phone numbers of Christian Reformed ministers. And so a lot of you randos that are out there sussing out my email address and trying to get through the, maybe DMing me on Twitter, well, retired boomer Christian Reformed ministers just pick up the phone and call me. And I see it's a 616 area code. It's like, Grand Rapids calling, better answer. And then I have fascinating and interesting conversations. And it's just like a conference where people watch my videos. I was thinking about this. People watch my videos. And it's all this one-way communication. This is why my channel started. It's all this one-way communication. And then they get to the point of just sort of filling up and filling up and filling up. And then you finally get access to the dude, and it's vomit out. It's like, all this pent up stuff in me. Here, have it all. And so you just kind of wipe it off your clothes after the first 10 minutes. And OK, we got that out of the way. Maybe now we can have more of a conversation. Yeah, I'm sure the Catholics have their own things. Grand Rapids calling. Yeah, the Black Archon. Yeah, it's so interesting, too. I mean, Sam, Sam with his comment on, let's see. Let's go there. Content. Comments. You can see what it looks like on the back end. Julian with an interesting comment. Off topic, but in the description of your conversation with Richard Beck, you described yourself going through a deconstruction phase. I've never heard you frame things that way. Maybe that will be in the long anticipated Tim Keller video that I have never done. This is Sam's comment. Man, I started to worry about you, PVK. 1030 CST video release? Yeah, that's because of the angst. And then also Sam's comment. I think character development and character quality are the biggest weak spots in the space trilogy. Probably in Narnia, too. Sometimes the characters seem like sock puppets for narrative-based metaphysical preaching. Yes, indeed. Sure, the metaphysics is interesting and all, but CS Lewis's failure to connect it to the experience of being a human character in his book weakens it. It's true. JK Rowling is a better Christian storyteller than CS Lewis. Ah! There, I said it. That's why you're a heretic, Sam. Heresy confirmed. How dare you? How dare you? How dare you say such things about our most contemporary church father? All right, all right. Father Eric, launching to the good Northern Ireland Protestants defense, Eustace is the greatest example of character development. Oh, the crowd is shocked. Do you have a chat with James Wood? Not scheduled, but I should because he's a college professor. Paul is a deconstructing reformed progressive reformer. See? Kind of? Oh, there. Seems like Western Claire. Oh, how can you not be in dark mode? Good point. I'm in dark mode in most of my computers, but not on this computer. So another, let's see. Professor Luigi Paralandro to me is the least enjoyable of the space pillage trilogy, but in retrospect, and upon hearing others' opinions of it, I suspect it may be very rich in content. I have to reread it. I have to reread it again, actually, because going through it once was simply not enough. I got to take off the dark mode. Dark mode sounds so dark. Paul, could you reach out to that one dude that deconstructed who couldn't see the god in the beach, please? Oh. Yeah, there's stuff in Paralandro about that, too. So yeah. So I should. So yeah. Finish a sentence, PVK. Sometimes when video production stops, it's because I'm working through stuff, and I'm working through stuff. I'm working through stuff, and I can't even work through it out loud with you, which is what a lot of this channel is. So it could be that this channel, Our Beloved Julian, is really a big part of my reconstruction. That's still going on 10 years after. 10 years? No, no, it's getting close to 20 years. Wow. So yeah. Thanks, Joseph. I appreciate it. If any of you book addicts want to read Homeland, the R.A. Salvatore, and tell me how he ranks in the author department, is that the because so all right, there's a lot I got to talk about. And I have to order it in my head before it can come out of my lips, because my head thinks faster than my lips can move. Oh, got to check and make sure Rick's not here yet. OK, Rick's not here yet. My conversation with Richard Roland. I was great. Sometimes you talk to people, and you just click. And I really felt like I clicked with Richard. He told his story really well. There were all sorts of angles. I'd heard bits and pieces of it in the universal history. But getting to know him a little bit was super cool. This is what homeschooling can give your kids. It can make them nerds. And it's super cool. Oh, your talk with Roland almost made me ortho. PVK. More CW. Yeah, we'll get to CW. We'll get to CW. Uh-oh. So yeah, that was just a great beginning conversation. He wants to talk about he said Paralander was his favorite of the three, which doesn't surprise me. I just started the hideous strength, Kyle and Nate and Karen and Luke did a conversation on that hideous strength, which I promised not to watch until after I read the book. And I started reading the book. And Sam, I'm not far from you in terms of my disappointment with Lewis's ability to create compelling narrative. OK, I'll say it that way. But I come for the philosophy and the religion where I also want to do some deep dives into some of Lewis's less known works. I want to do so much that I just don't have the time to do. Maybe in retirement, maybe if Living Stones goes under. If Living Stones goes under, you'll probably have 12 hours of PVK a day. That's way, way too much. So yeah, that's good. Too bad nobody else in the channel has channels to do these things on. What does John have to say? I'm serious, Paul. I know it's probably painful. But my guess is it's probably relatable and important, if not too personal. I'm not exactly sure if you're talking about deconstruction and reconstruction or CRC drama or if that's all the same thing. So yeah, the Richard Rowling conversation was outstanding. And so I had Richard at 8 AM the same day. Hey, Marcus. So I'll probably fly into the Netherlands mid to late October. And then I will go and do the German event. And then I'm flying to the UK to do the Peterson and Peugeot thing. And my schedule after that is still undecided. So if you want to see, because I don't know what Peugeot schedule is like after that event either, because he'll be there too. So it might be possible to do an event with me and Peugeot in Northern Ireland. That's possible. That's possible. That's possible. So you might think about that, Marcus. Marcus has become an event coordinator. I really love the people that he's putting together and what Marcus is doing with MoreChrist and his channel. So yeah. All right. I got the commit from Richard. Yeah, then there's the coming of Richard to the corner. Richard, who was the brother of Phlebas. It's crazy. Yeah, Richard. Oh, the other Richard. Richard is a very good storyteller and self-aware about it. Makes me wonder about self-construction. Oh, OK. Thanks, Chad. I'm talking about when you burned out and found Tim Keller. Yeah. That's a complicated story for me to tell publicly. Dum, dum, dum. Now there's a secret. What was burning you out? Yeah. Yeah. There are stories I tell. Andy knows. The NGO influence. Yeah, yeah. That's a great point, AC. That's a great point. So anyway. No, no, no. I completely understand that anything that's in the pay for. Oh, and by the way, gosh, this is so ADHD. This is why I make a PowerPoint. By the way, YouTube is offering me $1,000 I get $500 if I start the membership thing on my channel. And I get another $500 if I can sucker 30 of you to sign up for it. It's tempting. I'm not saying I'm all about the Benjamins, but it sounds like $1,000 of easy money from our YouTube overlords. And it's tempting to take. And I'm not sure what I do with the paid for content, because part of me really hates that. What I might do is post conversations before I release them and keep them on monetized. So it's kind of like YouTube premium, but you pay PBK instead of Google. I might put content up that there's always content I make like this one that I made. That is it's sort of edgy for me. And I don't know if I should release it. I could release it to a smaller audience. So that might come. But I got to do it by the end of July to get my money from Google. I'm all about the Lincolns. PBKVM, boy. Yeah, yeah, yeah, still waiting for the. Oh, you guys. Yeah, the money is in the merch. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. It's so bad. It's so bad. I am such a. I always get these messages from YouTube for content creators. And it's like, you have no idea what I do. Do you, YouTube? And it's probably for the best. PBK book. So yeah, I should probably do that. I can turn it off. After I get my thousand dollars from them, they'll probably offer me a thousand dollars all over again to do it. It's like unsubscribing. So last year, when the Exodus seminar came out, I subscribed to Daily Wire Plus. And I watched the Exodus seminar. And I watched some of the Daily Wire Plus only content on the Peterson conversations. But lately, Peterson is doing so much political stuff. So if there's a Peterson thing that is out there that you think I'd really like pointed out to me, because I probably missed it, because I don't have a lot of interest watching Jordan Peterson talk to Mike Pence. Although, that might be a good conversation, because does Mike Pence have a personality? I don't know. I couldn't tell. I thought Donald. Now I'm going to get in real trouble. I thought Donald Trump hired him because he didn't have a personality. And then, of course, he betrayed him. He betrayed him. And then, of course, he betrayed him. And yada, yada, yada. Oh, gosh. Oh, yeah, the denim wars, if you don't. Oh, now someone's at my door. Someone's at my door during a live stream. OK, I don't know what to do. I'm going to do the crazy thing. I'm going to mute those so I don't reveal anything. What's going on in there? Come here. What's going on in there? I told Rick I wasn't live streaming. What? This is a trick. I warned you that when Rick came, I would stop the video so you could hear him speak way infrequently. I warned you that when Rick came, I would stop live streaming. So because Rick has to undo the network and redo it. So all right. There's the end of this. And I'm sorry for the interruption, but this just proves I'm a really bad YouTuber.