https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IqC55muowLo

 This is Paul and we're not doing a bridges of meaning Q&A today. I want to keep doing that once a month. I think that's the best pacing for it. I thought, well, should I do a live stream this morning anyway? If so, what? The thought I had was maybe do a little weekend review. The purpose of a weekend review video is to is to see, well, get feedback on exactly what I've posted this week and any continuing discussion of what I've posted on this week. And it's been a busy week. Now, this week began for me with, in some way, with my, oh, I can pull it up here. There we go. With my adult Sunday school posting. And I never quite know what to do with my Sunday postings. Some of you might remember I had a little conversation with Grimm Grizz. And, oh, I think it was it was Lance about whether or not I should post Sunday sermons and some of those kinds of things on my, please, Luke, on my channel. I've continued to post my adult Sunday school class on my channel, and I continue to sort of evaluate that back and forth. I know some people really like it. When I was in the UK, one of the guys that I met with found the channel because I was posting these videos. It's, you know, my personal channels, my personal channel. Good morning. Good morning, Laura, Luke, Bryson, Mark, IRLPolitik. You can find my conversation with him. Anna, me haven't haven't had a random conversation with you. So I'm curious. I love doing my adult Sunday school class this week. Rick and I are going to try using stream yard to maybe bring in a very small handful of people into the Sunday school class. I don't know if if this is going to work or not. It might, in fact, as we set things up Sunday morning, it might not work. And we'll have to see how that goes. That won't be on my personal channel. That I think we'll have to Rick and I are probably going to have to do some setting up with respect to that. That'll be on the church channel. And as I think it was Senor Saboya mentioned some some misgivings about that. So we'll see. I'm starting Roman seven this week, which is how Jacob kept, you know, weeks ago, Jacob kept warning me, oh, Roman seven, Roman seven, you better not say. I'm not exactly sure what I better not say. So I'm going to say what I say and we'll see what he thinks about it. So I know just from the analytics that the interest in my Romans class is declining. And that's that's an interesting thing for me to watch. And I might I might pull it from the channel for that reason, just because I don't necessarily care to offer what people are going to call it the divided man. That's right. That's right, Mark. I'm going to say what I'm going to say. I know where I am. Oh, here I am. That one's a little bit better, perhaps, for what I'm doing. There we go. Yeah, so I've I've I continue to evaluate a lot of stuff that I do on my channel. There are some things that I do in my channel that don't work in the sense that they don't get a lot of views, but I don't care because I think they're the most important parts of the channel. Oh, I just want to explain the analogy. Christians have spent 2000 years trying to figure out how to explain it in a way that is not blasphemous, unsuccessful. I don't even know what Jacob means by blasphemous there. Mark says, maybe keep it, Paul. I could see me coming back to it when I get some time. Oh, that's Luke. Views are for losers. And that's and that's part of why I keep things like this. I for me, my adult Sunday school class is a high point of the week. I love nothing better than sitting in a room full of honest, interested, curious people and having a conversation about the Bible. Now, now streaming it has sort of inhibited some of the conversation because it used to be much more back and forth. And if you find old recordings of it, you'll see that it's difficult to capture the recordings of the people in the room. And the people in the room aren't as excited as I am about having a record of themselves on YouTube. So that's. It should be a highlight if you're working. That's that's exactly right, Mark. That's exactly right. It should be a highlight of my week. And and it affords me it affords me a chance to explore to that's right. It is it is for adults. It's a chance to explore those Jesus people love talking about Jesus guy with each other. Sounds about right. Well, that's really what churches whatever you call this format right now, I like it. Thanks. So, you know, part of why I want to do this video today and in a little while, I'm going to drop the link and and others of you can come in the channel. It's it's sort of YouTube. It's it's sort of YouTube dogma that, you know, oh, I want a conversation that sort of become dogma of our language. But I am very interested in in feedback and and what happens. Do you have a version that I can participate in? Well, Sunday morning, Manuel, if you go to the church channel, you may be able to participate. I'm not going to make any promises. A lot depends on a lot of things with with Rick. So and whether Rick and I can pull it off. That's right. Dogs don't have conversations like we do. That's when I fall asleep listening to Sunday night. So I'll keep it going then, Dale. Grizz Grizz made a comment that I posted on Twitter today about vengeance or Anselman made a comment that he fell asleep during my conversation with Benjamin Boyce and the distributist. So I am not offended at people using my using my my videos to fall asleep to at all. Transfigured was Luther's commentary on romance, his best selling pamphlet when it was published. Probably not. But it was his biggest hit over time. That's thank you. Thank you, Sam. And Sam, actually, you know, a while ago, made a made an affirmative comment about the adult Sunday school class, which I appreciated. And, you know, actually, I read most comments that are posted on the channel and I listen to as much video from this little corner as I can, which is why I of the corner, the person whose videos I probably listen to at the highest rate are probably grim grizzes, partly because Grizz does such an excellent job of of managing this this reaping skill for the the collective lobe. Luke says things I want to do, people love people fully. I find myself not doing in the things I don't want to do. Pursue status and control. I find myself continually doing who can save me from this. Nice job, Luke. Nice, nice job on Roman seven. Chad is in howdy. I thought Luther littered on the church floor. I didn't realize he was selling his stuff. Luther didn't make any money because publishing. The publishing rights weren't worked out. Those were the early days of the printing press. And so Luther would just give the printers stuff and the printers ate it up and then the printers would sell it. And that way, it's sort of like the Internet today. For better or for worse, I'm kind of giving my stuff away free and Google is making money off of it. I make a little bit off Google, but not much. Romans is what converted me Bryson. I listened to my last live stream. It was awesome. Over 400 views in a week. Way to go, Mark. Good job. It was one of Luther's takes on Romans that John Wesley heard preached when he said his heart was strangely warm. Now, there's absolutely no question that Happy St. Patrick's Day. There's absolutely no question that Romans is an a vital book in the New Testament corpus. And I think if you go back to the early lessons in my Romans class, a lot of that is because. In the Book of Romans, Paul, in some ways, most intentionally tries to. Address the Jew gentile divide. You know, I'm about to say something that I'm about to say something that might be. Could Jacob Fattorechi. Be in some ways a Paul of Tarsus character, because I never heard anybody talk about the Noahides until I heard Jacob. And in some ways, Jacob's Noahide application of the covenant is roughly analogous to what Paul was trying to do. So even though Jacob finds a particular disdain for Paul of Tarsus, there is, I think, a degree of commonality between them both. Dumb, dumb, dumb. IRL politics says, since you're in the feedback mode right now, I'd love to see you and Kale have a monthly convo we can listen to. You know, I would I. I'm really careful about making monthly commitments like that, but I would very easily have a monthly conversation with Kale. I think I think Kale and I have sort of a nice like we have enough commonality and overlap and difference that we, I think, are a good combo together. He's also just a lot of fun to talk to because he he knows a ton. And he's liberal with his comments. And he wants he's a you know, he's a. He's a deep Christian. He's a deep Roman Catholic Christian, whereas I'm a deep Protestant reformed Christian. And so, yeah, maybe maybe you're right. If we did a monthly live stream, maybe we could further the ending of the protest. I don't know. I so I visited Kale in Rhode Island at his school and I was moved. By, you know, what I found there, it was a rather remarkable place. It's an English Benedictine Catholic abbey that has a a flourishing school for probably mostly wealthy children who are going to be elites in the American hierarchies. And and Kale teaches, you know, great books there, which it's just wonderful to see that tradition continue. And Kale's done this for years. He's worked in administration. He's he's done a lot of things. And so now he's a he's a really good conversation partner. And we'll see what happens. It would be it would be interesting. We should do another probably another conversation. Kale and myself and Rod Rear. I. You know, then we sort of spam the Orthodox Catholic Protestant mode. And and there's at least enough commonality that we're doing, that we're talking about similar things along the way. Let's see. Scanning the comments here. Jacob is still in Paul Saul stage, not yet his Paul stage. Oh, there we go. I would say two people I fear the most are the Parsis and Martin Luther. Mark LeFaber is the third. Wow, Mark, he put you in pretty good company. I like Pastor Paul's conversation with Benjamin Boyce with conversation. Yes. Not Nate Hile. Yes, yes, yes. The comments are coming fast. Oh, my goodness, my goodness. We're throwing shade or casting shade at each other. Way behind on the comments. Oh, my. Now we've seen some of the some of the some of the some of the drama in the corner, some of the drama in the corner. So, yeah, Roman study. Let me know what you think. You know, again, the views, 440 views for four days ago. It's pretty low for the channel. And again, that's not everything, but it is it is a sign of what perhaps is and isn't helping people where they're at. Monday, I posted a video. Hi, this is I posted a video of Peugeot and commentary on some of the stuff from from climbing Mount Sophia. And that I that that was sort of a quickie video I did on Friday. I wasn't real happy with the video. In fact, I can I considered not posting it at all. I really liked the conversation that went on. Don't address the bald privilege. Don't let them know we baldies are secretly ruling the world. It's because our it's because of our testosterone that has destroyed our hair. I don't know how much I trust YouTube numbers on some of that stuff. No, that's really true. One of the one of the funny things is that the live stream I did a few Saturdays ago on the Asbury outbreak. YouTube algorithm has been loving that video, and it's just been getting views and views and views, but not many comments. And so actually sort of like the YouTube algorithm, the way I judge the reception of a video. Now, I know that thumbnail and title have a huge impact on videos. And if you want the best example of that, that the video where thumbnail and title had a huge influence was, of course, my video on at whatever this week, which blew up right out of the gate, but very few comments from new people. And that's another way that I sort of try to judge the effectiveness of the channel. How not only how many comments, but who's making comments? Because, again, I read comments and I know the list of characters, and I've sort of followed the evolution of those commenters over time. And. Yeah. You've criticized channeled like Dark Horse and Rebel Wisdom as not having institutional staying power because of the subversive branding. Is that also not true of Protestants? Yes, it is. It is. So but obviously Protestantism has had a lot more staying power than Rebel Wisdom or Dark Horse. And I think I think Peugeot is right in his criticism of that. And. I. I take that seriously, and that's why I say at some point the protest has to end. But that isn't up to me. And you might say, well, it is up to you, because if you really wanted the protest to end, you would join the Catholic Church. A colleague of mine once told me the day I see the Catholics and the Orthodox really reconcile is the day I join them both. He made a good point. So, yeah, that's a that's a good point. And Jacob and Nate are kind of going at it here. Total watch hours is more useful than views. A lot of other views are less than 30 second click or click outs. No, that's that's very true, Sam. That's very true. And that's a good that's a good reminder for me. Let's see. So Monday came along and I I made this. Yeah. And on Jordan Peterson as gunslinger in the ARC. I part of why I include some other videos. So Laura sent me an email saying, did you see my video with Nate about Jordan Peterson on Twitter? And I had it. So I watched it. And it was really good. Laura is one of these. So Laura is infamous on my channel because of the videos that are no longer on my channel that Laura and I did. And they were really good videos. That's right, Laura. That's right, Laura. I know you're watching. Laura is one of the real gifts to this corner from the Chicago. I'll call it the Chicago West. Sorry, guys. I'll rebrand you guys. Laura is one of the real gifts to this corner. She's got a very compelling story. She's super smart and very insightful and really goes goes after her points in a strong way. And so her conversation with Nate, I thought, was just great. And that's part of the reason why I played a lot of it. This this video obviously had a lot of which, of course, isn't unusual for this channel. A lot of Jordan Peterson stuff in it. Jordan's new effort to rival the United Nations. Oh, let's see. Did I? Part of the problem of this whole thing is I have to find. Oh, there it is. There we go. I'm still I'm still learning Streamyard. The Jordan Alliance of a. What's the are what's the citizens? Yeah. Chicago, I mean, a bestiary thing is an embarrassment of riches and the quality of our members. It's very true. It's very true. Unfortunately, I don't actually like lots of people paying attention to me. That's true. Sorry. His aren't going to charge monthly dues. Howdy, rascals. Well, Grim Grizz responsible citizens. That's right. Very interested in what Jordan's going to try with this thing. As as if you listen to the Benjamin Boyce distributors conversation, I've got a degree of skepticism. These things can have impact, but I don't know if. The way this thing works, distributists said, you know, one of the best lines out of the Benjamin Boyce distributist conversation was this distributist take on the W.E.F., which I thought was was exactly right. And so if that sense, if, you know, the distributists sort of stand atop a a dying dragon and line up and encourage people to line up for selfies as you know, with swords over the dragon, like, oh, look, I slayed the dragon. Yeah, I'm not exactly sure where this where Peterson's project will go. But I. You know, I'll tell you points for trying, absolutely. And, you know, you don't you don't you don't gain anything if you don't try. So one thing you can't knock Peterson for is not trying because he you know, people can point to all sorts of hypocrisies for Jordan, not being careful with his speech when he says, I'm very careful with my speech. You should be careful with your speech. Having your own house in order before you try and clean up the rest of the the house of the world, lots of people pointing at the Benzos and all of that kind of thing. So fair enough. And if you want to have a if you want to have a a whole colony of critics, have a large Twitter account and be active on Twitter and your critics will find you. So all of that, you know, people can have their criticisms of Jordan, but you know, and a lot of people will be out there saying, oh, Paul is just a Jordan fanboy. Well, maybe I am to one degree. But there are aspects of Jordan that are really important. And one of those aspects is he's a doer. He's a trier. He is going out and he is trying to maybe right, maybe wrong. But he's not a wallflower. And so the the chutzpah and audacity with which he goes after his things. Nothing but points in my book. You know, that's part of the reason, I mean, lots of people have criticisms of my friend, Jacob, and. You know, but you know, one of the things I love about Jacob is what I love about Jordan. Jacob is, you know, Jacob is not the church of Laodicea. He is neither is it is not that he is neither hot nor cold. No, Jacob runs white hot and Jacob runs ice cold. And that's what I love about a lot of the people in this corner who sometimes can't agree with each other and so get into their little spats and get into trouble. You know, that old bumper sticker, you know, well behaved women seldom make history. That's not just true of women. That's true. The bumper sticker should really say well behaved people seldom make history. And Jordan Peterson is doing his level best to make history. And whether you agree with him or disagree with him, he's doing it. So that's right. Jordan is doing fine. I agree. Oh, Jacob and Jacob and Nate continue to go at it. All right. There's something about the the quixotic ARC. I like the ambition. Same here. Same here. He's he's trying it. Room cleaning is not a one time event. That's right. That's right. Yeah, he's got some room cleaning to do, but look at my office. So I'm not going to I'm not going to. Be careful with your judgments, because the measure you use will be judged to you. That's what Jesus says. And in, you know, Jesus, according to Christians, is going to judge the world. And when Jesus will have a whole variety of judgments, I'm not looking forward to waiting for me. And Jesus will have his time with Jordan, too. But one thing Jesus will not say to Jordan is, you know, in the parable of the talents, Jordan is not the guy who buried his talent because he knew the king was and was a king who who reaped where he didn't. So. So Jordan, Jordan is going after it. And and also in that video, I maybe next week I will bring in this excellent plow podcast where they get into Jesus and John Wayne and Westerns. I thought that was a really good podcast. So I really want to play it. So that was that was a video. And early in the week, too, there were. I recorded a conversation with Aaron from the morning show and Nate about hell. I'm a little nervous about that video because I'm going to take heat from. I'm going to take heat from conservative Christians in that video and they'll let it be so. It's. It's hard in a three way conversation. If I'm held to the standard of having to defend everything, it's really hard to do so in a three way conversation. But I I really like the conversation and I thought it was excellent. So that'll be posting on on on Aaron's channel first and then at some point probably on mine. Let's see. A suggestion, do an overview of less than an hour than progressively reveal more insight as demand builds. Students are burned out early unless they are the usual suspects. You know, William, I think that's true. Here's. So my channel has first drafts for Sundays. Most other videos are first drafts. If you see me working from a PowerPoint, it means that I've done more work in it. A lot of my videos are me thinking out loud, and so I don't know what conclusion I'm going to come to until I get to the end of the video. And the Jordan Peterson is Logos gunslinger and professional herringbone Tweed to save the West. That's a great example, because it wasn't until I got to the end of the video that I knew what the video was going to be. I didn't have my mind set until I got to the end. And that way, my rambly monologue videos are very much think with me. My sermons are much more. You know, here's a sermon. I've got 20 minutes. Bang. I hope my presentations at. In Chino will be more settled. In other words, they're more tightly packed. They're organized. The kind of structure you suggest is the kind of structure for a presentation. And where most YouTubers are giving presentations, that's not what I'm doing. You're you're you're you're you're you're you're you're you're you're you're you're your your your you're you're you're you'reI'm. You're. You're you're. You're you're. Then you're probably putting it up. Soule as your mother. And parameters that are included in the video. fussing up my chat experience and selfishly, I'm not taking kindly to that. Jordan Peterson's reluctance to commit to Christian identity or even I believe in God as part of his ability to play John Wayne, the good and bad man. See why, Sam? See why I love Sam? It takes like this. That's why I do this. I do this to learn because y'all together are smarter than I'll ever be and, you know, nuggets of wisdom like this. Just really nail it. I should... Hang on. I was gonna screenshot that. Sorry about that. This is live TV after all. I think that's right. I think that's exactly right, Sam, and I think that's why Jordan is playing the role. He is in some ways John Wayne because he is the good bad man. He is like Trump in that way that he's gonna go after the Pope, he's gonna go after the Wokesters, he's going to go after the DEI, he's going to do the dirty work and for the sake of... So yeah, Peterson is a character in this western. Give Nehama a wrench. Okay, she does deserve a wrench. I'm gonna open this up. All right. Pull my finger. Chad, Chad, that gas problem you've got, Chad. I don't know what to say to you. Who else needs a wrench in there? Grail Country, he can use a wrench. She can use a wrench. What will she do with her wrench? Manuel, he can use a wrench. We need lots of wrenches, I learned that. PBK works hard, please watch your health. All right, I'm just trying to catch up on the... He's baptizing Sam's ideas. Comment. The good bad concept needs to be bounced off Rustler's Rhapsody. One of the characters is played well by John Wayne's son. I've never heard of Rustler's Rhapsody. Okay. Yeah, what does a wrench mean? Does Laura have a wrench? A wrench means that you have the power of moderation in the chat, which is an awesome power because you can... Fettirecci doesn't have a wrench. We'll give him one too. We'll give him one too. There we go. Now a bunch of you have wrenches. The dog-headed men are necessary. You can't take the perspective from the outside. That's right, the banhammer. I still say he's more Kierkegaard than John Wayne. See the Corsair affair. He's totally dandy. Well, Hank is here. That's a good thing. Mark LeFavor, let Jesus make you an instrument of peace. Is Mark LeFavor a good bad man in this little corner? That's right, Manuel. A wrench means you can wreck things. Seriously, what does bad concept come from? You all are using it. Why pushing back bad? I think the archangel Michael had a flaming sword. All right. So yes, so the Jordan Peterson video, I've lost. This is the one that's being... So good. So I did the... I should talk about the Benjamin Boyce video that we had this week, which I thought was an outstanding conversation. This is... And so I've spoken with both of these men in the past. Benjamin Boyce, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I've spoken with both of these men in the past. Benjamin has been on my channel and I've been on his channel a number of times. Dave no longer lives in Sacramento. He used to live in the Sacramento area. And he's actually been to one of our meetups back in the old days. He's got a really remarkable story and his channel, he's got a very interesting channel. I got to get rid of... There we go. He's got a very interesting channel. Yeah, here's something new. That's right. That's right, Grizz. I'm doing a little bit more talk with the peeps in the room. So I love this conversation. Some of you might have noticed that in my ADHD rough draft sort of way, so many of my conversations, like my sentences, remain unfinished. And so this is the whole theme. I talked quite a bit about this with Kale too, about sort of the big picture of the... whether the Anglo-Western culture with its liberalist core, which is breaking down, where will that culture go? And of course, Catholics come in and say, here, we have a core, use this. And the Orthodox come in and say, we have a core, use this. But Catholic church in America is by no means unified or strong enough to sort of become that core. So that's really, in many ways, the big crisis of our culture right now. And so this was a great conversation and I really enjoyed it. And we'll see. At some point, I'll probably play it on my channel. Part of the reason I replay things on my channel is because one of the things that you figure out is that even though maybe 50, 60% of the people who watch my channel are probably co-watchers of Boyce's channel and some of the other channels of sort of IDW adjacent people, like Boyce, we need a new moniker, IDW doesn't work. So I have a video that I recorded already that I haven't posted yet about the Lex Friedman, Friedman Sam Harris conversation. That's another one of these videos that's kind of sitting in the queue and I don't know if I want to post it or not because I don't necessarily feel comfortable with it. But I've also found that often the videos I feel least comfortable with get some of the best responses. Oh, here's some critique. 36 minutes in, you guys lost the thread entirely. This was a moment when you almost realized that progressives and conservatives have similar views of human flourishing but then lost it. There's a lot of truth to that, Nate. Conversations go that way. Intellectual Silk Road is a good moniker but a bit esoteric. You know, that's right. I mean, intellectual dark web had a cache to it but it, I mean, Eric wasn't right enough for it to last. Neither the Orthodox Church in America, neither is, it's going to take another 50 years to sort out various national churches at the same cities having different bishops. Yeah, that's a big issue. But another one of the issues is exactly what the Roman Catholic Church is doing, which are hierarchies. And so someone like Nate Heil and his Christian anarchism, there's something deeply American about that because the lack of a state church in America has led to a very Protestant invisible church that in its anarchic nature, it sort of governs. And I think that's part of the genius of why America continues to be a a more fervently Christian nation than these other nations in Europe that actually have hierarchical instantiated state churches. So if you had a situation where there was one bishop per town in America, so somebody, I saw a comment basically that, oh no, who was it? Oh, it was, so Karen Wong sent me a video of Wolfgang, what's his last name? Is it Smith? The guy that's been on Karen's channel with the interesting idea of the symbol and such. He basically says that Christianity in the next hundred years is going to re, basically the protest is going to end, the division between the Orthodox and the Catholics are going to end. And this was Wolfgang on the Theory of Everything channel. What's his head? Kurt, yeah, you all know his channel, TOE. He basically said that in the next step, the next step basically Orthodox and Catholic and Protestants are all going to come together. It's going to be one united church again. It's going to be a much more mystical church. So very friendly to sort of the emergent Christianity of this little corner. If that happened, and if you say had a reconstituted physical hierarchy, instantiated hierarchy that would function as Orthodoxy functioned in the East, as Catholicism functioned in the West. Part of my, part of my thinking is that things that endure, there's a reason for them. And I think the anarchism implicit in the secularized Christianity of a stateless church like in the United States, and the truth is even though the Netherlands has a state church and the UK has a state church, those state churches don't function. And so that's sort of where the anarchists have a point. Views are not helpful. You need implementation to move forward. That's exactly right. First wave IDW folks were giving way to a second wave IDW folks. They seem to have slightly more stable personalities. I think that's right. Maybe the IDW is watching and getting jealous. Eric wasn't right enough for it to last. It wasn't close enough emanation. People were pretty frightened by IDW, Normies at least. The IDW is a flock of cultural mavens. Chris is a genius. Here's the thing about genius. It seldom sells because it's a little too far ahead for people to keep up. And that's Grizz's channel. He is, it was juvenile and related to Eric's cowboy rebellion delusions about himself. Yeah, I made a clip on the Vanderklip channel from, from the time I was a kid. Yeah, I made a clip on the Vanderklip channel from something on Grizz's channel with an anonymous person with a very recognizable voice in this little corner giving some inside information about the collapse of Eric's discord. Had some very unflattering things to say about Eric. I've always had the sense that when I listened to Eric, he's certainly a very smart man, but I really don't trust him. I really don't trust him. And, and a lot of what me, the anonymous person said, I listened to and I thought, I, I'm not sure he has a core. Aaron, with the breakdown of Anglo culture, it will either be unified by race Christianity or old creeds that, but it can't do all three. That's right. America's credo nationalist. It's not ethno nationalist. They can't choose it to be broken down by progressivism. Yes, you are. Yes, you are. And, you know, Mark, anarchy and Christianity incompatible. Yeah. But this is, this is where you get, if Jesus is King and cornerstone of the church, you need instantiations, but this is exactly the problem with the Pope. And it's exactly the problem that Nate and I were trying to go after on, in our conversation. And towards the end of the conversation, conversation, Sam jumps in and basically says, yeah, but you know, in all fairness, pragmatically speaking, isn't the Pope kind of doing the, I'm rephrasing Sam, isn't the Pope kind of doing the institutional thing and keeping all of the nominal Catholics sort of in the tent? Yeah. But that, that tension itself is what's going on, is what's going on in churches all over the place. And churches are in freefall. In other words, for churches to really go, there needs to be a, there needs to be a sharp edge to them. And doing all the moderation you have to do to keep the nominalists in continues to blunt that sharp edge. I thought it was one of your best conversations. And the distributist was by, was far better in that than in his conversation. People seem to engage in secondhand interpretations and no longer seem capable of having a personal relationship with a text and therefore end up having flat interpretations of the Bible. Unitarian Universalist is a shallow state church of the United of America. It doesn't just, it doesn't want to realize that. Very interesting. Eastern Orthodox in America is just Protestants doing what Protestants do, saying one thing and doing another. See, see, see, this is Jacob. He might really piss you off by what he says, but he's got the boldness to say it. Matt C. It was a nice statement against anti-intellectualism, that deep conversation is hard to get as you find on the dark web. Yeah, that's right. Toronto Kurt. Paul, do you see the corner in a place to ease the Thessalonian-like grieving coming from reactionary right spaces Dave comes from? The corner's been a place like the Netherlands. The Netherlands was a place in Europe where dissidents could go. Same with Switzerland. Why did Michael Servetus, patron saint of Jacob Federecci and the Transfigured Channel, why why Geneva? Same thing, same reason the Puritans first went to the Netherlands before they went to America. And you might ask yourselves, why did the Puritans leave the Netherlands? This little corner is a place of refugees where people can kind of come and be misfits together and have, it's a fringe space. It's a place where people can come and be misfits together. And have, it's a fringe space. All right. Two ways for churches to resurrect under the antichrist and after the church gets crucified. See, see why he's a genius? You see why he's a genius? People need to realize they can commune around and leave their disagreements at the door. We can't be carbon copies of each other. I don't think that's exactly the right metaphor. I think we have to take our disagreements in and we, I think what love is, is learning to figuring out how to bless without agreeing. That's really hard. And Jesus says it, bless your enemies, don't curse them. So when I see people cursing their enemies, oh, yeah. And I've got a lot to learn about that too. See, see, I love, I love that. I love it when rivals agree. Mark the favor, theology disconnected from mysticism is in fact fruitless intellectualism. You aren't wrong about that. We don't have a state church in the Netherlands. Really? Really? Yeah, I guess formally. Not like you used to, but once a state church has been instantiated, it's really hard to get it out of the culture. Eric Weinstein is not trustable. He wants to be trusted. He wants to be trusted. He wants to be trusted. Eric Weinstein is not trustable. He wants fame and he's the type that thinks because knowledge is the highest value, should have the most money, a common problem with academics in general. I like Eric Weinstein. He's a lot like my early self. Einstein was my God. Interesting. Just trying to catch up here. But the murder of Theo van Gogh may have been deeply symbolic in the shifting sentiments of the Netherlanders. Very interesting. Ron Wood. Jacob has an excellent point in a way. Super chats, super chats work. Google highlights them. Orthodox Christian, should be looking to St. Herman of Alaska and the Saints of Alaska as examples of submission, not protest. Very interesting. Oh, this is interesting. I actually like Eric. I think he's emotionally about 13. Grail country. See, we're making progress. We're making progress. All right, good. We're making progress this morning. What's next after that video? Back to here. Does that make sense? I think that's a good point. All right, good. We're making progress this morning. What's next after that video? Back to here. Okay, so I posted my conversation. Worthwhile. This didn't get a lot of views either. Only 423 views, but it was a rerun. And this was, I wanted to, we've talked a little bit in the channel about having things that get people up to speed. I don't know that getting people up to speed will actually ever be workable in this environment because it's not disciplined enough, but I should really, it was Nathan here. Another, we've got all these Nathans around. It was Nathan here from Canada that really got the Rando's conversations going. I was going back and looking at my archives. And when I started the channel, I never, I wanted to have other voices on the channel, but I didn't know how to. And it was basically the Rando's that taught me that. And so, yeah, glad you made it, Yosef. So yeah, I knew I didn't have anything to post for Homeroom and I worry about the teacher isn't there. What's poor Grizz supposed to do? So, yeah, I thought about posting that. And I've always got way more ideas than I have time to instantiate. So one of my ideas is to go back and read for me to rewatch a lot of the old Rando's conversations and to pull out some clips. And I'm going to post that. And I'm going to post that. And I'm going to post that. And I'm going to post that all day. Yeah. Well, yeah, so. LGBTQ2 Fund. I mean that's that wordplay man. I mean that's that's the dude's gift. That's the dude's gift. So I like how Paul VanderKlaay thinks he's the only person has too many ideas to implement so cute. Yes Mark, I know you and I are kindred spirits in that except I I don't know how you keep a roof over your head or put food on your table. I myself need a day job and I have not wanted to make YouTube my day job even though some of you think I should. It'll probably come at some point but I think that will warp me and the channel. So um thank you Cruz. I have so many ideas I cannot express them. Hank we're terrified of the ideas that you might have Hank. So yeah I'd really love to go back through all of my randos conversations and pull out salient clips and post them on the channel because uh Phil a while ago went watched all the randos conversations and I know it because he was um because he was he was posting them he was posting comments on them and the way YouTube in the YouTube studio post comments it's always the most recent comment so I can see when when things go um when people are going through old old footage because most comments come in the most recent videos people seldom post comments on older videos so um Kim Prophet, Paul did you watch John Verveckis interview with Gaia or Ryan? No I didn't I thought it was very best like your randos I'll have to watch that thanks for the um thanks for the pointer. Harrington Scrivener video. Christianity should focus on the resurrection more than the cross if you want to thrive in cyborg theocracy. I haven't finished the Harrington Scrivener video. Mary and I are scheduled to talk this Friday. I don't usually go after conversations like this but she's been she's been so interesting and when in the Scrivener video she said she started telling her story and then she said but nobody's interested in hearing my story I thought that's that's that's the thing I'm most interested in hearing and in the unheard video she goes deeper into her story and it's super interesting so she's only going to have an hour though which is too bad but that's because she's got her heart in the right place and she's committed to being a good mother so yeah that's that's that's on the list there little lights. No one has or able to or willing to replicate your randos conversations why because they don't the the one who comes closest is sort of Benjamin Boyce but Benjamin I don't know he seems to he's not talking to the audience so much what I'm doing right now is sort of the closest that a lot of streamers get to talking to the audience but you know Philip that's not enough for me I want to know more and and part of the problem is that you know the early years especially my dance card wasn't as full and my Dunbar number wasn't as exploded so and part of it Phil is that I'm a pastor and so these are the kinds of conversations that I have with people so yeah it's a really good question it doesn't I can see looking at so if your goal is to build a big YouTube channel the way is obvious and I'm not saying anything against Chris Williamson but what Chris has done what Toronto Kurt has done get high status interesting people on your channel Lex Fridman another one Joe Rogan now I don't know Joe Rogan already had high status so you know he was just interesting people but if you look at early years of Joe Rogan to later years you can see the transformation most randos don't want to sit and listen to other randos because they're randos the world is full of randos I and one of my one of my friends said the randos conversations are boring sometimes sometimes they're not and this is where community if you have a sense of community if you have a sense that that rando is a place where there's gold hidden and it takes a little bit of time and effort to find that gold yeah you'll go there sounds like a task for reapers channel is warped already full time will warp bend the warp in different direction that's true um all right see you later mark yeah it'll be very interesting to hear mary's story grim that's that that one surprises me Benjamin is an interviewer pvk is a conversational now i think that's right i think that's right ben ben is doing interviews and um well yeah yeah i don't know um i would vote in favor pvk doing slightly more interviews with new conversation partners yeah it's it's now now sam would these be um randos or would these be known people people want to know more will be offline in person with person pascal was a lightweight spinoza was a cyborg i do i do i did i do oh i still do oh monwell an interview i'll have to set that up now now you want me to interview you or you can interview me um if you try to emulate a big channel you grow you just maintain if you try to emulate a big channel you grow you just maintain yes state churches lead to woke canterbury best thing about being in church is all the randos it's true mark has perf has perfected the art of going and not going simultaneously john you're you the internet you know john's an old man so we have to have a degree of mercy on poor john vendonc um and the reason that i mock him mercilessly is because he's dutch and at least for the dutch that i grew up with mockery is a love language so you know i love john because i mark mark him mock him but but john you have to specify which mark we've got a few of them around i mean i meant known people tlc mary h is a perfect example yeah yeah maybe maybe i know and that's what you're doing see see sam part of it is because i mean you're doing it nate's doing it karen's doing it others are doing it and so i don't necessarily feel the need to do it and and a lot of the when i do what i do with a lot of people who don't know this channel they get a little annoyed because they can't i came on this channel to promote my book and the pastor doesn't even want to talk about my book he just wants to dig up all of my past private stuff that i wasn't looking to share with the world yeah and so that way i'm kind of annoying to people and people don't quite know why i'm doing what i'm doing but for me i mean like um christin cobes de maille is a great example her book is obviously a very hot potato in some corners i've obviously got ideas and thoughts about her book i'm far more interested in the person that wrote the book because the person that wrote the book is more enduring than the book itself especially if it's not a great book yeah yeah people would like to see pvk talk with leaders of other communities cross-pollination part of the difficulty with talking to high status people is they are high status people and hierarchies bind and blind tom holland has watched some of my videos i have a little bit of a personal relationship with tom holland i don't like talking to high status people unless there's at least the possibility that in the long run the relationship might be fruitful and what i mean by that is the context of a relationship is absolutely essential to the productivity of the conversation and this is why you know my developing relationship with jonathan pidgeot and john vervecky in the context of these in real life conversations is absolutely essential and yeah i know grim grim grim went at me for my complaints in the pidgeot d.c shindler video about scaling that we know how to scale um and grim is right except that for me scaling has everything to do with the creation of more live events with the creation of more live events you know i had a lovely conversation with uh jordan b cooper my relationship with jonathan and john took huge step forwards being able to have a meal a couple of meals with them in thunder bay there's no substitute for that i can watch them on videos all day long my understanding and relationship with um understanding and relationship with jordan peterson even though he and i have had very little time together just talking privately i have a much better sense of him just being in a room and watching him and talking to him back and forth and being in a small group you know it's him and tammy and me and you know rick at one point and another friend of mine to another place those were just such fun meetings but um i have a much better sense just being there's nothing there's nothing there's nothing like being together in real life it's just true so the reason i sort of resist sort of the rapid fire um chris williamson style of guest after guest after guest after guest after guest there's something deeply transactional and a little bit promiscuous about that i want i will find more gold in a deeper relationship with someone that endures over time than talking to a thousand high status people for two hours at a time and i think it's exactly the same reason that marriage exists that marriage exists sure if i i've been with my i've been married to my it's going to be my 35th anniversary this summer with my wife we were uh dated for two years before that or dated for a year engaged for a year how would things be different if i had known if i'd had three wives if i had had six women if i had serial now that's a really hard question because i know some men that have lived that life but boy i'll tell you that that whole help me thing about a you know a man who's been married to a woman for 35 years and it's true so yeah i'm going to interview you i'll be up for the opposite too but you have to okay okay that's it that's it that's good no we haven't worked it out with chris green yet he's in the middle of the interview now what we're going to do is we're going to do a couple of interviews that's it that's it that's good no we haven't worked it out with chris green yet he's in the middle of moving to tennessee from oklahoma and and you know that's a great example nate um i love that little snippet in chris green i when i saw that snippet i thought i want to read his book before i spend another 50 dollars on a book i should really finish d.c shindler's book and um thank you lance um you're very generous i should really get going on this book too it's a beautiful book i still have that tarot book that someone sent and i remember getting that book and thinking i thought yeah then baltzer wrote the preface okay and but i thought i can't leave this on my table some some poor living stoner's gonna walk in my office and think the office and think the pastor's become enamored with tarot card reading and so see and this is why this is part of the reason why i believe in the age of the age to come because i believe i'm going to have 10 000 years and more to talk to chris green to talk to jordan daniel wood to talk to you all and i've i've got about how many years left to do it now and you're worth more i've i've been able to devote 35 years of marriage to one woman i think it's part of the reason for marriage and our limitations of time and space and when those time and space and when those limitations are gone you can start digging into the mysteries of christ i have no idea who michael parkinson is yeah yeah he did i loved i loved that conversation um i loved talking to jordan he was it was great um oh yeah rosaria butterfield yeah she'd be a good person to talk to pvk netflix series the tie has been cast choose i've been doing randos conversations but the point of randos conversations cannot be a big audience that's right it has to listen to the person you're speaking with you're exactly right jacob you're exactly right um okay you gotta why i gotta finish i gotta do my homework before i talk to mary absolutely um again i you guys are too generous um yeah the living stoners that's what i call them which is hilarious because they are not drug people they are conservative senior citizen church-going saints of god and sometimes when i say living stoners they look at me oh i love you people i love you people hey pvk what about that guy with the great voice that appeared on on the asbury stream can't remember maybe you yeah you got a great voice you know love it when love it when grim sings all right what have i been doing this i've been doing this for more than an hour so i think the time has come to release the hounds well wait a minute did i cover everything i said i meant to cover um oh oh yeah um the quest for a spiritual home gonna keep doing that the whatever girls that was a crc voices thing um the live stream with kale i already talked about that a little bit yeah to do to do to have a monthly thing with kale i would i would be down for that i would be down for that kale so if you want to do that kale let me know and um because i i kale's one of these guys that i can just keep talking to so all right here we go here they come oops oh mouse dumb dumb dumb um the link is pinned the link is pinned who will come in the first one in there he is high speed internet there we go and the myth the legend so you're going to interview me huh yeah yeah i am going to interview oh that makes me i i already sent you on twitter i sent you the format because you might want to think about all of it because like i have this this whole thing going um i'm gonna do father eric first so that's that's gonna be okay really interesting everybody can see it on a gapic orientation that's my youtube channel all right all right all right second only to navigating patterns of course and here we have the man hank hank the troll hank a regular on the transfigured podcast hank hank this is the first time is this the first time you've been on my channel hank oh i did a conversation with you didn't you may have so so hank what do you have to say hank huh what's your secret i have no secrets paul i am a i am a tabla rossa i am a blank slate that you fill each and every day with your fine videos hank is one of the pillars of the chicago but you guys actually have a name for your group in chicago hank uh we live in purgatory wait how do you feel about your your mayor that just recently got taken out i saw a viral video about some some reporter who lost his credentials uh beating her up and uh well hey chicago chicago used to be called beirut by the lake and it is again now beirut by the lake all right you you know what you don't go in without a gun wow it's it's a tough it's gotten horrible um i'll be brief just to say that the suburbs have had a renaissance of people leaving the city yeah and um and the people that are leaving the city in the greatest droves african-american middle class yeah they're either coming to the suburbs or they're moving to atlanta yep and i cannot tell you how unpopular the current mayor of chicago was with african-americans they despised her um and so it for a good reason um you know when your city becomes a war zone um the the residents usually aren't going to meet you with a lot of acclamation so um and by the way a guy who who you've had conversations with moe would be a far better person to discuss those issues since he lives in the war zone yeah sam and i sam lives in the richest part of the chicagoland area you didn't know that i mean he's you know i mean north shore north shore is like the main line in philadelphia it's it's like westchester county and in in new york i mean he's yeah i mean no you're gonna have to mute your browser there you go so but um i i found your interesting conversation with kale extremely interesting um regarding peterson and the pope i found that a very interesting situation because though i like to troll um the pope is who the pope is um oh i see sam says stop using my zip code privilege hey i'm sorry dude um oh no sam makes the gold coast look poor um but i i think that that and you know kale would be able to speak with this with with better knowledge than i do should know that hank left the evangelical church and a place where the evangelical churches are at the top of the hierarchy and went to rome and has been trolling me ever since yes but it with love um but i think the the the interesting thing is is that the pope is not a great communicator he says things that you sit there and go hmm and um i think the interesting thing is my daughter who's a very conservative catholic has a lot of words to say about the pope and i who am a catholic basically say yeah i get it but this too shall pass um and maybe because of my work with sam my work that i love history that the catholic church has outlived a lot of bad dudes or a lot of insufficiently good dudes or people who are not very good at communicating the faith um and this pope like me like you like everyone else is a um is beholden to their culture their time liberation theology was a big deal when he was a younger man um it would be interesting to me to have a see the two popes having a conversation pope frances and pope saint john paul the second who made liberation theology not so great again um so i think that we're why the pope doesn't upset me as much as other people is i think he does mean well i just think that he's not a good communicator and he's not a troll but definitely jordan peterson that response was that guy looked like a theobro he looked like a hardcore reform christian saying no this is how it works this is how it is and you're going to hell if you don't stop doing this and i'm like oh i've seen pastors like that there's a guy in southern california named john mccArthur who acts just like that and so you know i i guess because of my background in politics the reason i don't throw peterson off the boat and i don't throw pope frances off the boat is if i agree with you about 80 to 90 percent of the time you're basically a friend i don't have to agree with you 100 percent of the time i don't need to agree with you 100 percent of the time and i hope you wouldn't agree with me 100 percent of the time because if you do you're really quite boring to me i would prefer to have somebody stick their hand in my face and say hey you know that's why i love jacob so much jacob is a constant pain in my rear end and i love the guy he doesn't bother me at all okay and the best thing is when we're both trolling someone at the same time on twitter it's it could be quite fun it's a rope-a-dope and it's the dopes who keep on coming back wanting to have interaction with us that just you know one guy was yelling and screaming at jacob yesterday on twitter and i said you know you don't have to respond to him okay you could just ignore him okay i mean it's it's what i'm seeing right now with trump at desantis do you notice what desantis is doing with trump he's doing what you should have always done with trump completely and utterly ignore him and trump looks like a bitter flailing old man okay that just can't help himself and you know what desantis does yeah okay i gotta go do something else now anything else you'd like to yell at me about so like i said i think the interesting thing is yes if you look at the catholic church and i belong to a catholic bible study the people that have been on my bible study will have some have some deep questions about pope frances yeah the conservative catholics and my argument has always been is that he means well but his communication skills are in the power of george w bush all right all right you know i mean i'm just waiting for him to say nuclear okay well let's let's bring let's bring some other voices in here dale hey paul how are you pretty good good i got about five minutes and then i gotta take off all right what you got to say nothing i'm just a lurker who've been who's watching been watching you since december 2017 so all right we've been playing stuff you did i'm a crc guy grew up in orange city was in grad rapids about the same time you were from 82 to 95 so just been a lurker all right all right great thanks for jumping on michael howdy sir how are you good good what are you up to why'd you jump in yeah yeah uh well uh we're gonna make the best use of the time two things one when you're talking about conversations that you'd have that you choose to have with people of a certain profile or notoriety i'm here to continue to push for one of those to be with richard roland uh yeah yeah i should talk to him i wouldn't have any problem talking to him we just i just haven't set the whole thing up so actually if someone i know that for a while andrea wanted me to talk to him so if someone wants to actually set that up and be the go-between to do it between us that'd be fine um because i you know he's not really sort of in my world right now but and then the other question would be so andrea is setting up a conversation with myself and chris cavanaugh and i want to talk to chris because chris has sort of with his podcast been out there you know you know peterson's a grifter and verveke's peddling this and peugeot's peddling that and so i want to i want to sit down with chris cavanaugh that might be a little more a little more contentious than a lot of my other conversations because i want to get up okay chris what's what's what's up with you what's up with all of this stone throwing have you watched on the stowa with verveke yet what's that have you watched the one uh on the stowa with verveke yet what's chris cavanaugh on with verveke oh that'd be interesting i haven't seen that it's on the stowa just a few days ago oh oh i i'm definitely interested in that uh follow up on the the circles that the circles are really close with with roland which is one of the things that that i wanted to just bring up and i was kind of curious on your thoughts on um as i have to my surprise found myself in orthodox circles um where are you from uh i'm in texas i i have started evangelical or catholic or uh the the shortest story is something like uh grew up simply as a god pentecostal uh spent like 15 years as a communist atheist um like organizing occupy wall street kind of far on the deep end um and then uh and then took the the route that we're all so familiar with yeah something like your son joe your work so on so forth um so uh while i've been in these circles and encountering people like uh father barnabas powell out and coming georgia yeah yeah yeah all my twitter yeah well that's it so that uh i i got into all this because roland's like oh this eighth day thing out in wichita kansas right and i show up there and then i just got in my head and then all of a sudden i'm showing up at church um um so so uh between that uh father stephen de jones engagement with the coroner especially lately right and father stephen's real close with uh father stephen andrew damick of course who deals with richard roland right who's with joe it's like got this real tight-knit engagement um from the from some of the orthodox media leadership is maybe one way to talk about it something like that okay and and it seems to be colliding with what happens in this corner and i was curious if you'd noticed that or thought about that it really extends even to things like father barnabas powell which i think is really interesting yeah i so father stephen de jones early on peugeot kind of acted like intermediary and said you know maybe because father stephen de young came from the crc and i said i i want to well see you dale um i want to hear um i want to i want to hear your story i'm not as interested in i'm not as interested in all of your ideas and books about this or that until i really want to know your story just like i said earlier i like to know where people come from and so i haven't had father stephen on my channel partly because i think he wants to mostly talk about what he's writing in his books and it's like there it's already in the books it can be in the books um but i want to know when when you come into this channel that's the thing about me when you come into this channel you need to come as you um not your books and that's part of the reason that i don't just go out and do book tour things i like the hoodie there um not well um you need to come as you and so that's um but no you're right there's boy this is complex stuff so yeah and and peugeot you know when i first talked to peugeot came as him um and you know john vervecky comes as him and john of course has this whole constellation of um you know for he kind of science and yada yada yada but john comes as him and you gotta come as you so that's that's that's sort of my price that's my price for admission well hopefully that message gets back to them and and father powell i i think he very much comes in he comes as himself on twitter he's very sure does yeah he does he's very and that's and you know that's you know people get all upset at jordan peterson on twitter and it's like he's coming as himself you might not like who that is but that's at least he's not you know to the degree that i observe him he's not playing games he's not playing games he's not playing games he's not being a role and you know it and even with trump you know i might not care for a lot about trump but he's trump that's who he is so let's not play other games same reason i love hank and manuel they come as they come as who they are mark two so yeah i will not try to occupy michael unadvisable yeah michael because you're we we have a lot of michaels we had a lot of we have a lot of marks we have a lot of nathan so you know we need we need monikers on these guys so so welcome in in my little corner of namehood we're especially used to turning our head all the time to the name yes i'm sure you do i'm sure you do all right manuel i cut you off a little bit earlier i don't know if you had more you wanted to say uh well yeah i can i can make more commercials but i i have a question about you have you been have you been following the thing with the farmers in the netherlands because you were so i am talking to vendonk about doing a live stream about farmers on the netherlands when i was in the netherlands and john and joba and i are driving hither and yon across your fair flat beautiful country um john vendonk made this exclamation in the car joba's my witness even said i'd be willing to bet money that all of this talk because you'd go through the dutch countryside and there'd be all these upside down flags and things about you know they've turned them back right side up now okay john said and we'll see if he jumps on here he probably doesn't know how to jump in here i'd be willing to bet money that all of this drama is not going to put a single extra seat in the parliament for these people he was so wrong don't you find talk about who should win the ncaa basketball tournament then okay so he to vendonk's credit he texted me yesterday and said i'm here to pay up because i was wrong so because because john actually because of course john has been in farming his whole life and so he actually had a lot to say about this business about dutch farmers and the environment and the history of it and so and we so many of you will recognize aaron and bass who were part of the group panel that we had in the basement of the seminary in the netherlands bass had a lot of things to say about that so john is going to the netherlands and he's going to take a trip i said john find someone we can talk to about this stuff so we're going to talk about it anyway go ahead go ahead meanwhile well yeah so so in in relation to all this drama coming at us in the world right like i think this this farmers movement has at least the potential to to create a new prototype of of what's going to happen right because like there's now it's like there's so many new people right like this is a new party right so they don't have the structure they they don't really have an agenda yet right so so it's it's gonna have to come together right and then it's it's only the senate that's that's been chosen right so in some sense the actual legislation still needs to happen and it needs to get formed but there's this potential because the netherlands has been um ahead at least in in the european development in in in these these trends right so yeah that's the thing to look out for at least and yeah like there there's gonna like an answer to the meaning crisis and to the end of modernism and and the globalization and all of these things like an answer has to arise somewhere right so we'll see all right all right good good okay um anything else y'all we got um i should really land the plane in 20 minutes but you know it's a part of what vendonk what part of what vendonk talked about in the netherlands was they realized a while ago that to farmers could actually make more money if they made responsible use of fertilizer rather than sort of over fertilizing um if they limited the number of cows per acre instead of just seeing how many cows they can get on per acre that's a pretty remarkable thing because if you visit the dairies in southern california i mean these things were just just massive enterprises of huge numbers of cows produced a lot of runoff and so you know but then if you actually have to pay for the kinds of waste that this high concentration of cows produces that tips your you know your profitability so a lot of this has been sort of trying to get the formula exactly right and of course vendonk has worked forever in the dairy industry so there's a lot of wonkiness that goes on in there well so the netherlands actually have really advanced farming and and also the supermarkets they have this this label now right where it is like these i don't know what what standards they're using but they're using standards for the meat right which are like more severe than than the government standards and so like all all of the the meat that's produced in the netherlands is is trying to be at that standard because else they can't get their their meat sold so like like there's all this stuff happening outside of the government and and when i voted like i had this list of things that i needed to fill in right and a lot of these things were like the local government has to right like it was all this has to language and i'm like like like first of all like this is not a government thing like this can happen without the government and like why are you framing it that way right so there's this whole scary mentality where where like the politics has to grasp what's going on and has to control everything instead of having a supporting function all right dr evil has come into the chat i thought pvk's audience should be acquainted with shadow there's you know all this yungian talk about the shadow and integration of the shadow jacob is actually instantiating the integration of the shadow right there you just have to project it on the wall well so actually her full name is shadow of death and that is the valley of the shadow of death oh what do you have to what do you have to say for yourself jacob and not much not much um yeah not much well i needed to hold on i need to get a defib then after that my heart just moved you don't have anything to say well believe it or not i i actually am really shy and socially anxious i i know nobody believes me when i say that uh but i i i literally spent a year not leaving my apartment because like i'm i'm actually a very shy person i got your beat by four years so there's actually a lot of truth to that the there are i mean the internet sort of outs recluses because the internet is some weird space in which someone who is a little bit agoraphobic for one reason or another can actually can actually engage with the world so jacob you know um you know who i'm talking about when to talk about claire um who uh i mean she came in she came in to get on to the conversation i had with kale but i told her i said unless you turn on that camera your that's my rule on this channel if your camera isn't on you're not coming on the screen she actually turned on her camera on my channel once um she did but um so i have to say okay so i am a very anxious person and it was my it's my fear of society falling apart that makes it that makes me feel it's necessary for me to engage in in these fights that i do i i am a child of the islamic revolution in iran i am a refugee in this country and so um my i my so it's funny mars has two uh two uh moons fear and um what's the other one hate i believe right so war is comes either from fear or from hate and um i i think fear is is slightly more noble than hate so yes i i am at war with many things but it is because of my fear jacob uh humored me earlier this week in talking about um uh a a you know the the dread about the collapse of society society especially when it comes to technology we were talking about this earlier and um and i think that it relates to your conversation with dave uh where especially in these these you know trad calf and ortho bro communities there's like a rejection of modernism and like i'm going to go be out on this farm and i'm going to go homestead and i'm going to do this thing uh and uh rather than embracing something like an understanding of how creation is good and there's a there's a baptizing of that creation as least as far as i can tell um in a redemption of these things in in christ uh at least that's that's been my perspective and i and i see i was telling jacob that i see it as a as it relates to the story of jona where there's this resistance towards like oh the dirty nanobytes and this thing is so corrupted and fallen and i don't want to be a part of it right and just keep getting drawn towards towards this thing but i was curious uh uh master paul whether being in your role if it's just a recurring theme of encountering folks who you know as they're enchanted in one way become disenchanted with other things and trying to help them see the redemption of the rest yeah yeah that's that's a very good observation that there's sort of this cycle everything can't be enchanted at once it's sort of a sort of a corollary of the frame problem and so you find people cycling through things and i think that's partly sort of instantiation that the so spirit potential is always far greater than potential for instantiation that's why human beings change so much and that's why you know spirit is already is always greater than flesh so i think that gets into what you're seeing of this of this change um that that happens along the way but but also the how people sometimes people change it's sort of like the alcoholic who gets free of alcohol and becomes an overeater and then a collector and then i mean so there are patterns even within all of the different instantiations jacob briefly and then i want to i want to let bill into the conversation this is the first appearance of bill bill's have been a regular commenter for a long time so i i have to correct myself the two fear the two moons of mars are phobos and damos and phobos is um panic in that fear moves you to act and damos is uh dread as in uh paralyzing fear so yeah bill welcome oh i still can't hear you if you check that settings button you might see they click the little settings thing you might see to make sure that i love silent movies he's not muted he's no he's not muted yeah but his mike maybe isn't set up so i i wanted to respond to michael a little bit in the meantime so okay i i think there's an element where when when we're being right like that's when we we get this awareness of things and then we want to categorize it right like we want to we want to grasp it and and i think this necessity to grasp it is is the thing where people are stuck right and then and then they get reciprocally narrowed in this in this new grasping like this and then they have to drag themselves out and and so the enchantedness is is staying in the being instead of like getting out of it to to see what way you that you're being did you did you get your mike working bill well i guess i did i don't know we hear you we hear you welcome thanks for coming on the stream thanks for having yeah i'm i'm a little bit adrift here because what i came on to ask about or make comment on was what we what your jordan beaterson and the pope thing being a catholic myself i was interested in that and i had this visceral response to this you know social justice tag not because of any particular you know who said it but just the idea that you can summarize what you're supposed to do in a couple you know you know something like that you know you have to try you have to use words so that's not really fair but there's so many as you saw from my comment i don't know what else right right but i mean you know we're supposed to love our enemies we're supposed to help these people help help other people a lot of you know our neighbors ourselves we have all these requirements to do things which you know i through my life at least i i just don't see how i could do with those things you know i mean i could try but i'm sorry god's how do i do that and then have this thing where i'm going to have the government come in and help me you know that i've worked for the government my whole life i can't imagine they'll be able to do anything that significant uh in an effective way and uh yeah and the church was ran you know church the catholic church at least and other churches you know like britain and germany there were state churches and they didn't seem to do a better job than anybody else did in terms of taking care of everybody in the community they tried i mean give them credit for that but they weren't particularly good at it either so uh i mean i was messily bad at it but they they were just human at it as anybody else with me yeah um you know maybe that doesn't matter anything but no it's true and other people made the comment that they wish that kail and i had talked a little bit more about the the social justice question because you know depending on what you mean i mean there's there's always the term that's why i emphasized hashtag social justice because that then sort of once you hashtag it now it's sort of in the twitter sphere whereas jordan peterson if jordan peterson is going to make a video about dutch farmers he certainly cares for something that could be described as social justice it's just that the these labels have become um tied to certain applications and obviously that's what peterson was sort of going after but peterson clearly cares about justice and the pope clearly cares about justice and you know what we want to do is have a better conversation about especially in a democratic society how how the different actors the state actors um ecclesiastical actors private individuals non-for-profits corporate actors all of these different bodies that sort of constitute the world that we live in can can have a more just society so but obviously on twitter you know i think someone could rightly say that's kind of a cheap shot that jordan took well yeah but it's the only shot you can usually take on twitter yeah i i'm not familiar with twitter that much but i mean one of the commenters and i'm sorry i didn't catch who it was talking about and and the dutch issue in terms of the farmers and how you know they can come up with local solutions which can solve the problems if they're committed to do it and they seem and at least he was describing that they were trying to do it so why do you need somebody to come and fix it i mean it it's much more sustainable if the local people have decided to do something than it is for you know somebody comes in and says well the way to fix that is you know these three steps and okay well then you're out you know well well like i can expand on that a little bit right this the issue is the technocracy right so there's there's this idea of like okay there's this limit and it's like arbitrarily set like 20 years ago or 25 years ago and now you have to work within that game right so so there's this this technocracy and it's not looking at the local implementation but the local implementation needs to live up to this this arbitrary rule that's set and and you you can't get these things together right and that's why they have to buy the farmers out because like that's the only only way forward if you keep to the standard right and for some reason like they can't get into their heads that the standards that they set are wrong or or not useful and that's that's the issue but what we've seen is politics has become on both the right and left about ideology not about looking at it a problem and saying how do we solve the problem so one of the guys that i follow much like paul does is is scott adams and anyone who's been watching him understand some things but one of the things scott adams big on is nuclear power now paul and i grew up at a time and i still build it to three mile island that was you know very unpleasant experience for people at that time but now nuclear power is far different because we're talking 50 years into the future 1975 to me was like 1925 to my dad okay completely different and yet we want to still live in a world that's still in 1975 listening to bruce springsteen and so the ideologues come in and as someone who's in politics let me tell you what most politicians are they're either control freaks or they're narcissists i'm serious i i've worked with them i i worked on campaigns and the guy mark a good friend of mine mark who's run presidential campaigns he ran glenn yonkin's campaign for virginia governor i asked him one time how many politicians would you consider someone that you'd want to have a beer with he's been doing this for 50 years one politician okay most of them think the world can will will end if they're not elected and that's not true and so what happens is we look at what's happening in the netherlands because i've been sort of interested in this and now it's moved over to belgium it's going to move out other places because the people who get screwed when we sit there and say nitrates and all this other stuff are the people i know the guys i grew up with the working poor okay they get screwed and screwed hard not not the people who grew up on it where i live now in wheat and i'm blessed to live in wheat in illinois okay when i was growing up wheat is where all the rich people lived where i grew up was under o'hare field that's where the white people lived who couldn't afford to live in the nice suburbs and we all had all the guys i grew up with were aspirational nobody wanted to live at by o'hare field you couldn't think when a plane went over your head and so we look at this and i i have a heart for this it's like when food prices go up it's an inconvenience to me but when food prices go up it's a tragedy for my employees and i keep on trying to raise their rate wages and it's not keeping up with the cost and i hear politicians saying well it's getting better really in what world do you live in not in the world that i live in and so they don't want to solve problems and then it's the law of unintended consequences and so i the people i get the angriest with are the people that sit there and tell me as they're piddling on my shoes that it's raining out okay it's not raining out you're piddling on my shoes and i'd like you to stop okay and so we see what's going on in netherlands i cannot i can understand why those i mean a good friend of mine is a farmer he's a big time farmer he said hey if i stop producing how are you going to eat sweetheart okay those guys work hard they're disciplined they have to be they have to be good business people good agriculturalists they have to do a lot of different jobs pretty well and then somebody from the government comes in yeah i know phil vischer from wheaton great guy you probably get along no phil and i would not get along and we don't get along um okay just for at all um because um uh yeah i i'm having to re-budget file yeah criminal gas yeah food going up i get it anselman that's exactly it and people are talking about a lot of bs-ery but at the end the farmers say okay you don't my my niece lives in amsterdam and she said she was astonished because she sort of dislocated from this she grew up wealthy she couldn't believe how angry the farmers were my brother who grew up like i did said well you'd get angry too if someone's trying to take you out of your livelihood well can't they do something else and she's a reporter my brother goes well why don't you become a why don't you become a waitress and not become a reporter anymore you know he's trying to get her to understand what's going on it's hard it's hard i find the elites at least very not empathetic to people the regular people and that's exactly why donald trump became president of the united states even though he's the biggest knucklehead god ever created okay okay so oh here we go let me let me let me uh try to change the level of analysis here and i think we need to change the level of analysis here um on on my discord server we're talking i started talking about global trumpism i'm gonna get a drink you you talk because the the discussion local in it the discussion is is about the israeli politics uh elections and i think there's a reason and sorry hank but you're showing your protestant bona fides um you're you're thinking in individuals and about the politicians and even individual nations and i think what really is going on is there are uh powers and principalities that are and michael and i have been talking about this on my channel um that are affecting lots and lots of people and people don't recognize that they are being possessed by certain powers and principalities by certain spirits and we can talk about the dutch farmers and we can talk about the israeli uh protests and we can talk about the united states but global trumpism uh mark blithe who i have lots of disagreements with um talked about this six years ago there we we need to be talking about institutions and things that are larger than individual human beings and so talking about you know it's it's not just biden who's piddling on our shoes and telling us it's raining he actually thinks it's raining he doesn't realize he's in continent and that's happening in israel and that's happening in denmark and it's happening in netherland sorry um and it's happening um in in canada and that's that's why my thing has been about uh building cathedrals right we have to stop with the house churches we have to stop with the house churches we have to build cathedrals things that are multi-generational and not the work of an individual human being there's this one guy in spain who claims uh bible um there's this one guy in in spain who's claiming that he he's he's building a cathedral and oh no he he just died and he'd spent 70 years building a cathedral guess what first of all he didn't build it build what he's built so far by himself he built it with other people and second he wasn't able to finish it let's build cathedrals and building cathedrals are not the works of individual human beings yeah and i think it's also important to realize and this was where the conversation went at least what the thing that i was watching during the elections there needs to be a vertical integration within society right like what is a cathedral well cathedral is the place where all parts of society commune right and when you have a house church there is no capacity to commune all levels of society i know i want to answer to that is is my channel my channel is it is it my channel is it one person's channel no jacob yes jacob you bring up some great points and and obviously you have a different perspective in in a one that i have to take into account obviously i am we talked about this before i'm a product of my society which is very individualistic you know you want to understand me watch risky business that's my generation okay um and i don't want to see slant hanks slide across the floor in his underwear i really don't my wife does though but that's a whole different story okay um but i think that so we have two issues here america has always been an individualistic nation it's a protestant nation and people get very upset when their individualism is is confined constraint whatever you want to call it but on the other hand we can't hey chad you're looking great by the way um i think that thank you thank you thank you you're welcome um but yes we need to have structures and societies and accountability and understanding and actually funny that jacob should mention it i put a cathedral on my facebook post today and said churches should it should teach us to aspire so i i take the gentle rebuke uh jacob in in a good way because it helps helps me understand yes we have to build structures but i also get very aggravated when i see you're right i don't think i i don't think joe i think joe biden thinks he's doing the right thing i don't in a lot of ways but i don't think everybody is like does it there's a lot of people that are just there their principalities and power is literally power well and this is what i've been kind of uh interested in lately i just kind of noticed how our attention gets pulled in so many directions and that's why i've been on this whole kind of corny here and now thing because it's like well what should the church aspire you say that they should be a spy like we should be aspiring to what so like at the end of the day what am i going to do about the farms in the netherlands i know like that's closer to mcmahon well and that's more of his problem and but what about our relationships here now i think it's really important um at least to keep in the front of our minds because i'm not saying don't think about the faraway stuff i'm just saying we're being more captured by the faraway stuff as if it's important i don't know but it's all the same problem that that's what jacob is saying with the principalities like it's just it's just a different shape of the same problem right and like i i mentioned technocracy right so there's this this idea that if you can put things in a spreadsheet and then manage a spreadsheet for five years into the future you can decide what to do and like that's that's not what it is right like what you need is you need to cultivate them the cultivation is is an intimacy right like it's an interaction it's it's it's an unfolding process where your engagement with what's happening and you need to have that direct feedback and the spreadsheet doesn't have the feedback right so so that's what the cathedral does right like it's these layers of of society that get feedback and then when you have a consumerist society and the consumer is like it it the consumerism is is a relationship without intimacy right like i can get the thing that i want without having to care about you as a person like that's what a consumer is and and that's that's the thing that that is destroying everything because it's convenient but but now you're not building right like right so we're more interested in like the the thing that we are like society seems like is gathering around is more problems and not solutions and that's that's the problem so i'm going to wax poetic no man is an island entire of itself each is a piece of the continent i'm part of the main if a claw to be washed away by the sea europe is the less as well as if a promontory were as well as if a manner of thine own of or of thine friends were each man's death diminishes me for i am involved in mankind therefore send not to know for whom the bell tolls it tolls for thee all right i am going to call an end to this stream poor grim grizz is trying to do his thing right now at noon so um you know i feel very sensitive about sort of you know squashing the smaller channels that i really want to promote so um we've we've gone on long enough and as many of you know in this little corner there's increasingly thanks to jacob's innovative entrepreneurial spirit there's increasingly channels that you can get on to and have these conversations here on the open internet so thank you all for joining and um by the way i want to say bye to my my troll brother jaco instead of building a cathedral build a bridge and then you can vote well you know why every bridge that's built has to have trolls underneath it that's true that's true that's right of nature all right so thank you everybody take care guys have a great one all right bye