https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1PFWu35ujnw

 I just wanted to... Oh, there we go. Although I just wanted to preface this by saying that I don't know if you're going to want to actually, you know, I don't know if I'll have anything useful to say this time. I just, I believe in synchronicity and I've been looking at John Mark Comer stuff a lot recently, because my church is really, you know, I don't know if you remember, I'm a pastor. And there is a spiritual formation has become, you know, is very big in a lot of folks in my community. We have a lot of deconstruction people. And John Mark Comer is a name that's been going around quite a bit for the last several years. And he just did that interview. I watched that interview and I was trying to like, parse through my own kind of like weird tension I was feeling about it, which I would love to talk to you a little bit about that. But then I found that you had a video, you had done a video a few weeks back on it. And I found, yeah, I found your commentary on it both like helpful and also like, I was like, oh man, I need to talk to him about this. And then I happened to go on your conversations, calendar thing, and you actually you had an opening. I didn't even, it'd been, it probably been two years since I even looked to see if there were any openings and there happened to be an opening. So I was synchronous. Okay, things are lining up here. So I decided. Wow. I will tell you, first of all, you should, we'll have to find, we'll have to find the link to our first conversation. We can put this below to give people context because. And then also, it's a funny thing that happened. I recently, I recently, so there's kind of the Randall's conversation where anyone can sign up and then there's obviously other conversations that I, you know, that somehow occur. And then I wind up going back and forth with email and trying to find a date and stuff with people. And I remember back in the day, it was like, I take so much time and that's exactly what Calendly is for. I want to open up. So then I decided I was going to have, try and use Calendly for those other things too. And what I did was I altered some things in my setup and what that did was sort of lower the lower the gate. So two days later, I opened my calendar and it's like, where did all these conversations come from? Because I, you know, I just got finished doing a conversation with the CRC minister and he asked me, he says, how do you do this? Because you know, and what he does know is that he has no idea how hard this is because if I would just open up my calendar, my calendar would fill from Monday to Friday, complete those and it would do that every week and I can't have that. Yeah. So I have, I've developed over the years this system and it's, it's makes this sort of stingy and it was just, and then I looked at my calendar with terror because I had just flooded my calendar and then it was, well, what do I do? Yeah. Do I write everybody and say, oh, I'm sorry, I had an administrative mistake. I thought, no, well, we'll do them all. So wow. God had his hand in this. So here we are. Okay. That's wild, man. Yeah. I, like I said, I hadn't even looked for it since our conversation, you know, but I saw your video on this thing that I've been wrestling too. I was like, oh, you know what? I really enjoyed that time. I enjoy Paul. I've been listening to your stuff for, you know, you know, ever since that first Jordan Peterson video that you put out basically. And I, yeah, it just worked out. So I'm happy, you know, I'm sorry for you that you've had all those meetings. Actually, you know what? Mostly pastors have found it, which is really funny because pastors are a tiny portion of people who listen, but there's another Randall's really amazing Randall's conversation I did with a pastor recently and he's still, he's still deciding what to do with it. So yeah, no, I mean, I, you know, you left it, you left it on such a good note here. I remember I wrote it down. It's like you were asking the question, what exactly is God doing here on YouTube? What is God doing through? And you said this. And I, yeah, it kind of brought me back to you years ago. I think last time we talked, you had been really diving into the stuff about like the aggregate and all this kind of thing. And these, the way these spirits kind of manifest. You know, as I watched John Mark Comer, what I'm, I'm relatively unfamiliar with him. I know that several pastors I work with are really influenced by him, but it was just kind of like shocking to hear for me. And part of this was like my own insecurities coming up that I'm like, oh, I realize that I kind of do some of these things that he's doing. But when you're looking at yourself from the outside, there's also this kind of like. It makes you it makes me uncomfortable. And I look at some things, I'm like, oh, I kind of say that, don't I? Why does that make me uncomfortable to hear him saying that? And so that that phrase that you really landed on there, I feel like you got you kind of had to cut off your thoughts on it. But I was just like, I don't know if I'm so curious to hear how like your thoughts have kind of been developing on what you what you think God is doing here on the Internet, because it's something that as a pastor, I I'm increasingly both I'm trying to be hopeful about, but I'm also like, yeah, it just it feels like it feels like nobody has a handle on it right now. This is going to sound weird to people, but I think he's actually continuing to purify his church. And I just had a gosh, I've been on. So this morning I did a two hour conversation with a colleague of mine from the CRC, as it's a no, no ads right now, but it's going to come to the full channel. I'm going to do some clips of it first. And then I did a women of the corner live stream in the membership section with a couple of women. And and then I just had a little family. I just talked to my family and my brother in law is a member of Park Street Congregational in New England. That is Boston that is having one heck of a church fight right now. And, you know, in talking and think and watching the CRC's church fight and then talking to the women, I think part of what's happening is that a lot of the institutional games that churches could play that really didn't help members. They just can't be played in an Internet age anymore. Yeah, it's just not going to cut it. Yeah. People are going to have to people are going to have to be real and honest and disclosing about all sorts of things. And it's going to cause a lot of chaos. But from what I'm seeing with a lot of I mean, this whole deep wave of deconstruction, part of it is a sort of falling away. But another part of it is a purifying because stuff is getting rung out and things are getting tested. And usually in a time of testing, hopefully only what's really true will emerge. I remember Tim Keller before he died talking about this great deconstruction and saying a lot of what's probably going to come get burned off the church is a lot of nominalism. And and so it's definitely going to be an intensification and that's going to be chaotic. I think there's going to be I think just the resolution on church is going to is going to rise. That's going to be hard on the church and hard on people. But I think in the long run, probably for many people to be a good thing. Yeah, that's interesting. I essentially I think I essentially agree with you. I am because we're in the interim, though. I sit back and I'm like, I think that I think you're right. There's going to be a lot of like kind of shedding, shedding, shedding away, you know, a lot of bleeding off. I just I think it's going to be so much more than we think, though. Yeah. Oh, I think so, too. Yeah. I think that like, you know, I brought this up last time we talked, but it was a book that really impacted me called The End of the Church by Ephraim Radner. And I keep on going back to that book where he basically says that like the way what if is we're called to follow Jesus, what if we what if we took that to like the kind of umpteenth degree where it's like we we as a church actually follow him all the way up to the cross and we actually die on the cross alongside Christ. And this idea that maybe the way that, you know, maybe the church actually has to die as the final like kind of gift to the world or something like that. Somebody did that effect. You know, it's so hard because some of the stuff that like, you know, if I can use the language of trigger that triggers me about the comments a guy like Comer makes is it's like there's this weird I call it like the scrapbook effect where I'm just increasingly around people from a ministry background that seem very comfortable cutting and pasting from lots of different things. Like they're like, oh, this is kind of neat. I like that. I like that. They're just like slapping it uncritically slapping it into this book because they're thinking it's very individualistic and they're very like it's just like, oh, it helps me. It helps me be a better me basically. And so I'm going to put it in the scrapbook. And but it's like all the stuff that they're borrowing comes from a broader context of conversation. It would be like trying to put together a language like a language, a coherent language out of just all the bits and bobs from other languages without understanding the grammar or syntax or anything like that. Yeah. And that's the thing that for myself, you know, I've become more and more cognizant of in my own kind of like practices and behaviors where it's just like, oh, I didn't really think about that too much when I said that I use the language I talk about unhealthy a lot. It's kind of like an analogy or metaphor or whatever. But it's like, what am I actually saying? It starts a lot like Philip Reif. His critique of the therapeutic culture was that we dance around in this theater of the medical. Like, that's what religionists start to do. And I find myself increasingly gravitating towards that. And it's like, well, why do I use why do I feel like in order to validate my comments, I need to medicalize them. Right. And I because I noticed that a lot in John Mark Kovner. I noticed a lot of qualification, a lot of what I call, you know, the up speak where he doesn't make statements. He asks, they're all questions. And I find that a lot with my my my my co pastors who are really in a spiritual formation. It's all about asking questions. Right. But the question is a rhetorical device that's you're not it's not sincere. The question is not asked out of sincerity. It's it's a posture that you're putting on to get somebody to, you know, to give you it's like something a confidence man would do. Right. And I'm not trying to be like judgmental because I don't think anybody's intending that implicitly internalized these kinds of like these behaviors where it's like, I'm trying to get you to do something. I'm trying to get you to concede something or come somewhere. And so I'm going to frame what I'm saying as a question when I don't really believe it's a question, but I'm framing it as such. Does that make sense? That makes perfect sense. And that's boy, if you take what you just said and apply it to something like Socratic Dialogue, then because let's be fair about Socrates, it's kind of the move he was making. And the question is, you know, a confidence man sort of has a grift in view that he's working you towards with the questions. Yeah. The question of let's say sincere Socratic Dialogue is how. How much is Socrates himself a partner with you on that journey? Yeah, that's a fair point. Yeah. So but I think that's I think that's excellent because you're exactly right. The. The theater of the medical, that's really good. And. That that health language sort of came in a couple of decades ago, and I think it was an attempt to. Attempt to deal with pervasive skepticism with respect and a lack of confidence in the church. And so that became sort of the therapeutic mode of the church. Yeah. And I think you're exactly right that that can you can cover up a lot and sneak and smuggle in a lot with that. And I think sometimes it's probably sincere. Yeah. But what's interesting is, again, I just with with Nate Vendetta and the kind of the pastor I just had a conversation with. You know, he mentioned the fact that his father has Parkinson's and it's actually in medicine right now, where that which is which is sort of provoking a lot of skepticism in the modernist frame, because, you know, we we just talked about, you know, we just had a covid vaccine that doesn't really necessarily mean you don't get covid. Whereas the measles and the mumps and the rubella and all those vaccines seem to work and that was pretty straightforward. Once I got the vaccine, I didn't get the illness. But with this, I got the vaccine and the illness. And then with Parkinson's, he just referenced a book that a doctor had written who was basically saying, what if Parkinson's isn't a disease in the way that we think of it? Because and the same thing with autism, which is sort of another one of these things. And, you know, I wind up increasing as a pastor talking with people who have disease that basically medicine is skeptical of. And you have the sense you see the symptoms and you say, this isn't psychosomatic. This is psychological. So I see symptoms and you as the doctor are basically saying that's not on our map. So therefore, well, therefore what? Because we've entrusted you as a culture with the idea that you can fix anything. But then we also haven't asked, especially with psychology. Well, show me exactly what is the kind of person you are trying to help me become with your therapy. Yeah. What is the telos of this? Yeah. Yep. And you've been talking recently. I've noticed over the years, you've been really kind of focusing in on this idea of this teleological bent. And I think it is like to think through the ends, like what is the purposefulness of what you're doing here? Because I also think, you know, he brought up the Myers-Briggs tests Comber did, and that was another like I did. I've done a lot of like kind of career development training in my past for young people. These tests are helpful to a degree, but I became like in my journey with that stuff, I became extremely disillusioned with it because again, there is a there's a tailor, there's a telos, right? There's something that you're drawing somebody towards. And once you like, once you kind of like scooch them into that lane, it's like there's nowhere else for them to go. And so like I find like I sit around and talk to people about the enneagram. I was just having a conversation with folks at my church about this the other day. They wanted to talk to me about my opinion on the enneagram. And I said, well, I feel about the same way about that as I do about astrology and tarot cards. And they thought I was being like derogatory. And I'm like, I'm not being derogatory. I'm just saying that like people have been practicing these things for a long time. Like they thought this kind of stuff. But the risk is if there's a spirit in those things and it's drawing you to something, what I don't like is when people they use these these ways of self self-realization as though like there's this kind of like Russellian naivete to it, right? Where they're like, there's a natural use somewhere and you just need to get all the accumulation of society off of you and then you'll find who your true self is. And these tests will help you do that. But what they but that's so naive because these things are part of society that's trying to shape you from the outside. Right. But if you just fall in one lane, it's like you become like you become stunted. It's part of why I think there's so much mental illness in the age of the nuclear family in suburbia. Right. It's like your village used to shape your character. Right. It was a it was a given. It was taken for granted that community was a good and that you actually were a good and that you actually like your identity was shaped and formed by the external environment that you were in. Right. And so now that we think we've lied to ourselves and said, it's all about my individual spiritual journey with God. It's like, no, you're being taken somebody whereby somebody and you're used the language several years ago. You started using the language of colon colonization for what YouTubers were doing to people like they're colonizing your minds, your hearts. And it's like, yeah, that's kind of uncritically like if you're just doing that stuff, it's like, oh, these are psychologists. They know what they're doing. These are helpful tests. It's like, no, it's these things are shaping you. And so that's my hesitation. I'm not trying to be like it's why the church began to talk about astrology and tarot cards as if they're like demonic. It's because they understood the power of that spirit. Like that can be the guiding force in your life. And once you start like once your day becomes about you thinking to yourself, well, I I'm not going to do that because I'm Nate. Right. Oh, and that person there is seven. So I'm not going to even try to interact with that person because I'm at this number and we're going to clash. It's like you become possessed by that thing. Right. And you're being shaped by it into something new that you weren't before. Right. It's not like it's just helping you develop more of you. It's like, no, it's actually replacing you and making you something else. Yeah. And possessed people wouldn't. So one of the you know, one of the things that I've always been working on, too, is figuring out what on earth we mean by all of but what we mean by spirit and what we mean by angels and demons. And OK, what is what is possession? Because something that is begins as descriptive, very subtly becomes prescriptive. Yeah. And especially when there's so now I've never gotten into the enneagram. And again, I don't know anything about it. I'm not trying to, you know, do anything with it. But once you sort of take on the identity of that number, it was sort of like I was, you know, around for the whole Meyers Briggs thing, you know, three decades ago, four decades ago. I remember my parents getting that book and we're all filling out the little sheets. And who are you? I'm an INTJ. I'm an ENTJ. And, you know, and the thing is that once you read that little description in that book, now you're sort of looking in this mirror and that mirror is that mirror is looking back at you. And now I'm seeing myself through these four little letters. And and now when something comes, I ask myself and there's a little bit of question about what's my next move with this. Well, I'm an I'm an ENTJ. Therefore, my move is this and not that. And it's like, yeah, that that that, you know, a little bit of mind control, a little bit of possession. Yeah, this Meyers Briggs spirit has put into me. And it's starting to lead me toward this towards this thing. And of course, when you get to a village, well, now suddenly on one hand, there's a little bit of a little bit more security because at least you have a degree of temperamental diversity that's probably in that village. But you've also at the same time got some larger spirits that, of course, are shaping that whole village. There's no there's no getting away from the mind control and from the possession. We are we are going to be possessed by spirits. And the only questions are which spirits and where are they taking us? Yes. And I think that's exactly right. And I think I run into a lot of like people who are like, you know, they come from like these non-denom megachurch backgrounds, and they don't believe that there's any they think that there's spirits and then there's God. And then, you know, I'm like, I always Michael Heiser. I always want to give them to read Michael Heiser a little bit, just to kind of like, you know, parse that out a little bit. There's more going on there. But yeah, I think that you're right. I think it would be it would be ignorant to say that, yeah, we're all we're a sea of spirits impacting drawing us here back and forth. It's like I think I think the ancient Greeks, the way that they would talk about they would talk about these things, demons. And it was like it seems as though there's a lot of overlap between what we call emotions and what they call demons. And it's like and we even use there's like these kind of anachronisms where it's like we say, oh, he got that he was possessed with anger, possessed with lust. Right. It's like these things enter in and they totally reorient your perception of the world. And they're like, you have agency still, but those things are taking you somewhere. Right. And when we say when I say possession, it's like, yeah, it's like that internal thing that's taking you somewhere. It's one, you know, I'd say people can get possessed by nationalism. Right. It's this you're like on the healthy end of healthy. I just use that right on the good end of the spectrum. Right. It's like there is a kind of like love for neighbor that's getting expressed with like patriotism and all that kind of thing. But when we say nationalism, a lot of times what we mean is there's this added layer of like control that the spirit of the thing has grabbed you. It's no longer you're caring about people. You are now like you're caring about the spirit. America, the American spirit, it's like we got to hold on to that. Right. And yeah, so but we're we're we're a sea of those things. I think with the Christian, it seems to me and correct me if you think I'm off on this, but it seems to me the Christian distinction has always been that when we say that Jesus is Lord, the the assertion is not that nothing else exists, but that he has dominion over it all. Right. Right. It's all answerable to him. Right. Right. There's not these other things where it's like, you know, you drive around some areas in the country and you see the American flag and then the Christian flag beneath it. It's like that's the inversion of how proper ordering. Right. If we think about the hierarchy of, you know, you know, influence or whatever. But yeah. And so as I look at as I look at the modern spiritual formation movement again, like I'm kind of peripherally connected to it because I'm serving the ministry with folks who are very much engaged in it. But it seems like it seems like we're kind of playing out we're playing out this this this therapeutic like therapy seems to be replacing a robust like a robust how to say it like. The narrative of Christianity seems to be getting kind of like it's like the body snatchers a little bit is what it feels like. It feels like or I don't know if you watch any like analog horror or anything like that. There's a really interesting one, really disturbing. It's a form of narrative on YouTube. It's called Gemini Home Entertainment. And there is like the narrative that unfolds is like there's this alien presence from the outside that has infected the planet, the earth. And it's like it gets itself inside of things and starts replacing it. And it's like replacing it from the inside out. And the invasion is from the inside out. And there seems to be something really there's something kind of powerful about that to me, because I think that's actually kind of how invasion kind of happens in terms of like replacement happens. And it feels like as we start shifting, we start replacing our terms and are like kind of teleological frameworks for like the purpose of the Christian life. It's like it does feel like the thing. Is becoming something else. It's like Earl Bloom described it as the American religion. It's not Christian in the historic sense of the word. It is something that's become a different kind of religion that's more in line with what classic Gnosticism. And anyway, as a pastor, I just I'm probably too overly neurotic, you know, in reference to my thinking about this stuff. But yeah, John Mark Comer provoked that in me to where it's like again, like I see I see that tendency in my own ministry. And in the history of those around me, where I'm like like kind of like selectively replacing components of of this thing, that I think historic Christianity, like I don't think it would have made sense to Paul the way that we talk about Paul wouldn't have recognized a lot of what we're talking about here, it feels like in Christianity. Yeah, I could be wrong about that. I it's in. So I was I was reading. Working at a new members class and in the Christian from church that will almost always involve the Huttaberg catechism. And. In and so I decided I was and I was wrestling with, OK, how how to help. You know, unlike, you know, if I if I were orthodox, I would say, OK, you all want to join the church, you're going to be a year as a catechesis. And in that year, as a catechumen, I'm going to have you go 52 Lord's days through the Huttaberg catechism at the end. Maybe just maybe I'll let you in. Doesn't quite work that way anymore. But. So I was I was thinking again, I was thinking about the Huttaberg catechism through the eyes of these very diverse group of people, some of which will be baptized, some of which have been baptized before and will join the church. And so I thought I'm going to take a I'm going to poke around a little bit and see what's on YouTube and the Internet about the Huttaberg catechism. And so then I started getting into all of these books that are supposed to. They're sort of commentaries on the catechism. They're not really commentaries because we don't really write commentaries. We write. Well, how can we describe sort of the modern genre of Christian book? It's very much in what we're talking about. Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's a few little stories and then a distillation of what we think that, let's say, this Lord's Day is about. And then maybe a little application. It's all these like little mini sermons that we put next to the catechism when the catechism itself was a tool that was supposed to do the same thing. But 500 years ago. And then I I thought, oh, I'm going to look for some older ones. So then I found an older one that was written about 125 years ago. And it starts out saying, now, these are questions and answers. And the reasons that these are questions and answers are because we're not going to leave it up to the people to make up the answers. We're going to tell them exactly what to say, because the old way of using a catechism was the teacher gives the question and the answers memorized and given back to the teacher. Yes. That is what how catechisms were supposed to work. Yeah. Now, when you watch people present the catechism, it's much more. Well, these are questions. And it's almost like the answers are these. These are the suggested answers that maybe you should think about a little bit. And it just struck me how. Yeah, things have changed when I was in the Dominican Republic and they were working the Hutterburg catechism with the churches there. It was much more question and answer, because that was exactly what happened in their schools. And when the well-meaning missionaries from North America would come to help start Christian schools, one of the first things they tried to wrestle away from the smartest, most educated people and very uneducated villages was, we are not going to do question. We're not going to do education like you received in Haiti, which was exactly the form of the catechism. Here is the question. Here is the answer. It was fascinating saying, wow. And so what happens in churches generally, exactly like you mentioned. Well, what we'd really like to get from you is your profession of faith is sort of. What is, you know, what does God mean to you? And then if if anything that you say sounds nice and not racist, sexist or homophobic, you're in. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's oh, man, that is so that's so interesting. And it's like a lot, you know, even now. And there's nothing to it. Like at the end of the I shouldn't say there's nothing to it, but it's like it's it's like shaky sand, you know, like it really shaky. When you hear what comes out of people. Well, it's just like they're like, well, God is love. And it's like, well, we all. Oh, that's so nice. It's like, well, what does that mean exactly? Do you mean like, oh, I love a cheeseburger. Is that what you mean? Like, what do we mean when we say that God is love exactly? Oh, well, God is Jesus. Well, what do you mean by that exactly? Because a lot of people have really weird ideas about what Jesus is now, too. Right. It's like we have I don't know, in the scrapbooking, we've kind of like we've kind of amalgam. There's this amalgamation of like experiences that we have, and it's all the experiences that we like now get attached to Jesus. Right. And man, yeah, it just it's it goes back to that internet question of like, what is God doing with places like YouTube and with the Internet? It's like, OK, he's shedding things off. It's like, well, how does this stuff play into that shedding off? Because without the Internet, the scrapbook doesn't compile the way the scrapbook has been compiling for a lot of people. Right. Right. Slow replacement processes haven't been happening. I you know, I think that one one day we're going to wake up probably and we're going to discover like 90 percent of like the Western Church is actually like a form, a weird form of paganism or something like that. Right. It's like it's like we'll wake up and we'll be, you know, on the one hand, we'll be praying to, you know, praying to God. And then on the other hand, we'll be reciting the, you know, I don't know, the the the I don't know, the Lincolnian MLK American kind of like catechesis, like where it's like we have all these kind of like nice feeling, like enthusiastic statements. And we're like, yeah, that feels positive and good. But they're just expressions of our American cultural heritage more than they are an expression of Christian cultural heritage. Well, we've had this for a long time. Because if you watch movies, so in the 1950s, sort of peak Cold War Christian reform modernity when church attendance was at its highest. Yeah. You see that there is a form of of of Christianity that is in American culture, that for probably most people is sort of indistinguishable from American culture. But it's it's when you watch it and you have a little bit of a theological education, you kind of watch it. And it's like, what? That's kind of funny the way this works. And, you know, one of the things that people have often said to me, which I think is true, is they will say people don't especially preachers hear this, people don't remember what you say because people aren't really that good listeners, they remember how they felt when you said it. Yeah. And then what they usually do is take some other little thing like usually maybe what they thought you said and attach that to the feeling. And that then goes in that scrapbook. Yeah, that's so that's really interesting. And that's that's an anxiety of mine as a minister. I started after my second sermon, I can remember like I didn't think it went that well, and I remember like I felt like, oh, man, it was so jumbled and such a mess. And somebody comes up to me like, oh, that was just one of the best terms I've ever heard. And they they proceed to tell me what my sermon was on. And in my head, I'm like, I didn't say that, did I? Like, I'm like, I'm like, you know, and so you just realize it's like exactly what you're describing. It's like people project they like projecting what they wanted you to say. And they hook it. They hook their projection onto your words and then they export it over into their kind of like their scrapbook. And then it just re-informs their kind of like individualized, you know, so, you know, self self journey with with God and God is like Obi Wan Kenobi and their Luke Skywalker. It's like God's the wise old sage that helps them on their heroic journey. Right. Yes, indeed. And and yet, lest we, you know, because part of part of the difficulty is and then we're we're very we very easily enter into the trope of these various other little characters you find, especially on Christian YouTube. So we're the we're we're the feel we're the doctrinal, the the confessional critics and everything we see, we're just going to evaluate by our little ruler. And what we come to YouTube for is to tell everybody in the world how all of these people are doing it wrong. Yeah, they're like they're like the nerd culture, what nerd culture is for like Lord of the Rings and all these things. It's like they're pointing out how exactly you're not doing everything right. And unfortunately, that's part of what YouTube kind of like rewards. Right. Yeah. It rewards it big time. Yeah. And so and so I find my own. I have to check myself. Well, I'm glad you're bringing this up. It's like as I'm critiquing right now, it's like I have to check myself because I realize that you you step into the silo and you start sliding down into it because it's like, you know, if you want to come across on this channel, if you want to cross out this, if you want to, you can find that everybody is a kind of a son of a bitch. Right. It's like there's something about a person. Is that all you got for cussing? That's well, I keep going. I know. Okay. I'll go. Well, but it's like you keep on digging around and it's like, you know, I got shit in my own life where it's like, I know that it's there. And it's the wisdom of Jesus is, you know, like, judge not unless you be judged kind of type stuff by the meter that you kind of measure. So too will you be measured. It's like, you know, there's this reality, this hard reality that I think that's part of what God is doing is it's like we are, we are like having to confront, we're going to have to confront at some point this critical error. Right. And because at some point it's like, you'll either be left with a world of trash. Like you'll either realize that everything is bullshit. Right. Cause at some level, everything kind of is bullshit. Like there's a component of it that there's like bullshit, bullshitery is like, you know, it's part of the human condition a little bit. Right. And that doesn't mean that you should just accept every instantiation or iteration of bullshit that emerges, but it's like, you also have to be like, you have to be charitable, like the word, the language of charity. I've had to pull myself back so much in the last several years and just like measure what I'm doing through the lens of charity. And I think the reason why a guy like John Mark Comer is so like jarring, at least I can speak to for me is that like, I, I am least charitable on some level towards myself, right. It's like, you know, it's like, I turned the lens inward and I'm like, Oh man, Oh man, Oh man, Oh man, what was me? I'm, but then you, you can project that, that kind of like harsh, harsh critique on a guy you, you mentioned, like, you don't sense inauthenticity from him. I don't, I think he's being an authentic guy. I think my, my, the triggering is that he's authentically on his journey. And I start to realize that I'm kind of like at living as though I'm authentically on my journey, right on my journey. And it's like, isn't it? Yeah. The relationship between my journey and Jesus's journey is like, it's a, it's a difficult thing to parse, right. I think it's Philip Reif that talked, made the comment that like the shift that's happened in churches is people used to go to church to understand their suffering. And today people go to church to be alleviated from their, like to have their suffering alleviated or really, you know, experienced relief from suffering. And I, yeah, I, I sense that in my own heart, a desire to have, I don't think it's a bad thing. I just think it's like, it's a very different kind of thing, right. To be seeking relief from suffering and to have the kind of attitude of like, oh no, like suffering actually, like the Pauline kind of mentality of like suffering actually, we should rejoice in suffering because suffering actually like cultivates a more robust faith, right. It strengthens our hope and our faith in Christ. Anyway, sorry, I just talked a lot right there. No, that's fine. That's fine. That's well, you talk to preachers. They talk a lot. That's, but no, but I think your point is, is exactly right. And part of what happened in, you know, during the seeker movement is I think during the seeker movement, at least in evangelical spaces, you now had the, you sort of had the, this, the creative, many mega churches began having therapists on staff. And, you know, if you read someone like Larry crab, so Larry crab was sort of at the front end of that and also add some critiques of it too, you know, even as a therapist, because I think you get into that dynamic where we have through our, and let's, let's, let's be fair about many different kinds of suffering through our medical technology. We were able to relieve a fair amount of common suffering for people, antibiotics, pain medication, et cetera, et cetera, surgeries. And then through, through psychiatric means and psychological tools, we were able to relieve certain kinds of suffering for people. And all of those things were good. The church has long been in the business of hospitality and receiving suffering. And it goes all the way back to Jesus saying, giving a cold, you know, giving some cold water to, you know, a stranger. Yes, absolutely. Yet there is, there, there, there began, I think part of how this went is that. Plurigy began to look around and think, well, what's, what's our job then? Hmm. And so when I was in seminary back in the eighties, the pastoral care classes were, gave lots of stern warnings that you're not a therapist. This is not anything you're not educated in it. This is not your, what you are to do. But I remember coming out of those classes, not having a much of a sense of, well, then what exactly is my job? How exactly do I help people? And, and it was only in. In the years of experience with people that I began to sort of learn. And it was also in my own experiences of suffering that I could not. Alleviate or get out of that. I began to, Oh, this is my job with people. Because the truth is on one hand, as a culture, we like to try to, we, we sort of suggest to people that all of their sufferings are manageable by the doctors, the government, the lawyers, the accountants, the economy, the, you know, whatever, whatever tool that we have as a society to throw at things that all of your problems are resolvable and you will live a happy, healthy, fulfilled at, in all those buzzwords life. And it's just a lie. It's, it's just a bold face lie because people, the bigger, the bigger truth was what Jesus said in this world, you will have trouble and it's just as true today. It's moved around a bit, but it, no escaping the trouble might take a little longer to find you there, but you'll live longer too. So yeah, what good news is your life expectancy is a lot higher. Bad news is it's still going to find you. Yeah. Well, yeah. And it might find you when you're 80. Yes. And, and it's like, that's, that's the thing that I've been noticing is people like the, the archetype of the Y the wise old man is kind of like evaporating a little bit because a lot of what cultivates wisdom is kind of like painful experience. And increasingly like you get, I I'm running into a lot of people in their fifties and sixties who like, they're trying to live as though they want to look as though they're still 20 or 30 and they're just like, they're still like going, going out. Party in and doing all these things. And you're sitting back and I'm like, you know, they just have to spend more time in the gym and more time with the plastic surgeon. Yeah. It's so, so interesting. And I, Paul, I was blindsided by just how normalized Botox has become among women. Um, in my, in, in like the, I, people in my generation and slightly older, it's like, it's like increasingly normalized and maybe it's just, I'm connected to like upper middle-class suburbia, but it's like just in little ways, like they're not like doing extravagant, but it's like just smooth out that one ring, the crow's lines that are forming, you know, they're whatever it's like, Oh, it's like, and even among men, it's like, there's this kind of strange vanity that, uh, is also like penetrating our experience of like, what we consider to be suffering now it's like now just the idea of age itself of like turmoil that we have to be released from. Um, and yeah, I, yeah, anyway, these, these are the things that, uh, ministerial ministerially occupy my mind. Um, because again, like as a pastor, I look at that and I can't, I don't want to be judgmental, right? Yeah. You're a good guy, but I sit back and I'm like, that seems off to me. It seems off to me that you should be that preoccupied with image. But then I think about the fact that, I mean, people in my community, I have no idea how many hours they spend a day on Instagram, right? And it's like, what does that, what does that do to the human soul? And it goes, it goes back again to this conversation about the John Mark Comer was talking about where, you know, he, he talks about something language wise, something that I've seen increasingly as well is people have this kind of like, this is the language of like personal advancement and there's this kind of implicit, you don't get it yet, but I, they will say things like, Oh, I used to, I used to be like that. And now I'm here. Right. And they're, they're really, he, he cares a lot about it. And these people care a lot about the internal journey, you becoming, you know, better, better, better. And that is like internally, but it also becomes like an external thing too. It manifests itself that way. But what's interesting about it is it seems Paul to me, like it's the exact opposite of what will make your life a life of joy. Um, and that's what stands out to me so much. It's like, inevitably, like he, he talked about those stages in the faith journey. I forget what book it was from. Um, but this idea that there's like stage one, stage two, stage three, stage three is described as the productive life, the giving life, and then stage four, which is the inward journey. And I wrote next to that as he was writing the inward journey, that's feels like a bottomless pit to me though. And then he, there's this irony because he says in the next stage, stage five, it's it from the outsider, he says, it looks exactly like stage three, but there's just been all this deep inner work. And I'm like, it reminded me of something DT Suzuki, this Zen guy once, or he was talking about an old Zen passage. And he was talking about a student on the path to enlightenment, right? Uh, and he said, when a student first enters onto the path of enlightenment, when he begins, he looks at the mountains and he thinks the mountains are just mountains and he looks at the clouds and he thinks the clouds are just clouds. And he looks at the waters and he thinks the water is just water. But then when he enters onto the path, the journey of enlightenment under the teaching of a good master, he will discover that the mountains are not mountains and the clouds are not clouds and the waters are not waters. And, but then finally, when he attains the abode of rest, the student will realize that the mountains are in fact, just mountains, the clouds are just clouds and the waters are just waters. And, uh, in, you know, this business about, you know, becoming innocent, like a child. And, um, I, I, I wonder sometimes on our path to alleviate suffering, if we aren't, we aren't chasing, we aren't chasing the wrong thing. We're feeding this bottomless, with this bottomless pit, where really the thing that we have to do is we release, we have to, you know, it's the Philippians two thing where it's like, we just become pure servants. Um, the, the act of whenever I have reoriented, when I'm praying about myself, I find that darkness starts setting it where it's like, I just become overly introspective thinking about me, me, me, me, me, but the power, it's hard to explain what the power is that you experience when you were praying for other people, like something changes in you when you were thinking about others and they don't even know that you're doing it, but when you sit down and you're just like, Oh, this person is going through this, they'll never know, but I'm praying for them right now. Like, you know, I think Augustine talked about the concave man and the danger of the concave man, the person who just starts turning in on themselves. They're just all preoccupied with self, self, self. And my concern is in these, like these pursuits that we're entering into that are hyper individual individualized, um, as we, we might start just living in our scrapbook, basically we won't live in a church anymore, we'll live in a scrapbook and, uh, it'll be your scrapbook and you'll be the only, you'll be the only citizen in it, you'll be like, you know, in the great divorce by say, CS Lewis, the vision of hell is basically the same thing as suburbia. It's just that that one house way out, that one light way out in the distance, you know, it's that, that person is all Napoleon. Yeah. Yeah. He, he, he, you're all, and you're all, I want to meet, I want to meet Napoleon better get walking. He's gone a ways now. Yeah. And I, I just, in the journey, my, my pastoral concern, Paul is that in our journey for self-improvement, which on its face sounds like a totally noble, noble call, but I feel like that might be how the enemy gets in. Yeah. It's like, you just, you know, you know, whether the three sticks together and not easily broken or whatever. It's like one, it's like, when we go on, on these personal journeys and, you know, therapists, no knock it to anybody who's involved in therapy, but I was involved in film and, you know, the, you know, that world for a while people. There are a lot of people out there, a good number of them who therapists are their hired friends, like they don't have, they don't have friends. And so you're paying somebody to be your friend and functionally the therapist is doing for you, what friends used to do for people. Right. They were, they were a place for you to talk. And the problem is, is that, you know, now it's just part of the economy now. And it changes the spirit of the thing and disconnects you from, cause it's a one way, it's a one way street. Right. And so anyway, that's those are some of my concerns and I, again, I don't want to be uncharitable cause I agree with you, I think John Mark Comer, he means he is doing well and all, all of us in ministry, we mean well, when we engage with these things, it's just like the, the peripheral process of discernment is so, so challenging. Uh, when we, you know, yeah, we, we, we consult these things from a very pragmatic lens, even, I mean, I don't know where you are with Jordan Peterson now, um, but I have to confess that one thing that as a reflection, that's alarming to me about some of his orientation towards Christianity is that he's doing so, I mean, he even used to say this, he's looking at through philosophically through the lens of a pragmatist, which is, you know, the old, the old, what's the cash value of the thing, right? What can it do for me? And that's just, that's a complete shift in Philippians two spirit, which is like, what can I do for other people? Right. Um, and, uh, anyway, I don't know if you watch, uh, Chad, the alcoholics channel, but Chad had a conversation with Neil two hour conversation. This little corner is generating so much YouTube content. I sometimes think it's like, it's like agent Smith in the third matrix movie that just kind of, I wonder if this little corner is going to keep growing and growing and growing and it's gonna, it's, it's in a race with AI to fill up YouTube, but, um, but Chad was, Chad was reflecting on very similar lines to what you were just doing now in terms of, cause he was, he was in AA and he was working AA and it was just sort of like, stay sober, serve others. And he was, he was wrestling with, well, why does that serve others thing? Why is that in here? Cause certainly, and sort of in kind of the maxing phase, well, yeah. Uh, being a, being a, being an alcoholic, that's a problem. So you really want to address that. But if you go AA, you go to AA to get sober and you just leave sober, there's this other piece that didn't seem to have any reason to be connected. And so then Chad was just reflecting on it. And, and he said, but the funny thing was that when I was actually serving others, I was being changed. Yeah. And he was looking for the transformation from, you know, you go to AA because your life has become unmanageable and, and you come to the realization that, you know, there needs to be a power higher than yourself who can deliver you from this. And so that, that I'm here to get off. I'm, I'm here to no longer be an alcoholic. Okay. So here, try this. No, no, no, no. I'm not serving others. That's costly, painful, troublesome and frustrating. Yeah. Yeah. But that's, that's what you need. I mean, how often doesn't, you know, doesn't, I just preached on the market version of the rich young ruler and, you know, Jesus looks at him and loves him. I love that. I love that Peter puts that in because I think Peter, when, when I see, when I read the gospel of Mark, it's like, you know, Luke might've compiled sources, but wherever we get the gospel of Mark from that dude was there because he notices so much. Yeah. It feels like a, like what I love about Mark is it feels like it's a, it's a reporter, like somebody on the ground. And it's like, and that's why, like, yeah, the all, everything that he says and Mark is so fascinating, but yeah, the rich young ruler. And Jesus looks at him and loves him and says, just one little thing you lack, just sell all of this stuff and come follow me. And the man goes away sad. And, and then Peter, of course feels insecure. I've left everything. It's okay, Peter, you'll be all right. Don't remember. Nobody remembers this dude's name. He's forgotten you, Peter. You'll get to get, you'll get to be crucified. You get the gift of crucifixion. The gift of crucifixion. So the story, the true story doesn't change. It doesn't, it's just the truth. And so no, that's, that's gosh, you know, I, we could talk all day. I know that. And, um, but I'm glad, I'm glad by divine providence, I screwed up my calendar and I opened up the flood gates and, uh, you came in Eric. Yeah. I'm glad you did that too, because again, like, um, I, I very much, you know, you're doing a very valuable thing here and, um, and I know that you hear that from other people, but it can't hurt to have another voice say it. It's like, as a pastor, I look at what you're doing and it's just like, you're, you're doing something very valuable for the kingdom. Um, and you know, I think it is kingdom work and Jesus, uh, Jesus is partnering with you in this, so, well, thank you. Thank you. And, um, I got, may God bless your church and your ministry and, um, may he have mercy on us all because we're kind of a mess. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, it's good talking to Eric. Take care. Bye bye. Oh, no. Oh no. It's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, recorded. Uh, that was, uh, every time I'd have staff meetings at like one of the universities that was always like, Oh, bring it down. But I used to come up to Sacramento probably a couple of times a year flying in there to go to Stockton and some friends out there. So, uh, frequent, uh, frequent in your old town. Yeah. Yeah. It was a cool little area. I guess. It is a cool little area. Old town sack. Yeah. I haven't done the underground. There's an underground tour in old town sack now where, um, because the street, the old street level is quite a bit lower. And so now actually the street level of old town sack is a little bit higher now, so there's an old underground area there. So. I love that kind of stuff. I, uh, there's like, if you ever go to tombstone, Arizona, there's actually a hidden like underground tour that you can take down there for all the ghosts. You have to find the right person to ask, but, uh, yeah, there's an underground tour there. Well, we should, we should begin. So you had a little bio of yourself, but why don't you, why don't you tell me, why don't you go ahead and tell me a little bit about yourself? Yeah. Um, I'm kind of like stream of consciousness sometimes. I apologize in advance. Um, a little bit of that. Do you have to apologize for that on this channel? Yeah. Well, fair enough. Uh, well, a little bit of background on me. Um, my parents were kind of like part of the like Jesus hippie movement, I guess, like in the seventies, uh, my mom was deeply involved in missions. She spent time in Iran before the shot fell. Uh, she spent time in Pakistan, all that kind of stuff. My dad was a DTS that is a Dallas theological seminary graduate. So he was like that whole scene. Um, he was a pastor, uh, when I was born and, uh, yeah, there, my dad was a church planter, he got burned doing that up in Washington. Um, and I was born up there, but we moved down to Arizona pretty soon after that. I grew up in a household where we didn't have television. The only things I watched were like Bible cartoons. Um, uh, your viewers might not be familiar with super book or the handle or Bible adventures. Uh, my first Bible was a comic book Bible. So I was deeply, I was deeply immersed in like kind of, what would you call it? Like the, uh, the, the even Bible bookstore, evangelical kit. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The, the social imaginary of a evangelical Bible bookstore. Wow. It's very, very Western United States too. Yeah. Oh yeah, totally. Uh, I didn't know that at the time, but later on, of course, you know, what's that book on evangelicalism, um, that came out a few years ago? I can't remember her name. It was a big book though. Um, Worthen apostles of reason. No, no, it was just called evangelicalism. Oh, okay. Remember it was a pop. It was a popular book. Even Al Mueller interviewed this author. I can't, but I remember I was reading through that book and I'm like, she's like talking about the history of Western fundamentalism. I'm like, oh man, that's like, that's me. My parents were talking about my, my mom, my mom, the, uh, it's kind of weird. My mom was also very involved like with civil rights and, um, my parents, my dad was, you know, a Baptist preacher. My mom did not want to be part of the Southern Baptist convention though, because she grew up in the South and knew about that whole relationship. So part of conservative Baptist association is what my dad was with. So we went out to Payson, uh, Arizona, which is a small kind of, at the time it was like, you know, they didn't, they didn't have nothing. They had like, they just had a grocery store just opened up when I was out there. And so my dad was minister, you know, trying to raise a family. I think he was getting like $10,000 a year or something like that. You know, I raised a family out in the small town rural community. Um, and at some point, you know, they had a guest speaker come in and they were like speaking, you know, I don't know, they were doing all the crazy stuff. And my dad was like, everybody loved it. My dad's like, Oh, I can't do this. And so he went on a walk that night and decided he was going to apply for law school. He did the opposite. Most people, they're lawyers and they feel bad and become pastors. He was a pastor, felt bad and became a lawyer. And so we moved down, he went to law school down in Tucson. So we moved in and, uh, lived down there for a long time. Um, spent a, I was, you know, lived in a pretty like diverse, uh, cultural context. Yeah. I was, uh, I, my mom tried to get me to enroll in a, they had magnet schools, what they call them down there. It was like kind of these places where they let you kind of like explore sciences and arts a little bit more and more focused manner. They wouldn't let me go there because I, uh, I offset my school's demographic there. I was like, you know, they, I was like the white guy there, the token white guy at my school, they wouldn't let me leave. But, um, so went down to Tucson, lived there for quite some time. Um, my dad was a lawyer there. We moved up to the Phoenix area. I can remember being in about four, third, fourth grade and thinking to myself, as I was looking at all the church kids, my parents were making me hang out with thinking to myself that this church stuff is kind of malarkey, right? I can remember, like I was really into UFOs, aliens. Uh, when I was a kid, I was a really strange kid. I watched a lot of X-Files as a child. I believed in ghosts and like, I thought big foot, I thought the truth was out there. The truth is out there. And so my first book report was on a book about UFO abductions. Um, I ever wrote. And so, um, I can remember thinking that church is kind of malarkey. I can remember sitting down with like this homeschool Christian kid at my house. We're talking about aliens. And he goes, well, aliens don't exist because they're not in the Bible. And I said, what are you an idiot? Cars aren't in the Bible either. Do you believe in them? And that was my defense. And so, um, but so that kind of, from about third grade to through middle school, in middle school, I became like a skater, punk rocker, and I was convinced church had nothing to offer me. And then at some point they hired some like, um, what would you call it? Like a youth pastor, I guess he had like blue hair. He was punk rocker, skater. He liked all the things I liked and liked all the music I liked. And that was like, that's how they get you in evangelicalism. They're like, they get the cool, the cool guys. Like guys, Jesus is awesome. And so, he kind of suckered me in and started playing in the worship band there. I was what you would call what I call a tooth and nail Christian. Tooth and nail was a record label, Christian punk record label. I don't know if it's still operating. It probably is. But I was a tooth and nail Christian. So I was like, well, these cool skater guys who are punk rockers are Christian. So there must be something there. So I was a very, but I was a very, as you can imagine, liberal kind of like evangelicals. I was the guy who was like, you know, supporting, you know, supporting gay rights issues before people were really talking about that. Yeah. I was very much attuned to how white our congregation was. And I was also like really hostile towards like nationalism. This was like early Bush years. So I was, you know, I was really hostile towards, you know, the, you know, the, you know, the, you know, the, you know, the, you know, the, you know, the kind of like rock war. Yeah, I was, yeah, I was really like really hostile towards that kind of stuff. And I can remember being in high school and sitting around in class with all of like my evangelical youth group friends. And they're saying, they're saying, we just got to support our president. And I would get into these big heated debates with them in the middle of history class. My history teacher would allow it because she was a Kennedy Democrat. Right. But yeah, I was like, I'm going to go to the next one. But yeah, so that was, that was kind of my background through high school. That was kind of my story. I discovered, you know, I was really into music, really into performance, all these kinds of things. I started helping when I graduated high school. I helped out with our youth group. It's kind of like, you know, assisting the youth pastor at some point, though, I had just like one too many church camps. They would have, I actually went to Hume Lake a lot. You might be familiar. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I went there a lot of times. Yeah. I went there a lot as a counselor. And I just remember once sitting around a room, everybody was joking about what they called the coming down the mountain experience. And it was when students, they'd have a big high spiritual high up there and then they would come down the mountain to real life and they would just fall. Their faith would kind of fall apart. And I'm sitting there, I'm like, you know, this happens and you're sitting around joking about it. I was like, that's it. I'm done. Done with this. I don't know why that was the straw. But like, I mean, in the meantime, in college, I discovered things like I read the Bhagavad Gita, the Daode Ching. I discovered something called the Gospel of Thomas. I was like, WTF Church, why didn't you tell me about this? I read Waiting for Gutto and I can remember reading Waiting for Gutto. You probably read the play. I don't know. I should assume. But that moment where they're talking about the differences in the crucifixion scenes and how only one mentions that there was this thief who had a change of heart at the cross. I was like, I was like flabbergasted. I was like, how did I not notice this? It's like I stopped in the middle of the play. I threw that down. I read all four of the Gospels, the crucifixion scenes. I'm like, oh, my God. I go into church. The truth is out there and you've been. Yeah, I go to church next Sunday. I'm trying to tell people about this and they're just like totally disinterested. I was like, oh, OK. And so, you know, I was like, I started getting hard into the documentary hypothesis. I started reading all the apocryphal, canonical stuff. I read a book called Jesus by what was the guy's name? I can't remember now off the top of my head, but it is historical study of Jesus where I discovered Q source and all this kind of stuff. And this was like I was going to community college at the time. They weren't talking about any of that crap at community college. I was just like I was just I did a hard dive into it. I was really into literature. I read Harold Bloom's The American Religion, which like I discovered Gnosticism and blew my mind about the Southern Baptist Convention, about how like Gnostic they are. And so I started reading all this stuff, Elaine Pagels and all this kind of thing. And that was around 1819. And so from 1819, I was kind of like I went to my youth pastor and told him, I'm like, I can't do this anymore. I'm done. And walked away again. I got really into film during that time, really started studying Joseph Campbell, Carl Jung, the archetypes and all these kinds of things. I got really deeply interested in that, especially his surveys of religion, because I also thought like I began to think that religion was a helpful way of like understanding human narrative, because I thought religions, I began to think that religions were true in the way that like Shakespeare was true. It spoke about like something like, you know, there was like a mythical psychological core underlying it all. And I was like, this is why these stories kind of resonate with humans. And so I want to know how to access this so I can write successful screenplays. Right. I'm the perfect like commodity, like, you know, whatever. But, you know, Carl Marx would, you know, cringe or say, he told you so. But so I got really involved in that. I finally I moved to Los Angeles at some point. I wrote some scripts, nothing anybody would ever hear of. The other thing that you should know about me is I've always been really suspicious of social media and all of these things. I have a flip phone still. I haven't gone on Facebook since 2012, probably. And so that's like, you know, I'm very suspicious. I don't have IMDB. I try to if there is anything about me on IMDB, it's because other people, but they're not because I've put it there kind of type of thing. But I did do I did some short film work. I helped, you know, others, you know, other people writing their stuff. I acted in a few like music videos. But it was kind of like, is there acting in music videos? I remember for them from the 80s, what acting there was in music videos in the 80s was really bad. Oh, my gosh. I was so like they might. I can remember like one time I was a silhouette. Another time I was like I had a like a zebra head on. I was smoking a cigar. But Paul, I mean, it's so sad. I like it so sad. My heart breaks for like the city of dreams, the city of angels. Right. It's like, man, there are people there are some people I worked with who have been doing it for like 40 years and they were still doing stuff like this was non-union work that they were doing. And they still thought they were going to make their break. And you're sitting there and it's just like it's a city of these broken dreams, man. It's like that's such a cliche. Right. But it's like, it's true. At a certain level, you just like, oh, man. And nobody nobody talked about the job that they actually had, which is what they pay how they paid their rent. They all talked about like what they were aspiring to be. Right. It was like taboo to ask what you actually did. But like, yeah, so there there were people who thought they were really great actors and who were involved in these things. And yeah, so there was acting. But yeah, you know, it's that level. So I was out there for a little bit. I got really burned out on that city, got really jaded. I was I wasn't even living in the city city. I wasn't in North Hollywood or anything like that. I was out in Whittier, California, because I was like, God, if I have to live in L.A., I'm at least going to live in a town that feels like a small town. So I got burned out, jaded out there a little bit. During that time, I was still doing my music. I ended up coming back out to the Phoenix area. I was working on music out there with a recording partner, doing some performances. And then like a series of bizarre events happened in my life where I don't know. I look at it now as like this is going to make you sound like a duty free religious guy, I guess. But it's like the movements of the Holy Spirit working in my life. It was like I was chasing all these dreams and fantasies. I'm not even kidding. I don't know if you heard about that guy who wrote a poem that for a buried treasure somewhere. Did you hear about this rich guy like years ago who he wrote a poem that was supposed to he was he was like he had all these like like all this gold that he was burying somewhere. And he wrote a poem that was supposed to give you the clues to where it was. It was somewhere basically in the Rocky Mountains. I heard something about this. Forrest Fenn, I think was his name. Yeah. I'm not kidding you. Me and my brother had like we had like put together this elaborate plan to go dig for buried gold one summer. It was so ridiculous. So I was I was looking for buried gold playing music around town. Right. I was looking for buried gold. You know trying to write my screenplays and make it in Hollywood. And then I was looking for actual buried treasure. But so a series of circumstances happened. I had some grandparents pass away and there's nothing like that shakes you like having grandparents pass away within 24 hours of one another and then having to go and like sit through the relics you know the relics of their life. Right. Something happened in that process. And I started really like kind of rethinking like what I had been doing with my life. Now I didn't do anything like profound necessarily. I decided I was going to finish going to college. And for some reason I decided to make this really genius decision of going to stay and studying religion in college. So during my film time I had still been connected to religion. I had worked a lot studying specifically Navajo religious practice and Navajo witchcraft specifically which is like that would be a whole series of hours right there. So I don't know if I want to get into that. But I spent a lot of time interviewing people reading you know reading transcripts and reports. I mean it's a very secretive environment obviously but got really invested in that. I thought it was going to be just a writing project and then it was like you you've been in interest like areas that aren't like first world affluent like you know European culture. You go into some places and it's just like supernatural stuff is not like and this started like clicking with me. It's like it's not fake. Right. It's like you might not believe in it but it really impacts people's lives and people people like believed that they were witches. Oh yeah. What does it mean if a person believes that and they do everything as though they are this thing. And I started thinking about you know early on they are witches. I'm like what is that. What does that mean. It's like I can sit back in my like you know suburban context and be like oh there's this thing as witches they're just superstitious. But it's like man people that freaking die like it's like people die and do terrible things like in the name of this stuff. So anyway I started like you discover that and that started that really like that has always stuck with me. I tell people there was like a five year period of time where I was like I dove into that and it's like I'm haunted by that to this day. I mean this is my early 20s and I'm haunted by that to this day. Sticks with me as a career. You know I am a pastor at this point but like it still sticks with me. So anyways I decided I was going to study religion. I think in the back of my head I was like well you know maybe I can use the stuff that I learned. But for some reason I decided to choose Christian tradition as my area of focus and study. Again like it just was provoked in me. I decided I was going to do that. So I end up going in. I'm like in my late 20s mid to late 20s and so like I'm totally like way older than everybody in my classes. Right. But it just so happened that there was this you know there was this professor who had just graduated from Princeton Theological Seminary. It was his first year and he wasn't much older than me but we really kind of hit it off and connected. And I started to survey the first thousand years of Christian history. My immediate reaction to the first thousand years of Christian history was like yeah these guys are a bunch of assholes. Man you read about Athanasius and the things that he was doing to Arius. You're just like man you're feeling bad for Arius. I can't believe this crap. I'm like yeah no wonder I got out of this thing. But then it's like I can remember reading origins contra contra Celsius or Kelsis however you want to say it and realizing that like I thought that Christians were just like kind of like ignorant bumpkins who just didn't understand how the world worked basically. And they had just like selectively like imposed their convictions through power basically this narrative in my mind because I had also read a lot of like critical theorists and things like that up to this point. Anything that would allow me to deconstruct Christian faith. But I got to this point where I was like I read origin and I read first principles and I'm like wow this guy's actually pretty sophisticated. Like he's got answers to things that I thought like he addresses these questions or you know comments that I have because Celsius in some ways is like an ancient Nietzsche right. It's like you know he was like he had some pretty like damning criticisms of Christianity where it's like he's not criticizing the truthfulness necessarily of it. He's saying even if it's true it's like this is bunk like this is this guy Jesus is not worth worshipping. That's basically his argument right. He's like I'll concede that Jesus exists. He's like he's not worth worshipping. It's kind of like that's why Nietzsche is anti-Christ is still like I mean you know I don't have an answer to that book. It's like you think that Jesus was this kind of like lazy heathenness or you think that there was something good about him laying down his life. It's like you know anyway. But so I got into that I was like wow there's actually some stuff that's actually really sophisticated here that I haven't been able to wrap my mind around. Hang on one second. I got to get this not because I think someone just got out of the hospital. Oh OK. I love it. I forget where I was but I was so Celsius. Yeah yeah yeah. I started I started reading then into you know sort of reading a bunch of other stuff too. It's like part of what this this guy from PTS suggested that I read. He's like he had it had me read Augustine's Confessions which or Augustine however you want to say it. I never read that before. I was like whoa again like this or anymore more Augustine. I was like oh this guy was really smart to win the world and this one about Genesis and I'm like like I thought I had debunked Genesis as you know you know just kind of like fable or whatever. Sorry I've got my train coming by here. It might get loud in a second. That's all right. I was like wow he's got some really thoughtful responses to that kind of thing. I also found origins comments about spiritual reading of scripture to be really compelling to me. It was like something I had never heard before. It was God's literal work and it's like literal meant kind of like kind of historical except when it came to song of songs and we didn't really talk. But anyway and so read that read Gregory Mesa. Greg read all the Cappadocians and then also read the Epistle to the Romans. Just my teacher said just sit down and read it in one sitting. Yeah yeah yeah. I was like I had already been kind of into Soaring Kierkegaard years before. I was like wow there's some really interesting ways of looking at you know the Binding of Isaac and all that when I didn't care about any of it. And I read Romans I'm like wow this is like this is the guy who inspired Soaring Kierkegaard's writing style. It's like he's actually really intelligent like Paul is. It's like it's not just like you know this is the Bible. It's like wow this is a pretty interesting way about going about an argument. And so read that then I want to read Galatians and all of his letters right. And he also had a really interesting approach to the Old Testament which I had never heard before which I thought I had never heard before where it's like you know all the stuff is signs of what's happening. And you know like Abraham Sarah these are signs of Christ and all these kinds of things and even Hebrews. And to me it's like the most important book in the whole New Testament to read if you're trying to get kind of like a handle on Christian hermeneutics right. It's like the lens by which we read scripture it's like oh you get a sense for that in Hebrews and I just had never had never even thought of it before. I had always been like under the impression that you know Jesus was just this like teddy bear that we all held in love. And the Old Testament is like sorry that's just how it is. We got to go to war. And so I was always really not compelled by either of those images of God or of Jesus because Jesus to me was always like the hardest thing to access in the Bible in a lot of ways. He felt like David Bowie's character and man who felt he was like a space alien like. And so I never understood this. You know Jesus is like you know hey he makes me feel so good. Right. But so I started having the lid kind of thrown off of like my way of understanding the Bible. And so also now I was like reading it again with like a fresh set of eyes. It's like I'm reading like the gospel of John. I'm like is she's being sarcastic right here. That's what it like kind of feels like. And that exchange between him and Pilate about what his truth is really like I don't know. Just very it felt like a modern author had written this thing. It was like so resonant for me. So really started diving into that. And this was at a this was at a state university public universities Arizona State University. I had this experience. And then I then the next thing that happened I started studying deeply like the historical you know historical critical approach and the criticism that are leveled against Christianity and what they're based on. And I'd always just been around this assumption that like these are really like airtight arguments that these people are providing. And then you realize it's just not. And I knew enough about Navajo and religious tradition to know that probably most religious traditions are grounded in oral history first. Before they were actually written down. So a lot of criticisms I'm reading about have to do with like when we're finding manuscripts you know the errors in manuscripts. It's like you know Bart Ehrman and his arguments are like the least compelling thing for me on the planet at this juncture because I'm like you know everything that we have in the Bible is probably like inspired by something oral that is so freaking old that we don't even we can't even get our minds around actually. And so it's like the documentary hypothesis they have these you know fairly coach and arguments for why Moses didn't write it. But it's like unless you think that this was all grounded in something that's oral that's much older than the written documents that we have. Right. So what does it mean to write something. You know it's like then you get into the question of how authorship is actually shaped and formed. And I read an introduction to commentary on infusions where this guy just like shoots down all these criticisms about Paul is not the author of that text. And I was like all the arguments made a lot of sense to me. I was like oh yeah that's a really good point. It's like what if he had like you know different scribes and all this kind of stuff. It's like it throws in the question it throws the questions into question pretty summarily. Anyway so that started happening to me at ASU. And then during that time I had professors suggest to me hey you should go to graduate school. That had not been on my radar at all. I was like I don't want to do that. I don't want to do that. And then I read it. And so I wasn't how many I wasn't even sure how I would go about doing that. And then I started reading more theology started reading you know some older guys like John Calvin's Institute. I was like wow that's pretty impressive. And then I also read some modern guys. I don't know if you're familiar with Ephraim Radner. No. He's out of White Cliff College. He wrote a book on the end called The End of the Church which is just a really fascinating historical read of like new new mythology. Right. The movements of the Holy Spirit and what what the implications are given what we've seen in our fractured church in the modern world. Is you know his thesis. Well his conclusion he basically comes to is that if we are the body of the body of Christ as the Bible indicates it's like maybe we are recreating Christ's march up to Calvary and we'd be broken and bruised on our way up to that. The scary thing he says is that that means maybe the greatest testimony that the church can give to the world is by actually dying. And so that's why he has this thesis about the end of the church. Anyway so I read that and that kind of blew my mind a little bit. And so I was like well I'd love to study theology more. And so I was like well if I'm going to do this I'm going to like apply to all the best programs in the country. The best. What are the best. Yeah exactly. I did though. Yeah I was just you know ignoramus really but I started doing these you know well you do Google searches what are the best schools study theology at. And so it was like the list the consistent ones were always Harvard Yale Duke and Princeton Theological Seminary. And so I was like well I'll apply to all of those and if I don't get into any of them which I probably won't then I don't have to worry about any of this stuff and I can also tell my teachers my professors that I tried. And so I applied to all of them blah blah blah and then I got into all of them. Yeah getting into Yale Divinity is different from getting into Yale Law. Yeah. Different. Real difference. And once you get there you discover there's a real difference. I was like anyway but I got in I got into all of them. Yale Yale Divinity offered me a full ride and so I was like well I got to do that and be stupid not to. I turned down money. Yeah exactly. So I go there I worked for there and they give me a job working at the fine key rare books manuscripts library. So it's kind of cool. Yeah it was great I got to hold a Luther Bible that was like from the 16th century it was really cool. But worked out there I had my thesis reader was Miroslav Wolf. Oh wow. I was out there developed a really good relationship with Catherine Tanner. Some really great folks got exposed to but up there so going out there though I thought I was liberal going out there. I even put my I think I put religion not decided or something like that on my entry form. And I go out there thinking I was liberal and they were just replacing the gender science on the restrooms because the previous graduating class had ripped them all down as being like bigoted at the time. And I was like in the in the administration was too scared to because everybody in the administration was really uncomfortable I think with like not sharing bathrooms with everybody but they. And so they I come out there and that's kind of what I step into. I'm out there in 2000 I'm during I'm out there during the Halloween costume thing. And actually I lived in a house with seven other people and I had people who are actually I had a guy who is a family friend with the Christchurch this is in the house, but I also had a person in the house who was involved with the the BLM organization who was actually making demands of the administration. Regarding like you know their perceived mistreatment in this moment right so I was out there for that was down in the yard when all the yelling and screaming was happening. That was made so much news and I was like I was like man what is going on like I was like. I was just baffled and then I started taking like you know I started taking some of the seminars and a lot of them are really good some of the old school people that you have working there just like really, really intelligent there's a guy named john hair there who's just like yeah really thoughtful theologian. And obviously Miroslav and Kathy are both like really thoughtful to but serving you know flymocker and all these kinds of things, but then. We got into like James Cone and to Mary Daly and to like you know all these kinds of like like into. And you know there was a lot of stuff like that going around James Cone came up and spoke at the divinity school before he passed away. It was the first sermon I ever heard where somebody actually quoted the gospel of Thomas in their sermon. But during that time I started like getting the sense that like oh maybe i'm not liberal because i'm not like any of this at all yeah. And i'm in my late 20s so i'm a little older than some folks but at yds there's actually like a lot of second career people there. I can imagine. But everybody around campus was very pretty radical and then then the stuff with trump started happening. I don't watch the news like that's I know i haven't watched the news like I will get snapshots of it like once a week. But I remember I read somewhere that like you know. The Solzhenitsyn quote about you have a right to be informed, but you also have a right not to be informed and it's like oh yeah that seems really smart actually and I also like i've always had a punk rock suspicion of media. And it's total and so, but then like stuff with trump started happening and all my housemates wanted to watch the republican debates which I did. I'm like oh my gosh i'm hearing all the guys stuff he's saying I couldn't believe it. And then they're all like laughing at this goon and i'm like thinking about people because I had in the past i've been like i've been working blue collar work I had like I had been a janitor while I was working in screenwriting. I had been like I had worked in parks departments I had I had lived in like blue collar America where you know the drug problem was just starting in the late 80s and like only escalated. And i'm sitting there and i'm like listen to this guy and I just like I just felt i'm like it's kind of like a I just felt i'm like this guy's gonna win I remember saying it at some point like to him like this guy's gonna win you guys like you're laughing at him but he's gonna win. And I remember somebody looked at me and like Eric I think sometimes you just like to watch the world burn and. I was like no man i'm just like this guy I had to think there's a good chance they did a survey of students, while I was there. You know they said, like 99% of students said that Hillary was going to win the other 1% said or said that they were voting for Jill Stein and Gary Johnson. And then the election night happened like the debates, by the way, they had like Super Bowl parties at like the like the bars around town like there are people watching the debates. Drinking and laughing and Trump all the time, I can remember going down to the basement of this one of these bars and seeing one of my classmates sitting there by himself watching the TV with the sound off and just reading the captions. And he's like you know if you're away from all the laughter, he says they both don't sound that different. Like it's like it's just all that up there makes him sound comedic and implausible but it's like if you just are sitting here it's kind of plausible and it was like that was an interesting moment. During this time to obviously stuff with Jordan Peterson came up and I remember in I think it was 2016 the fall 2016. I also like that was going on, so I started getting more invested in what was going on in the Jordan Peterson world. When that video like to me what was interesting was like oh he's got there's this professor who's being outspoken about transgender stuff. And I'm like oh that's kind of interesting because I was also part of my program I was studying liturgy and like. YouTube culture and stuff like that, so I started getting kind of like that's how I kind of discovered him. And I was like wow that's pretty cool that he's being bold enough to say something like that I even emailed him at some point and said hey I just wanted to let you know that you've really you know. You really inspired me and yeah you just have you at least one friend out there at Yale and you know he thanked me and said, you should recall young and I was like okay, thank you. And then it was like you know the election happened and they canceled classes people were crying in the streets like literally crying there was a teacher who got up. And he read lamentations in tears he read lamentations to class. After. And it was just like it was such a Babylonians have destroyed the temple. And it was just like it was such a Babylonians have destroyed the temple. yeah that's kind of how it felt right it's like you couldn't even like I couldn't even wrap my mind around what I was seeing. Like I hadn't been like a trump supporter or anything like that but i'm sitting here and i'm like the. hey everybody if anybody ever watches this besides you not that there's anything wrong with that but it's like. i'm sitting there and i'm like what is happening what like these are like adults and I felt like I felt like I feel maybe bad saying that but it's like that was my reaction I was like. Somebody told me that you know about the experience they had had that day about all the tears they experienced and I was like that's just like so sad that like and like pathetic that like that's where people are emotionally right. About fragile. yeah yeah I like I just was like so flabbergasted and so you know that was 2016 and things kind of like you know escalated from there a little bit, it was like. I don't know it people in that people like tension kind of arose and I began to realize more and more that i'm actually pretty like. You know i'm really suspicious of politics, but theologically as a Christian, I am a Christian and, by the way, i'm also really pretty conservative about my Christianity. Because, like the other thing I started realizing while I was out there and you probably have some familiarity with this is like. The the perspective that says that like basically start trying to over accommodate the religion, the religion to. Culture, I mean religions function like language, and so, if you try to accommodate the religious language too much to this other cultural language. it's like pretty soon the religious language kind of gets like subsumed in that and it stops like having any meaningful content to it it's like right. words are just metaphors that we're using to get at the abstraction right and if the word doesn't isn't useful for getting at that abstraction anymore it's like it ceases to be the thing anymore right. Right. Anyway, so I realized at some point that you had to have a strong commitment. To the language of your religious system, otherwise you might as well just discard the whole entire thing and I hadn't seen any credible arguments. To me for discarding that thing because the alternative to focusing in on committing to your religious language system was like. Complete fragmentation and unknowing. Yeah, like this, but I was experiencing, especially after the election, I was just kind of like. This is like this is what you get, this is the foundation, this is your foundation it's like. You are experiencing collective cognitive dissonance right now because your your religious system has failed you. Yes, I remember I heard a I heard a Lutheran minister say his experience of it was it was as if somebody found Jesus's bones. That like Hillary losing was like as if somebody had found Jesus's bones and I was like. That's really an interesting way of thinking about this, and then I read Eric Vogelin I think. He he he made this connection between Gnostas and some of the political movements they saw manifesting in the late 70s. And that kind of drew some connections to me as well as like really we're talking about counter religions right now. And so I'm going to I'm going to pick the religion that I'm going to commit to. I'm really going to press into that. And so all that happened, I graduate I don't want to go through the PhD stuff because I'm just like I'm kind of over academia at this point. And I get a job at Arizona State University teaching and also over at there's a university out here called Grand Canyon University I get a job there teaching. And so I come out come back out to the phoenix area to do that I know during this whole time Paul I haven't had a church. I knew that I had to get into a church like the first thing I needed to do is get into a church because. If you don't build a church into your rhythm is really easy I mean we're discovering this now in the wake of coven it's really easy to cancel church out of your rhythm. yep. And so I immediately started looking for churches eventually I stumbled into this local church right down the street from me that's meeting at a performing art studio in our old town area out in peoria. turns out that the pastors there have very similar background to me and in terms of like being involved with music and kind of like you know. deconstructing right luckily they reconstructed in the way that I you know I reconstructed as well. They were really something that I really became committed to while I was out at Yale's the importance of church calendar and liturgy. I think it's really unfortunate that we've lost some of that they're really committed to that as well, and really hit it off, it was really kind of like just for two of this, and so I started going to this church. There you know they were meeting my being the pastor would have a series of lively discussions before I actually became a minister and I discovered during this time that they were men and I brother in. Anabaptist tradition, obviously, I didn't come from that we would get into theological debates and my dad was a lawyer, so I became very comfortable. As a child being getting into debates and discussion. I remember the leading one of our discussions and the pastor stops in the parking lot turns around and says hey. I just want to make sure that you're not going to leave the church over this and I remember like this probably was not the appropriate answer, but I laughed out loud when he said that and I was like no no no and I was just so. Like I found that to be so like I don't know there's something so great about that I just loved that, even though we have this disagreement, he still wanted me to be part of the church and so that was when I decided like i'm i'm committed here. And you know, as I was teaching I was getting more involved in you know in volunteering serving at the church. At some point, the pastor approaches me and asks me says hey i'm sensing the pastor's heart in you is that something that you would consider. And we kind of entered into that process, I went through you know all the you know the the process of the denomination the minute I brethren and got licensed with them. And i'm only i'm still by vocational i'm still teaching or at the universities, but i'm also now this minute and a brother and pastor. Which has been kind of like a weird journey in and of itself, I mean we're not like we don't. We don't have like big beards and red horses and buggies or anything like that we're like a really hipster church. We came into like we came into this old town area we revitalize the lumber yard and we have a coffee shop attached to our church right we get like we don't call ourselves, we don't our buildings on a church it's a venue space right. And a church meets there. And I moved down the alley from the church, so I can see the church building from my house. And really, because I really believed in like the importance of local and being kind of connected to a local body and people in a community. Because something that just really always exhausted me about kind of the evangelical project seemed like people were connected to the church. And it's like man, how much of life are you not doing with people in your community right and that's why it's like to me it's like that's what creates the consumer right it's like. The church consumer is it's just another thing that you do right like going to Walmart and you know like you know like you know like you know you're like you're like you're like you're like you're like you're like you're like you're like. Yeah, and so I was so as I've been pastor pastor of our Community groups specifically, but I was out here, you know, obviously during COVID, I was a pastor and I was a pastor in the church. And so I was a pastor and I was a pastor in the church. And so I was a pastor and I was a pastor in the church. Yeah, yeah and so I was so as I've been pastor pastor of our Community groups specifically, but I was out here, you know, obviously during COVID and I can I can remember being like. This was like a hard year and a half to be a pastor I was in Arizona I wasn't even in California and I can say. And I just remember, I am not I'm not anti you know I think hope is real i'm not one of these people, but I remember sitting with elders and really resisting closing our doors. Because I just said, you know, it takes about three weeks to establish a new rhythm in one's life and then it'll take something like coven to disrupt. And that's why i'm like hey we can be really cautious but it's like I just don't think we should stop meeting. We ended up deciding as a team to transition into that into doing online Luckily, we were a church with a lot of artists and creative personalities there. We had a people who had live stream equipment and so we are sure something about like 100 150 people, but we were able to put together what I thought was actually pretty like well. In within a week, we were able to put together our live stream kind of like system and operated really well. We were able to maintain community communities surprisingly I threw out we really interest in emphasize small groups. And that one, but it was like oh God, it was just like so painful. I don't think like dirt you know it's like I didn't realize a dark night was until you know you're just like sitting in your house by yourself like because. You know you can't go and it's like I remember being Easter and just like we're recording our live stream and there's just like nobody else there. And I just remember looking out the window and just being like this is Easter morning and it's just like it just feels like any other morning right now. Yeah, it was like so tough in a lot of ways we made it through I think overall our church really responded well to the moment. But it did leave a lot of I saw lingering question marks in the wake of that yeah because it's just like I don't think that. I don't think that this goes away, I think a door of possibility has been opened in the way that school shooting became a thing after column nobody thought that was possible, then it happens and it becomes possible. I think that you know we live in this kind of like. theater of medical and media and it's like right now it's like we're all just kind of playing our parts in it, and I really do think that. I think that this is going to be a perennial kind of issue that the church has to deal with shutting its doors. On that's my perception, but then you know being out there, I still I found in my heart a desire to be a church planter still or a replanter one of the two. Because I find something really I think there's going to be a lot of communities dying around the country and I find a lot of churches are going to die. A lot of churches are going to die. yeah and I feel there's like there's a call to just like try to save and salvage to so anyway i've been just talking so much. that's been great I love your story it's a great story. it's so cool. Thank you man but yeah I so that's I discovered you early on in the process, I think my brother he's a he's a medical student at Baylor. He he pointed me in your direction pretty early on when you posted that first video he's like oh you might be interested in what this pastor guy has to say. And so i'm not involved in social media so i'm not like I wasn't like leaving comments for you, or you know. All this kind of stuff but it's like i've been following you since probably you know that first video. Holy cow. Really kind of got off the ground. held by the way that you engage with with people and in fact i've had students come up to me who started coming back to their faith through Jordan Peterson but then started realizing that there was like. Jordan Peterson is not orthodox and he's actually kind of like heretical in a lot of ways is how they would describe it. he's like they're like they're like we noticed that a lot of the language you use is kind of similar to what he says, you talk about archetypes a lot and currently on it's like. What what are your thoughts about Jordan Peterson so we would talk and then I would always point them in your direction, I'd be like you should watch you should watch this pastor Paul Vanderkley. And so, so yeah i've been i've been aware and paying paying attention to you, I mean beyond being a really good pastor I mean i'm not trying to toot your horn or anything like that it's just like. The level of reading and like thoughtfulness like you give to things it's just like remarkable to me. You you strike me I you I told my brother, I have told him this i'm like man just based on what I see from you on YouTube i'm like you're the kind of pastor the pastor should aspire to be. it's like you know, being in the kind of context that you've described being in I just. I am just so compelled by that. I am just so compelled by that. dedicating your life to that kind of service and then finding a new area that needed ministering to and just seeking that out so just yeah really compelled by that man. Thank you, thank you. It kind of grew. I don't know it's you know my church is small and dying and so I want to be faithful to these people. I don't think the church is going to somehow balloon because of you know my online ministry. Because churches are very local they they're very local and very individual they're like fingerprints there are. They grew they're very organic and they're organic they're authentic and people take a look at this particular organic and authentic and like. I want to be a part of that that's it's too organic and authentic. Because what people are they they hear organic and authentic what they really want is mirroring oh, I want the church to church to be a flattering mirror to. yeah they want all well they want all the good and none of the bad they don't want any of the garbage that's not like for me it's like we're in an inner city kind of area where our churches at and I was like all in so I bought a house out here. I thought everybody in the church is going to start doing that. you're like nobody's going to do that. There's real reasons they're not going to do it. yeah yeah. God bless them and that's why you know there's people are in at different levels and they partner at different levels and churches are sort of you know the consensus develops of this is what people are able to give and able to do and. And so it kind of kind of is that way so now i've been i've been tremendously blessed I had no idea what was going to happen after I. made those first couple of videos about Jordan Peterson, but the whole the whole journey has been fruitful and deeply gratifying and and just a lot of fun just a lot of fun so. yeah you look like you look like you're having fun man. Oh, I am I have a great time. He certainly may. It's totally fine. I'm just kidding I i've also been like so I emailed you several months ago because you had Andy Littleton on. I've entered into a good dialogue with Andy. Oh good. But since that time you started entering into this conversation about powers and principalities that I just like that to me is like. From a Christian leaders perspective it's like that's the thing that every pastor should be talking about Paul like this has been like spiritual warfare like nuts like this last year and I think that's the thing that's been. From a Christian leaders perspective it's like that's the thing that every pastor should be talking about Paul like this has been like spiritual warfare like nuts like this last year and a half. Or that it's just become more evident that right I remember at the beginning of coven all of a sudden I was getting called the houses to do like. I'm not not exorcisms to pray over a house because people are sensing that there's bad spirits in the house. Yeah. And all these kinds of things and I've also studied enough about Greco Roman kind of perceptions of the demons and spirits to know like. There's not it's not like there's like a guy who's standing there he's like I'm a devil and I'm going to get you it's like. The things that we call emotions are very similar to what people are talking about when they're talking about possession and spirits anyway, but I would love to hear like. What has been kind of like what what has led you to like locate that is like this kind of like dominant theme like something worth like really emphasizing and focusing on is there, I mean that's kind of a big question in some ways, but I'm just like. I'm so compelled by your language of using that of recognizing you said at one point. You said that these these videos and these books are colonizing your mind and I was like yeah that's like all we are doing now we're in a culture of. Colonizing we're cannibalizing one another on a spiritual level we're participating in this warfare and we don't even realize it so I'm really I don't know if there's something for you to answer there. So James K Smith you probably heard of him he's he's the one that he's at Calvin University now I mean he's written a series of books on on secular liturgy and. You know it struck me so so part of what I part of what I. Part of what grabbed my attention about Jordan Peterson was and I think this sort of also comes through young is the the disconnect in our language and the way that we're able to connect to each other. The disconnect in our language around spirit it's it's quite frankly in modernity amazing that hang on a second. i'll be right back. All right, so. So this you know this word spiritual remains in our language and people use it all the time and and even highly secular you know people who are you know hard bit new atheist type continue to use it and it's like. You ever stop and ask yourself what you mean by that word and and I got into this because I. You know I do Bible studies at church and people. In in churches like this you'll you'll tend to collect people who are committed Christians. But they you know they haven't necessarily thought terribly they've got you know good Christian practice, but they haven't necessarily thought terribly deeply about all of the Western evangelical kitsch language kitsch that they've just picked up along the way and. Part of the way that you gain status in a church like this is you learn to master that kitschy language and so you have all this code talk that goes around and at some point you know and I don't want to be a jerk about it, but at some point as a pastor it's like maybe we should. Maybe I should maybe we should start to play around with some of this kitschy code talk and see if we can get some of that. Because there's just a fair amount of social bullshittery that is going on with all this kitschy code talk so. And so, then someone would say something like salvation and I would say well, what do you mean by that and then, of course, it'd be like oh crap why does he do this to me i'm in front of my. Good church friends and he's asking me to ask he's asking me a question I can't answer about a word we're all using. Like all right, but i'll be gentle and now i'm not gonna i'm not gonna leave you on the hook here, but we're just gonna poke around there a little bit say what do you mean by that word salvation, what do you mean by kingdom of God and then, what do you mean by spiritual and, of course, people have no idea and so. I was wrestling with that stuff and you know reading a lot of CS Lewis and then, of course, Jordan Peterson came along and. The the way that he. That the breadth of people that he sort of got a hold of and and some of the. Some of the particular groups of those people that he sort of got a hold of. Some of the particular groups of those people, people who had sort of deconstructed both deconstructed into you know hard bitten modernistic rationality like like new atheists or into sort of mushy new age spiritualism. And, and these are the people that he sort of at least some of those people he sort of got their attention and then they start similar to your story. They want to do things like read origin or church fathers and and I thought now this and the breadth of this movement, I thought. This is this is this is to me, I immediately saw this is one of the more significant things significant movements that i've seen in terms of my adult North American ministry i'll say it that way. You know i'd seen the seeker movement I kind of came back to North America, as that was sort of receding i'd done my junkets to Willow Creek to saddle back i'd taken a good look at that. It never it was never going to be applicable at a church like this we're just never going to be able to pull off the music and the sound and the image and the excellence it's just. Never going to fly in this place is way too rag tag way too much authenticity and i'd watch the emergent movement sort of split into young restless and reformed and I thought well that's kind of interesting because i've been. You know i'd grown up in a reformed tradition, but this was obviously sort of similar to some of the hardcore Dutch reformed but much more Presbyterian and then, of course, the rob bell and that whole thing on Oprah and. yeah so watching those two things coming out of the emergent movement and it's like okay what's what's what's going to come next down the road and. And then I church plants, so we had been planting churches pretty aggressively when I got here in the late 90s early odds and. That my church my partner who's the pastor of another CRC church who had one of the few successful CRC church planters using say a seeker methodology. I mean he actually grew up in Kalamazoo and he used to cut the grass for Bill hybels mom. In Kalamazoo that was his job in high school you know cutting bill hybels mom's grass, so he was you know he and he was this he's a he's a good pastor and very. i'll be careful that almost sounds like something else. very refined and so, and so he had actually been fairly successful, especially in CRC terms and he. grown a church into 3400 people in suburban sacramento and yeah and so we both got into church planting and and then right away. Like the the second church the first church plant out of the box these guys wanted to do a cell model that was interesting and the third church was more of a secret church again and then. And then the fourth church plant wanted more of a TIM Keller PCA type thing and then by the fifth church plant, it was all. liturgy and you know weekly Eucharist and using that word and. liturgical seasons and and then these other church plants all started going that way too, and I thought, well, this is interesting now of course living stands living stones can't ride any of those bandwagons I mean. This church it just can't do a bandwagon it just it just way too authentic not you know just you can't turn this church, it just is what it is so. You know i'm watching all of this stuff happen, then of course Jordan Peterson is the one who started this church. And I see all of these people interested in orthodoxy and Peugeot comes on the scene and it's like. there's stuff about this and stuff behind this and I had. You know I had studied I had visited Redeemer in New York City and you know had a quiet little seminar with TIM Keller with a couple of our with some of our sacramental church planters we'd had an in sort of so we had a. sort of private audience and a chance to take a poke around Redeemer press fairly closely and. You know that was in some ways closest to where I was from because Keller comes out of Westminster, UK and I was there. And I was there for a couple of years and I was there for a couple of years and I was there for a couple of years and. I was there for a couple of years and. And. You know that was in some ways closest to where I was from because Keller comes out of Westminster East and in the in the 80s, there was this whole urban missions thing that was happening. A lot of that have Westminster East, so you know the Keller stuff was was pretty close to me, but you know we were never going to be anything like a kind of reformed. reformed conservative cathedral church, which is sort of what TIM Keller was doing and and then, of course, Jordan Peterson comes along and I thought. This is it's enough in alignment with the you know the ancient worship theme that had really developing out of the emergent thing and and it was he was asking he was provoking a lot of deeper questions that were really. Getting at secularity and then, of course, I made a video and people started watching it and contacting me and that was completely unexpected, you know I i'd been working in this church 20 years and you know i'm known in my denomination but beyond it. You know I don't have a mega church i'm not on the cover of Christianity today. So then, so then, well, what do we mean by this word spiritual and, of course, you know I didn't know anything about young but totally different take on things that will get up a speed on some of that stuff and then you know back to philosophy and. And you begin to realize that this. Phenomenologically is not a it's not a it's not a bad approach to this, which is, of course, very much the way Pagio went it's post Heidegger and. You know that, of course, someone pointed me to john vervecky developed a relationship with him. So. You begin to so when in church, you know, you know, it's not a. You begin to so when in churches, especially a tradition like the CRC which wasn't Pentecostal but could be Pentecostal friendly charismatic friendly. I went in grand rapids and in college, I was in sort of a charismatic Christian reformed urban church which sort of tied a lot of those strands together for me and just knowing that. This word spiritual. we're going to have to have a far deeper understanding of it and by virtue of my Dutch Calvinist. tradition, you neither can exclude sort of the. supernatural that you would bump in and, of course, you know black urban America, where I grew up and then Haitians and the Dominican Republic and then charismatic reformed. You know, so I wasn't I wasn't I wasn't too skeptic about what modernists would call the supernatural but it's also got to tie into a secular culture. And so. You know, in terms of my videos I just sort of follow where the conversation leads and. And and so I. I really had to you know i've been really thinking about what do we mean by this word and and how does that connect. So this week i'm preaching on Paul he's leaving Antioch after he and Barnabas are there for a year. And then he's going to Cyprus and basically you've got a showdown between this Jewish magician bar Jesus versus Paul and Paul. And Paul, you know, basically curses them and says you're gonna be blind for a while and the guy turns blind, and this is all in front of the pro counsel who is watching this and he's like. All right, well. Paul and got credibility he's got my attention and. And there's sort of an easy dismissal by secularist modernists of this stuff as this is this is this is legend, this is all BS. But you know, like you if you're around Navajo for a while it's like BS you know there's there's a reality to this, but if you've been around enough Pentecostals you know. You know they got some BS going on there too, sometimes and the prophets roll into town and the show comes in and it's like. there's a good bit of skepticism about that too so so you really want to somehow bring all of this together into an integrated picture where spiritual doesn't simply. deny sort of a modernist frame because people are going to have to integrate this into their worldview as they leave secularism. So you're not gonna you're not gonna desire you're not gonna deny what modernists feel like spooky powers. But you're also going to have to integrate this into oh what trump did because that was you know, however you feel about his politics. All he sort of gave the nation and advanced course and. An exorcism of sorts, you know he he that'd be one frame to think about what happened with trump and I loved what you said it's as if someone discovered Jesus bones and. So I. And so I wanted, I want to figure this out and my channel for me is. A lot of figuring things out and and if you're going to silo yourself in which we sort of see probably I don't want to speak ill of these people I don't know them, but in a place like let's say Yale divinity maybe i'm just working off a. An impression, but I see that often because you have to sort of silo yourself off because the world is too big and so, then the whole key is well let's have a productive filter. You know that some things get filtered out and and it's a we can we can work in a manageable level to for the church to. To to deeply work on this question. Okay, so the Holy Spirit is moving through your church and you can approach that language in a fairly modernistic way and approach it in a Pentecostal way, you can approach it in sort of a primitive way and try and get at. What the Romans were dealing with and but but one way or another we're going to need to use that word in a comprehensive way. And but but one way or another we're going to need to use that word in a competent way and i've i've found in this little corner of the Internet. You know, with you know, say, Peugeot and his Orthodox tribe and verveky and his non theist tribe and the Roman Catholics and this whole crazy group that we've sort of gathered together here. I think we're having a productive conversation about this. And that's rare so let's have it and and again I see this very much as a spiritual movement, because not only do I believe it's the work of the Holy Spirit working through this. But it's also all of these spiritual streams just kind of coming together and you know, one of the things I picked up from Tim Keller, which he picked up from one of his seminary profs at Gordon Conwell was. You know revival happens and and it's the work of God, you know we don't you can sort of you sort of want to try to make an altar on top of caramel and say okay Lord. You know we're ready for you to show up, but only you can show up, you know, in revival all of the streams come together. And there's you know there's new hymn to tea that erupts there's there's fervent prayer you know there's pious devotion there's you know work with the poor and poverty and justice it's it's all of the things and. And and the history of Christianity has been in many ways, a series of revivals with often dying of things I mean Chesterton notes that you know the seven the seven deaths of Christianity, it keeps dying and rising again and and certainly. Modern Christianity is dying. Yes, and that's epitomized and you know the mainline church. Now, obviously, these deaths are never full and complete they're always you know somewhat dead or mostly dead. It never seems to go all the way. yeah there's still a little bit of movement in the body. that's right, but I and so I saw with the Jordan Peterson thing I thought there could be a revival from this, and I think there already has been to a degree. But revivals come and they reshape the world. Yes, and I don't want to be sitting on the sidelines when the revival happens, I want to be there. yeah that's oh man. And that's like that's the real sense right it's like this last year and a half has made me I don't know I felt very impatient. Like this last year and a half for the reason of like I feel like things have been like ramping up and now we're getting to this place where it's like. Things are changing indelibly like you can't like we can't go back from whatever it is we've just entered into and i'm going to be stuck at home. it's like you know as a pastor it's like there are people dying in the hospital i'm stuck at home it's like there are there's all these things happening right now. And you can't you feel like you can't just be like separated from it, you have to be engaged with it, because you do you sense this flow happening right now. I you know you talking about John for Venki I want to thank you for introducing me to him as well in terms of like just as content so good. But like he talks about shamans as entering into this like flow state and i'm like thinking like what what happens like culturally. Seems like what you're describing is like a kind of like cultural flow state almost like these revivals and things like that it's it's when we're all like just. Releasing ourselves to this something right and that can be really good or it can be really bad depending on how you're testing that spirit because it's like it's a battle right now. yeah. I think what they mean is they just remind them of like you know Tim Keller or something. And then, on the other side, the conservatives churches think that we're liberal and in a lot of ways like I actually think that's a good thing. But we have increasingly like out in the phoenix area we're having churches like getting really divided over lots of issues. Right now, there was actually a church that got on and said like pastor gave sermon local church and he goes. That's a euphemism for like you know lukewarm it's like you're you're it's basically you're either with us or against us is what this pastor is saying and he's talking specifically about social justice issues. yeah yeah yeah yeah I hear that a lot. You know you're talking about the young restless and reform we got mark Driscoll and his church out here and they actually i've got people go to that church and they're like. It's like there's this like there's this weird tension even within the body of the church not even like just culture broadly obviously it's there, but. there's a book called broken church broken nation it's a little volume. I don't know if you ever read that, but this guy it's a short historical study of the church and the church is a little bit of a mystery to me. And how actually these denominational divisions kind of exactly parallel like what happened within the country itself and it's kind of interesting thinking about that. And how actually these denominational divisions kind of exactly parallel like what happened within the country itself and it's kind of interesting thinking about that. And how actually these denominational divisions kind of exactly parallel like what happened within the country itself and it's kind of interesting thinking about that perspective what's happening now it's like okay what what is being born right now. I do think that the church spiritualism of a country is reflective of where the country is going to materially be. yeah yeah. So yeah lots of stuff happening there, I think, like your language like Mormonism my group around Mormonism so knowing Mormon history reading I don't know if you've read D Michael Quinn he wrote a book called early Mormonism in the magic worldview. That's, I mean, if you, if you are a fan of history like he is like a king historian. What's his name? D Michael Quinn. D Michael Quinn. Early Mormonism in the magic worldview. He's like talking about like pointing out how these revivalists that Mormonism was grounded in the things that they're seeing they're seeing through spiritual eyes that there's this kind of strange like in the wake up and leading up to these kinds of like revivals, people stop seeing just what we're seeing materially right right. Right. Seeing things of spirit. And I think that like that's really been helpful for me to consider and think through to. He looks at like things like sales records for like books on magic in the United States, and how there are actually more people buying these books on astrology and magic, and there were people buying Bibles in the United States. And it's like, it's like what what does that mean and I'm like, you need to start thinking about like astrology is becoming popular in the United States again, but also for the last two decades we've all been looking into these scriars stones right these like crystal balls essentially looking in and I think of Gandalf he had a comment where he said, you know about the sea lost seer stones you look in you don't know it looks back out into you. Terms you know you stare into the abyss the abyss looks back out into you it's like, what are we're looking in right now we're engaging this technology, as we see it. Yeah. Functionally, it behaves a lot like magic devices did, you know, we've seen us doing so what spirits are coming out through to you, and these crystal balls that we're looking into right now you like CS Lewis abolition of man he does that really quick connection between alchemy science and alchemy and magic and it's like magicians and scientists aren't that far apart. So they're both trying to harness the power of the earth. Right. To man's benefit. It's like an actually historically they have that connection. Yeah. So, that stuff's been really that that draws that to my mind as you're talking about kind of this like bubbling fomenting something that's happening. I've also been a Philip reef has become very popular again. Oh yeah, yeah. And especially in your reform world, Carl Truman conservative one guy, he used to be cool and reform circles and now he's cool and all evangelical circles. You know, a little book about identity, but he's been drawing people back and Philip wreath, which I think is really useful because Philip wreaths trilogy on sacred order social order is really helpful for also understanding I think the deeper battle that's happening, that's underlying this moment. The tensions that are arising there are these kind of, it's a tension between a, a one way of perceiving sacredness, and this kind of anti sacredness which is in a sense its own kind of new system. And so, he's got some really interesting insights that he writes about especially in the crisis of the off the crisis of the officer class, and, and my life among the death works. And I think that's one of the things that I've been revisiting because he tries. He is going off of Deuteronomy and the interdicts that are laid down by God there and contrasting that to our own moment, essentially interesting. And so, you're just just just giving me more books dude. Yeah, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I get complaints and now here you've done it to me. It's really bad. We get we get alone we get siloed out here nobody else is reading these things except somebody. I gotta I gotta land the plane here because I gotta do some things but, you know, what you know is this is this video good to share you want to preview it first what do you think I am comfortable with you sharing. Good, good. I'd love to I the conversation before this I had a lovely talk with a woman who's a she's she's young she just got married she's she's going to you and she's going to the University of comp and studying theology in the Netherlands and it's just, it's, I don't know I love these I love these randos conversations because it just gives me a chance to gives me a chance to step out of my filter and let other things come to me and so this was just a delight. This was the flight so I really appreciate it. I appreciate it. You give me this time, Paul and send me send me anything like if you got church stuff or something that you'd like me to include in this video just you have my email address. Yeah, I believe so. So just like church websites stuff like that. I just just send it to my name at Gmail there I just did it. Yeah, I'll see if I'm interested. There's been like a closeted like Jordan Peterson community there that they feel afraid about talking about it until they find out that I'm a fan of Jordan Peter. They'll probably appreciate that. Public and outspoken about these kinds of things but yeah I would be happy to send that to you. And if you get back to Tucson have Andy introduce you to my friend Rod. Yeah, absolutely I actually you actually connect me with him as well and I try to exchange some emails there's just like so much going on. Yeah, yeah, yeah, but if you if you if you're ever down in Tucson, make sure you contact Rod first and say I want to buy it. I'll buy you breakfast or lunch I'll take you anywhere you want to go I'll take you to some greasy spoon and they'll sit and they'll tell you stories you want to talk about spiritual warfare talk to that man. He's a giant in many ways. Your conversation with him was like, oh so moving. Oh, I got to have him back on that I got him back on the channel. Hopefully I'll be able to sneak in and get another time with you too. Well, I just I just value your mind and your insight so much. Well, I hope you know Vin Donk of course wants to redo the road trip so I'm sure I'll get down to Arizona again so and it'd be much nicer to have lunch with you personally so absolutely. It'll be on me. All right. Sounds good. All right, Paul, take care. Yep. Bye bye.