https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tIQe10yKSc4

 Hi, this is Paul and today for our live stream as some of you might be noticing, I've been doing some different things with the Friday live streams. We've had Kels Elden on last week. We had a group that wanted to talk to me about Tucker Carlson and my ignorance of him. And this week in anticipation of the conference that's coming up in Chino, you can still buy tickets today and tomorrow for the conference, but ticket sales are going to close because Ben Donk needs a number for to give to his caterers so they know how much food to bring in. Dr. Jim, who's been on the channel a lot, we've talked a lot. A few times we've talked about Westerns, we've talked about a whole variety of things. And last time when we spoke, he said, there's some other things I'd really like to talk about, especially it's sort of connected with the conference. And so I said, well, let's do that on the live stream before the conference. So welcome again to the channel, Dr. Jim. Thanks. As usual, thanks a lot. I feel like you indulge me and my desire to hear myself talk. And I'm very grateful of that. You know, you give me a lot of good things to think about. And so, I mean, you've noticed that I clip a lot of our talks because a lot of the things that you say sort of continue to churn there in the consciousness Congress. Well, that's that's good. I'm happy that that's the case. Lots of you know, I've lived myself, I've lived my life kind of, you know, kind of steeped in ideas one after the other. It's been part of the way I've kind of journeyed, if you will. And so so that's so that's why this little corner, I think, you know, is is maybe one version of my my spiritual home and kind of thought we could talk about that. You know, I'm I'm ready to to commit a weekend and fly down to California to get together with you guys. So it must mean something to me, I guess. So I thought we could talk about that. What is the idea of the spiritual home? What's a quest? How does that fit with the different participants? I have some ideas about, you know, hey, maybe how would we think about Verveky? Not that I'm going to psychoanalyze these guys, but Verveky, Peugeot, maybe some other other individuals and maybe myself. I'm leaving you off the list. I'll let you speak for yourself, I guess. So that's the idea. And maybe to set up the conference, one of the other things I was hoping to do was to make it. I don't know. I tend to. I don't know. I tend to think I'm talking about myself, but but tend to maybe sound abstract a lot. So maybe I'm hoping to give people entry to be able to approach me and talk with me about the things that I've talked about and and kind of break an opening for people to have conversation when I get down there. Yeah. One of the things that we have. So those who have registered for the conference, you should have gotten an email with a Discord link, however comfortable people are with Discord servers. Very that varies. But the schedule is on it. And we have built into the conference. Not only are we going to have speaker talks and then we'll have panels about the speaker talks and we'll have question and answer for them. But we've also built in the conference times for more estuary type gatherings where people can get together in groups of six or eight and really start to sort of burrow down and and digest this stuff and hopefully do some applications, some some pondering on on the topics, because, you know, even for myself, when you have a topic like this and again, we came up with the topic of the conference together, the five of us, Vendant, Catherine, Peugeot, Verbecky and myself. It's a it's an evocative topic because home is a. It's came up in sort of the warm up conversation that we did. Home home is a very complex place. It can it there are and there are expectations of rest, of comfort, of security, but also of challenge in many ways. No place is more challenging to any of us than our home. So I don't know. Wherever you want to start, you just go ahead and dive in and we'll. Yeah, I've got like a kind of a number of different ideas that I've kind of been working in and I can be scattered. So I hope it doesn't come out to to scatter. You might have to move away from that. Don't don't watch the chat. They're just having fun in that. Oh, yeah. I remember from the last time. It's not going to it's not going to help me to look at the chat. So no, it won't. I guess I would say some things about what, you know, kind of in a broad abstract sense. What about a home? You know, and I want to say some things as I've been thinking about this. I want to say some things about that. One is that a home is not an end. That is, it's not, you know, to use Christian terms, it's not the eschaton. It's not it's not salvation. It's not it's not transcendent in that sense. It's it's therefore in the middle of the arc of the journey in some way. It's also just a well, it's also not tranquility. It's not, you know, what you might get when you kind of reach some state of meditative bliss. It's certainly so that's not where we're going. If if we're trying to go to a to a home. And those are just some generic thoughts about that. I would say it and this is how I kind of wanted to structure my thoughts. And you can feedback and see what you think. I wanted to structure it on an end, a goal. It is a goal. It's an end. And T.S. Elliott, who is my spiritual guide, has a has a quote, In my beginning is my end. Here, that can mean a whole bunch of different things. But one of the things and can be there is purpose or goal. And and that end, if that's if we're for the moment, kind of take that to be a home is going to be fully kind of elaborated based on where we come from. You know what? What are in Christian terms, what our formation is, is going to determine the possibilities of what we might take to be our home. And that's how I kind of wanted to look at, you know, some of the different figures in this corner, maybe ultimately myself. The thought I had was was something like with John Verbeke, and again, I don't want to speak for him. He will speak for himself, of course. I'm just speaking for the kind of archetype that I take him to represent. And he is a guy who came from we all know this story. He came from that fundamentalist background that that ultimately he had to leave and he had to leave it in a way that I would want to say is closer to a kind of transformative experience than it is a an evolution or a progress. And so he is in a sense that this might be a little bit too strong a term, but he is in a sense cast out or exiled from that origin. And so now he's, of course, found himself in a in another kind of place after that progress. But it's but what what I see him doing in a way is is somehow framed by that fact. He's he's he's kind of reaching for all of the possibilities and the capacities that he has, the intellectual competency that he has, the resources that he's able to gather and bring forth and trying to create something new, to create something out in the I wouldn't go so far as to say out in the wilderness, but out beyond of that origin and implied in that, I think, is that he can't go back to that to that starting point. And and that kind of defines for in a way what it's going to be that is going to be possible for him as his spiritual home. And I want I want to make sure I'm I'm framing that in completely neutral terms in terms of some sort of judgment, because I I resonate with with a lot of that, although I do not have that kind of deconstructive origin, and it changes, I think, in a big way for myself. And if we ever if in this conversation, we're able to get to to having me kind of talk that through, I'll I'll describe myself in contrast to that, I think, in a in a big way. What are your thoughts there on that? Yeah, I think I know a number of things you said. I really resonated with leaving. Leaving that fundamentalist background as a transformation to. You know, knowing, knowing, even though that's not my story, I I. Sorry about that. I've got I got a visiting dog here today, so it's going to be unpredictable. All right. She's OK, I think. Yeah. You know, my my story is very different in that I I'm third generation Christian foreign minister. I'm in the same denomination that my family has always been. I've never felt the need to leave it. I'm pastoring a church, which is in some ways in continuity with the church I grew up in. I mean, in that sense, John and I are sort of polar opposites. I've in some ways and other ways have been some ways never left home. I just live on the other coast in. And John very much in his story, and it's been very interesting watching the evolution in the video I just released this morning. I talk a little bit about the fact that this formation is ongoing with us and John began his journey in the YouTube space. He was already a university lecturer. He was already a cognitive scientist used to the used to the academy and to publishing. But now suddenly his face is on YouTube. He's subject to the algorithm. He's subject to the comments section. He's subject to the the the commentaries by myself and just about anybody else who has a view and an opinion. So and someone who very openly has said that he has a fair amount of anxiety with respect to attention. This is a you know, for him, this is a much different journey than someone like me, who, you know, truth be told, probably likes the attention, at least to some degree or not, or I wouldn't have got myself into this. And and so then, you know, beginning my first conversation with him expressed some reticence to talk about. The place he grew up and his experience there, the longer that he's been in front of the camera, I've watched a number of interviews where he's been able to talk about that more easily, been able to disclose a little bit more. I think typical of John, he's he's careful. He tries to be respectful of his home of origin. But even when he talks about the fact that with respect to his meaning crisis, many people can find solace and home and comfort in the legacy religions, as he calls them for others, and especially for him. He doesn't see those as viable options. And and this is where sort of the where myself, Jonathan Peugeot and John Verbeke are sort of in a spectrum because Peugeot, of course, his family was within a trajectory of French Canadian to evangelical, his father for a while. You can hear my dog back there. Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's fine. Hopefully she'll settle down here. Dog longing for home. So Peugeot, in a sense, is someone who has had transformations. But with respect to Christianity, you know, how on earth do you ever measure these things? I mean, he still very much counts himself in the Christian fold. And and for Jonathan Peugeot, go if there's if if we have a legacy version of Christianity on the menu, orthodoxy is it. OK, so Peugeot goes all the way back to one of the most legacy elements of orthodoxy of Christianity. And I still say sort of in the Midlands, who has never really left my tradition. Right. I would you know, I kind of I like literary kind of examples. So I was going to put Jonathan Peugeot as as Odysseus. And he he's kind of kind of left home, got he's kind of wily, he's kind of maybe a little bit of a trickster. He's smart. He knows the world. Never really deconstructed. I wouldn't think of Peugeot as really deconstructing, although, you know, in in again, T.S. Eliot terms, he went on a journey and he and he came home. And home was different because he went on the journey, but it was still home. It was still home for him. And and so he didn't really have that thing that I was kind of talking about with with Verbecky as a kind of a kind of metaphysically deep transformation, if you will, that I think Verbecky is is in the midst of. You know, so I think that's that's one way to to frame it. Yeah, that's one of the reasons I didn't actually try to frame your journey, because I think it is you were you were back at home and waiting for Peugeot to come back. I don't know. Never left. Never left. Never went to Troy. Right. Right. I've I stayed. I stayed at home in some ways. And perhaps in some ways, my own. There's a sense in which perhaps. John Verbecky's YouTube Odyssey is a search for home. In a way that mine isn't as much of. Yeah, I again, another literary example here. I could I can put on him and I don't want to kind of well expect everybody to know all these things. But The Tempest by Shakespeare. Prospero is is a guy. Hopefully I'm not breaking up too much for you there. No, your voice is still good. So Prospero is a guy who was banished in a certain sense. I think you can think of Prospero to tell the story really quick. These are city states in Italy. He gets kind of usurped by a group of kind of Machiavellian types. And he gets banished. He's a kind of figure of of of both a kind of Merlin like figure, but and an alchemist like figure, a kind of a guy in control of magic. But he's also really a humanist. He's really a a modern and he's the new man. Prospero is so in a way. And if you know the story, he's he's making things happen. He's making storms happen. And he's he's from this island that he's banished been banished to. And in a way, it kind of inverts our thought of the past, because the image there that Shakespeare's painting is that the medieval world was actually the world that was disenchanted and it was disenchanted in the form of Machiavelli. So and you can kind of see that, I think, and maybe the way Luther might have imagined the church, even Erasmus might have imagined the church as, you know, kind of involved in this kind of Machiavellian imminent battle of for power struggles, that kind of thing. And Prospero is the new man. He's he's pointing to the future. He's going to he's going to be the future. And it's kind of science like he knows nature. And he nonetheless, he's banished. And the story starts with him seeking revenge. And ultimately leads to reconciliation. He ultimately reconciles with the guy, you know, Alonzo, who is the guy who is responsible for his his banishment. And of course, the the the real mayor, the real kind of reconciliation and redemption comes from the children. His daughter marries the son of Alonzo. And so we now have this kind of future in which there's reconciliation, there's forgiveness, there's redemption and a future, which is somehow the combination of, you know, the new and the old in some sort of a real reconciled, you know, possibility. So perhaps we could see, you know, John's unlike, let's say Sam Harris. He's not just wanting to be congenial. He's wanting to reach back into that tradition and somehow. You know, bring it into reality without necessarily not being that person who went through that transformative experience. And, you know, and you can I can you can see him kind of doing this. He definitely wants to be on the levers of these scientific possibilities and tools, the kind of alchemist image of Prospero fits with that, I think. And and that's kind of how I see a verveckian in all positive terms with with with great heart. You know, yeah, it's interesting the tensions within, let's say, the alchemist. Because and Lewis Lewis points this out regularly in some of his more some of his less popular writings that, you know, in astrology, which to us sounds very new agey is actually a determinism alchemy, which sounds very enchanted to us, is in many ways the the height of technological ambition that even to the very essence of of lead, we can have mastery over it and turn it to gold. And in terms of the enchantment argument, it's been interesting that Justin Briarley, now that he's stepped away from Premier Radio, he's sort of now being more of a player rather than a ref. His his first podcasts have focused on enchantment, which is, of course, sort of where Rod Dreher is. The. You know, there's a there's a there's a tension within John Vervecky's work of science, the science of enchantment. I mean, it's almost like the squareness of the circle. And I really think back, you know, in sixteen hundred when Shakespeare wrote this, the it would be natural to attach to that alchemist. You wouldn't see the alchemist as the guy from the past, as we do. You would see that as the guy pushing into the future, the guy who's who's trying to get a hold of the of the way the ways in which you can manipulate and push the buttons of nature to make things happen, to make enchanted things happen. And now we see it obviously as kind of inert. You know, this is kind of a inert materialistic vision. And this is sort of where I think Peterson in some ways fits in because. It was Peterson who leaned into the fact that a bunch of these modern psychologists who basically looked at what Jung wrote with respect to alchemy and threw that out, said this is inscrutable. Why on earth would Carl Jung be paying attention to alchemy? And Peterson focuses in there and says, no, this is actually key to this whole question of science and enchantment. And like McGill, Chris does at the preface of not his latest book, but the one before that, that's right. He he drills into this fact that we are, you know, we in in the modern period, we are all about the explaining and the explaining is in an inverse relationship with enchantment. And that that isn't going away yet. Now we we long for which can't be explained. And I think in many ways, John. With John's relevance realization, a lot of the pieces that John is sort of bringing to the table and language that he's bringing to the table, even his his recent AI talk sort of raises all of those tensions. And and so. If you and pastors, of course, well, I don't know in churches, this is also a little bit weird. But but in a sense, John is is trying to participate in the erection of a a non theistic ecology of of practices to provoke, you know, this this the end to this meaning crisis. But if if you're mean, if the end of your meaning crisis is achieved rather than received. Will you really abolish your meaning crisis? I mean, because all of these things are sort of bound together. Yeah, yeah, I agree with that. You're you have a feeling that. He's he's still moving, he's still seeking, he's still trying to, like you said, construct and and make foundations. And and that's definitely true. Peterson doesn't I don't. I don't know about Peterson in terms of this whole thing, of course, and it's all just wild speculation. But I would almost think of him as someone alongside Odysseus coming back from Troy who got lost and not critical necessarily, but he's floundering might be too strong a term because it's got a kind of a negative valence to it that I'm not necessarily intending, but a kind of feverishness in Peterson to try to grab something, to try to make something happen, to try to feel something that feels solid to him or something and regularly kind of being, I would quite say thwarted, but not necessarily settling that that's a possibility for him. And that's me talking about a guy I don't have any idea about, so I don't I don't want to be seeming personal and judging. That's what it feels like to me. You know, and both, of course, both John and Jonathan know Jordan personally, which it both adds information and forces them to respect concealment and lack of disclosure. But Jordan, it seems to me, is more of an Agamemnon figure. And it's like, all right, we're going to go to Troy. You know, all those Wolbsters are holed up behind the walls of Troy. Let's get our ships over there. Absolutely. And take care of this Troy problem right now. Oh, yeah, actually, you're absolutely right about that. That's perfect. That's perfect. Doesn't end well for Agamemnon. No, it doesn't. But then the irony, of course, is that he's and this is this is, I think, you know, one of René Girard's great insights is that mimetic rivalry forces the two you know, the two sides that are formed to become like opposites of each other. And and which is part of the the caution from René Girard is that, you know, in some ways, mimetic rivalry is inevitable. But woe to you, to whom it comes, because you may very quickly become very much like the thing you are trying to destroy. And for me, when I look at Jesus in the Gospels and this is where, you know, say myself and Jacob, I know he's I'm sure he's listening. Jacob, the Jew or myself and Jacob sort of differ on Jesus. Jacob is much more frustrated with Jesus because I look at Jesus as sort of recognizing the mimetic rivalry with Rome and saying, I'm going, I'm not listening. Jacob says, Come on, Jacob, you're just waiting for me to to name you. You know, you were. That that Jesus sort of steps out of the mimetic rivalry and basically says, I am going to I am going to deal with you in a way that you are completely unprepared for. And, you know, Jonathan, well, we can we can we should get to we should definitely get to Jonathan Pichot, because his journey is also very interesting. But John Verveckis, what you said, what you opened up with with T.S. Elliott is just so true. That, you know, my end is my beginning that. People, it's where it's very difficult for us to ever finally leave home. And in some ways, all of our struggles continue to be with our home. And and so in terms of John Verveckis quest, that is certainly part of it. I mean, if if in fact he hasn't ever given details, which I think is absolutely appropriate. But, you know, if in fact the type of fundamentalism that he grew up with, like many, like many fundamentalisms that arose in the late 19th, early 20th century, is sort of this anti-science fundamentalism. John is in that sense a a scientific fundamentalist, but certainly not in sort of the reductionist way that that Sam Harris thinks he is. So importantly, there's that implied belief in reconciliation, that implied belief, you know, faith in the other, that he is constantly trying to, you know, restate, make sure is is understood that that's his posture and his stance. You know, a little less so in Jordan Peterson. I think Jordan Peterson has a good heart in the end. Obviously, it's a very much a a passion of of of genuine effort to to help people to to be a positive force, but a little less formed, a little less, you know, kind of. I don't know, clear as to where that might that path might end up. Yeah. Yeah. Well, let's should we should we have we have we finished with John? Should we do it to? Yeah, sure. Yeah. So I Odysseus as Peugeot, that's that's very interesting. Yeah. Well, just because just because it you know, in a way I see Odysseus has not ultimately transformed by his experience. He's still that he's still the thing that he is. And he ends up home in a real way. And and just I don't think we have to say that the move from whatever his formation was to the Orthodox means that he sees that himself, you know, as as having that kind of exile or or transformation away from whatever it was that it was there. There's something essential there that was always there, I think, in a certain sense. And that's that's how I see him. I think he's he's. What's the right way to think about him? There's one of the main things that was attractive to me about Jonathan Peugeot in the beginning was his. Ultimate pointing to an elevation of the kind of substantialness of our phenomenal experience, and for me, that's important because it it allows for a kind of a circumstance of not rejecting the eminent of our experience, the kind of the way we're in the world and his his way of of talking about the the ability to engage and really come in contact with these patterns that he's regularly referring to, we're experiencing those in our real incarnate life. And therefore it's it makes for the possibility of kind of deeply meaningful habitation in in the world as we are. We find ourselves and I don't know how that connects with quest for a spiritual home, but that's kind of the way that was the main one of the main things that attracted me to him, and I see a lot of that in TS Eliot. He talks about TS Eliot is not a symbol. He doesn't like symbols, but not in the way that that that Jonathan Peugeot uses symbols. TS Eliot uses a term called the objective correlative. And what he means by that is that when we see a rose or a beautiful flower, you know, it's it is the manifestation of beauty of that transcendent transcendent. So the transcendent is in the imminent. It's it's it's nested in the imminent, if you will. And it's and it's fully available to us. We have direct access to it, if you will. And and so when he uses imagery in his poetry, he's he's bringing in things wanting us to notice that fact that, you know, that if you want to know, you can describe a rose, you know, fragility, it's got thorns. You can describe abstractly what, you know, maybe talk about how that's kind of evoking some sort of transcendent notion of of frail transient beauty. But that's all secondary. That's all that's all a reconstruction of the primary experience of the rose that's right in front of you. So so in a way, I see Peugeot. Here's my dog going off. I see Peugeot kind of trying to do a similar kind of thing. He's trying to he's trying to make us realize that we could be comfortable in the phenomenon, our phenomenal experience, recognize the way things are and have them have the fullest meaning that they they have in our direct encounter with them. I don't know if that's no, I think that's really good. And I think that's really helpful. I'm you know, I'm I'm not really familiar with Elliott, even though many people have been all you get to read T.S. Elliott. There will be an opportunity that Ralph Fiennes is has done a roadshow in England where he reads four quartets. And he's now I think with his sister producing a film, a version of it that's going to be coming out within probably the next six months. Oh, wow. It should be an interesting way to experience four quartets. But anyway, but no, I think you I think you really I think you I think you really nailed a lot of Peugeot's project. And it's interesting that he comes at it from a different way than Elliott, but in many ways a very similar quest. And I think in terms of Peugeot's biography, I mean, he one of the problems that we have with with us as human beings is is we're only we're only sort of getting to talk to one small arc of the story. It's fine. It's not really that loud. Yeah, OK, very good. So we only get to we only get to sort of see one small arc of the story with every individual human being, and especially for someone like Jonathan. I know on one hand we are all individuals, but we are also nested in. I mean, this is part of what's coming down the road now to you see this. And in Michael Levin's work, when we're when we're looking at looking at each of us as individuals is sort of like looking at one act of a three act play that, you know, my father's story is nested in me, my my mother's story, my grandfather's story. I mean, there's all these stories that are nested and formed in me. And so even just talking to me now gets the instantiation of Paul VanderKlay nearing 60, which would be a different instantiation of him nearing 30, let's say. So so Peugeot is is as found a way, I think, to to access a far broader picture and and be able to bring that into into into view. But yet still, he is still nested in this narrative of, you know, French, Canadian to evangelical. There was his obviously his missionary work in Congo, which was deeply formative in making him him into who he is. And and now, of course, this this YouTube instantiation or or even, you know, it could could wind up being more of a publishing instantiation and and his his goal in this, which has been to. He's found a way to give people a picture of the one in the many and of the and of the accessibility and availability of these patterns in the phenomenological. And I think for him. In some ways, his his path to orthodoxy was, I think, I think that's really true and Odysseus like in terms of his path to home and. Yeah, it's it's really interesting, though, because orthodoxy has within it both sort of a mere Christianity aspect and also a deep exclusivism. I mean, the more I've gotten to know. The orthodox among us and I. Obviously, orthodox like is sort of a single and plural word, we don't say the orthodox is or the orthodoxies. We could say that. But, you know, you've got some orthodox who are demanding rebaptism. And you've got other orthodox who don't. You have some orthodox that sort of adopt this mere Christianity posture. And you have some orthodox that basically say, if you're not in an orthodox church, you're not in the real church, but then you're going to have, well, but if you are Ukrainian and the Russian Orthodox Church and, you know, if your two nations are fighting, so so. Well, I don't know what you'd comment on. I don't I don't get the feeling that those issues rise to concern for Peugeot. I mean, obviously, obviously, very much in the mere Christianity orthodox camp. Yeah, I can. I won't do this, but I could deconstruct the history of orthodox, the orthodox church and come up with some fairly unattractive elements to that deconstruction of that history. And but that I don't know how important that is. No, you know, J. Dyer out there in YouTube land. I haven't watched hardly any of it, partly because I am so inside kind of the mere Christianity camp that even within my own Christian reform circles, I find the the the antithetical people who just want to really dig down into just what is and isn't common grace. And if we should allow any of it anymore, I just don't really spend much time there because I find it uninteresting. Yeah. And that might get to, you know, I don't know, might get to my own take on a lot of these things. I we should talk about Vindonk before we get to you. You're going to be that you're going to be the climax of this. I don't know about that. The personal is always the climax. It really is. And yes, you are meeting, you know, you arrive with people. I want to talk about this abstract thing over here. And then suddenly they disclose something intimate and the room hushes because we know, well, now we're in the holy place. So but but the one that the one, you know, of course, you know, Peugeot the show is a big draw to these conferences and, you know, Peugeot sort of gets people sort of people really need to see Peugeot. And some people really need to see John not so me so much. And of course, John Vindonk, a lot of people, well, he's organizing the conference, but. It's been down who really in many ways has skin in the game in this conference. And if far fewer people have watched the my original, my biological, biological, my biographical conversation with Vindonk. But his story. His story is is deeply in this because, of course, I'll just run through some of the snapshots, he comes from a broken home. His his mother, you know, for a while he was put into a a residential school because, you know, there was concern that his mother couldn't quite handle things. And his his father abandoned the family. And so when he tells a story, he talks a lot about being fathered. He eventually had some reconciliation with his father when his father was old. But he John Vindonk in many ways as a boy and as a young man was adrift. And Vindonk is an interesting character because he, in fact, of course, he leaves the Netherlands and goes to Canada on, you know, he had been working in dairies in the Netherlands and then he goes to Canada to work in dairies in Western Canada, and it was supposed to be sort of an educational thing, but the Canadian government messed up his visa and gave him a permanent visa instead of an educational visa. And so and he's not a Christian at all. And then he realizes very quickly that all of the really wealthy dairymen in Western Canada are Dutch and go to the Christian Reformed Church. So schemer that he is, he decides he's going to start infiltrating the Christian Reformed Church so he can get in good with these wealthy dairymen. And and he does that and he finds himself suddenly, you know, now suddenly there's church and there's God and there's, you know, all of these pieces he's going to wait till he hears. I told his story. He's going to freak out. And and so then he becomes a Christian and then he wants to be a minister. And so then he has to figure out how to get himself to Calvin College to get a degree and he meets a woman there and and he eventually will get married. And he goes to seminary and then he's into church planting and he's pastoring. And by his own admission, terrible church planter, not a terribly effective pastor, you know, just can't always keep himself from saying the wrong things, the things that are really on his mind. And and then at some point his wife is getting an advanced degree. And so he sort of puts ministry on pause to raise their three daughters. And then she leaves him and he's a single mother or single father. And his life is a wreck. And again, another church steps in the church that we are gathering in and sort of puts their arms around him and says, we don't care what crazy ideas you have about propositional theology, you're one of us. And of course, he goes to a he goes to a Richard Roar event where he sort of has to go out on some kind of a vision quest. And and the whole fatherhood thing sort of gets put into a package for him. And and an aging psychiatrist in that church says, I spent my whole life working, trying to address the damage of broken homes and fatherlessness. Why don't I give you a kind of a ad hoc job to to be pro fathers and go out in the world and do what you can in this mess? And, you know, and and so he's, you know, John will never be an elder at his church because he's heretical in a variety of ways and he'll never be a minister again. And, you know, it's his story is all over the place. But what he's always longed for, just like we began with, is, you know, his his end is his beginning and this this this this fatherlessness that he felt very acutely all along the way and in some ways always looking for fathers, always actually being fathered, you know, sometimes by dairymen taking him into their home, you know, putting a place at the table and saying to everyone in the room, that's John's place. He belongs here. I mean, so for so even though John doesn't make videos or anything. Quest for a spiritual home, that's John Van Dong's story, and now he's in his 70s. And. So, you know, wow, yeah, go ahead. Well, I'd say, you know, that's a that brings in the dimension of the of the, you know, ecclesial, the community and kind of absent from the thinking that I was I was spinning out before. And it's obviously very important and it trumps a lot of the other stuff. Right. And that's powerful. And I did listen to him with you conversing about that and that, you know, what comes to mind on that is the is the power of the absolutely personal story, because I don't want to do anything with that story besides besides, you know, kind of honor it as his, you know, his personal reality and that I would assume gives you great opportunity to be, you know, to know who he is and be with him when when you when you've been together or when you've talked, I assume. Well, when you when you say the power of the personal story, that is John's mission. Yeah. I mean, the whole estuary thing. I mean, he talks about this myopic mental meanderings. I mean, I think he talky stuff we do for for John Van Donk. It doesn't get real until someone sits down and discloses and says is and enters into this ability. Hey, hey. And enters into the space of vulnerability and and goes into this group of mostly strangers. Keep talking. I'm going to take care of this real quick. All right. No problem. And enters into this place of vulnerability and and then suddenly. Someone who was a total stranger in the room, surrounded by mostly strangers, starting to become friends, then they say, this is who I am. And in a sense, all of those vulnerability questions, this is who I am. Do you dare to love me? Can can I through your eyes imagine myself as someone lovable? You know, the the the video I did with the Mueller on Contrapoints was very interesting because, of course, Contrapoints says, I don't believe in any of this ontological stuff. All I want to know is, am I attractive? And for Contrapoints, of course, as a woman, am I am I desirable? Um, you know, and it's humans are such subtle creatures. We have a whole generation of women out there on one hand saying, don't desire me for how I look. Well, that's some of the population. A lot of the rest of the population are dying to be desired for how they look. And that one woman as a young woman who didn't want to be desired for how she looks now suddenly in her old age says, I'm no longer desired for how I look. And so we're we're we're creatures with this with this very, very sensitive core that. Yeah, wow. I do think that's that's an interest. That's that's kind of opens my eyes to a little bit more of what he might be up to there in terms of creating a space, creating an environment in which that's, you know, kind of facilitated and made made genuine. And and, you know, not not in the form, let's say, of demanding approval from impersonal other populations, but rather personal and direct encounter. That's that's that's a dimension of a spiritual home that we have to that has to be a part of of. What we're doing, for sure, I'm looking forward to what he says. I'm looking forward to what he says a lot, actually. Well, it's it's he might complain that I make him sound better than he makes himself sound, but but but but, you know, but that's a real life. It's a real life. Yeah. But there's there's, you know, in some ways we can see each other better than we see ourselves, so that's always an issue. But, you know, for John Vervecky, this ecology of practices. For, of course, in a fundamentalist space, your ecology is very ostensibly. Now, I've been in enough fundamentalist places to know that they're they're not quite as narrow as they're not quite as narrow and consistent as they imagine they are. But in a in a fundamentalist place, the entire game is we don't move the boundaries. These are the boundaries. And, you know, I'm going to, you know, you're going to pry that out of my cold, dead hands. That's sort of the clasp of fundamentalism. And and so John's John sort of, you know, no, we need to it's the it's the horizontal. We need to continue to go out into the horizon and this can be refined and this can be known and this can be pursued. And so in many ways, John Vervecky is all moving outward. Jonathan Peugeot is in some ways elliptical because like Odysseus, it's an elliptical journey. And Odysseus doesn't necessarily change that much. But he's you know, when he gets back to Penelope, he needs to reestablish home. You know, his wife is under assault. His son is everything's in jeopardy on Ithaca. And in that sense, Peugeot, you know, fits that mold for, you know, for John Vendonk, it's in some ways we're holding this in a church again. And I'm preaching in that church. And so when I think about the sermon, churches want to and this might enter into some of your thoughts about yourself. Churches want to sort of in this meaning crisis put out a welcome home sign. Because especially in modernity, especially in America, especially in the West, where you have all of this movement out into a strange land, churches want to say and sometimes can. We are the home you've always wanted. We are the home you're looking for. And of course, those who are most hungry for home might, you know, take the bait and have a profound sense of disappointment. Some for some people and as a pastor, I think we we have to be fair to churches on both sides for those for some. Churches do become the home they've always longed for and they do in church find rest for their souls. And I think we have a lot of stories out there of disappointment and disenchantment with church that leads to a reputation that churches always miss. That's if churches always missed, there wouldn't be so many of them. Churches seldom completely satisfy. And when they do, it's usually for a season. And but but this the whole question, especially of of church and temple, which it follows, is very much a quest for home. So, you know, this and so then for John Vendonk, he's you know, I've been the one that's called I take him, you know, I'd visit him down in Southern California and he always talked to me like, you know, that's their church. And then I'd be with him in that church and I watched how they talked to him and I watched how they defer to him and I watched how much responsibility had be given, I said, you're not going to you're not going to bullshit me on this, John. They love you here. This is your home. You've got angst with your home, but nobody fights harder for this place than you. You know, pastors come and pastors go, but this is your home and I know it and the people here know it. You just don't want to admit that to yourself or to others. So that's interesting. That's interesting. I like that image of him. I like hearing that. Yeah, that's good. I'm really looking forward to meeting him and I've heard him talk. I feel that in what in the end when he talks, you know. So let's see what else. Well, what about me? I want to hear you do me. I'm curious because we because again, we can't see ourselves and I'm so my sister, she's never going to listen to this so I can say it. My sister has a YouTube channel and every time she she reads all the comments, every time she gets a negative comment, it's like crushing. And I want to say, get off YouTube because the bigger you get, the worse it's going to get. And, you know, I'm not I don't know. Maybe it was because, you know, my mother loved me so well or something. Negative comments don't bother me. I kind of like them. So I don't think I'm going to have anything negative to say about you, Paul. You know, because well, just because I consider you my pastor and so I'm not going to I like everything about you, Paul. But let me let me certainly don't know me well enough. Maybe that's it. Maybe that's it. I guess I would say, you know, I just I just talk out loud about what I think. You know, you look you look to me like a guy who's very committed to, you know, kind of real important high stakes things that you that you have had deep roots in deep. Um. Let's say demands made upon you to live up to those realities and and want to do that, obviously, I mean, are committed to doing those things in the face of real, real evolution in thinking real, you know, kind of bumping into realities as at the role that you're in, that, you know, that have some dissonance, let's say with with that core, but that core is still the you know, the the thing that you would sacrifice for and perhaps sacrificing for that means, means, you know, kind of grappling with these dissonances and realizing they're not going to resolve and but that does not mean that you're going to bail or or, you know, kind of, I don't know, do what do whatever it is, go out on a walkabout or whatever. And, you know, so that's I feel that about you, that that's your, you know, that's your work, let's say. And and I I don't know if that's that looks right or not. That does sound right. I, you know, I. When I. So when I started on the video thing and when I when I so when I did a deep dive into Keller, I was just blogging, there was no YouTube. When I did a deep dive into Keller, that wasn't so dangerous because Tim Keller and the Christian Form Church, Tim Keller, and in some ways sort of a perfection of half of the Christian reform church. So but when I when I decided to do a deep dive into Peterson, I very I very much wanted C.S. Lewis to be my Virgil because I knew I was going to go on a journey and I knew I wanted a guide and I thought Lewis can be a really helpful guide for me through this because I definitely saw resonance between Peterson and Lewis in some ways and but. You know, there are. I am I am at my core in many ways a missionary and there are risks in this journey, but I at the same time, you know, at this stage in life, it's it's it's a good stage in life to go on a journey. You know, journeys are in some senses for young men before their fathers and for old men once the kids are grown, you know, that middle section with the kids at home. Now, that's you know, that's where you're at. Yeah, for sure. That's where you really have to be. So and I, you know, I often feel. I often have to deal with some of my own anxieties and insecurities in these things because, you know, Peugeot is is is just breaking ground and you just watch him breaking ground and and Verveky is I mean, he's so well. So bold, you know, kind of bold. And yes, I mean, the guy knows so much and he's read everything and he continues to read more and and sometimes I just want to get on stage and say, you know, ah, shucks, I'm just a pastor here, fellas. You know, I don't I don't I haven't read as many books as you all. And I certainly, you know, I certainly can't sort of see through things like Peugeot can. And I don't have the kind of breadth of understanding that that Verveky does. But I hope I can in some ways do what a pastor does, which is hopefully do what I can to create a space where people will or people will flourish, because that's that's really the job of a pastor to sort of create a space where people can flourish and that flourishing is is is not I think I think in our current cultural imagination, we imagine that flourishing is always a pleasant thing and by no means it's seldom is. Yeah, that's obviously that's good. Good work. It's important. Important thing to be doing. I do that, you know, with with with patients. It's it's a lot of what I do is trying to be with people in, you know, in difficult circumstances, not always difficult, though, you know, but serious circumstances, let's say, and trying to be something for them, both in terms of what they might imagine about me, but also in true, you know, kind of direct connection with them to somehow be therapeutics, to be to be supportive and be present. And it's not always the same. Everybody kind of needs something different. It's not necessarily about kind of some correct choice of a medicine or some understanding that you have about, you know, a disease process or whatever. It's it's about connecting and giving the best you can confidence and and and love in the end is the right word for that. And it's, you know, it's like, I'm sure in a lot of ways, it's like your experience. It's very much an encounter with a real particular person who's very different than you are. And you're trying to figure it out. You know, you're trying to understand what is the best the best relationship to build with them, if you will. And it's in small. I don't get the opportunity to be in depth with every one of my patients, of course. But some I do, some I've known for many years. And it's very important to try to be there, be the best you can be for them in that way. Why cardiology and not general practice? How did that go for you? Because it was more fun. It it's you know, it's a combination of, you know, kind of technical stuff. There's there's a lot of technology and I I enjoy that kind of have a science slash physics background that makes me enjoy that kind of stuff, how certain imaging techniques work and that kind of stuff. But it's also procedural. So you get to use tactile stuff and learn procedures and get good at them and feel confident in them. And and then it's also this kind of direct patient care. So it's got it's got a wide variety of ways of interacting with people and with medicine. And that's that's really how I ended up there. But it was also people. You know, I found people who I respected and I wanted to be like them. And so, hey, that's that drives you. Well, and you know, is is heart disease the number one killer of North American? Hard to go out of business being a cardiologist. I didn't mean it that way. I mean, you know, you're in a sense you're I don't want to say anything about podiatrists. That would make me, you know, but for the most part, I've not. Although then again, gangrene diabetes, I've had people in church who've had foot concerns. And so their podiatrists are very much where the front line is. But more often than not, it's congestive heart failure. It's heart disease, it's stroke. And so, yeah, it's. Yeah, obviously, I liked I was tempted by I felt the the pull of of being in that kind of important place, you know, being being the one responsible and trying to build to the point where I would be confident in that place and and the, you know, the respect that you get in that kind of circumstances is very attractive and it's got it's it's got its difficulty over the long haul. You know, it's hard to compete with, you know, somebody having a heart attack in the hospital. And so my kids or my wife, you know, it's pretty hard to hard to say, no, I don't want you to go in. So all right. Or I've got some what the neighbor died. So, you know, but it's not necessarily that serious all the time. I don't want to be making that making that seem that way. But but it does kind of raise that level of, you know, kind of creates a gap between you and people to some degree that you're just constantly working on and dealing with. But that I've settled into that now and late in my career, I'm very, very comfortable with what I do and a lot of, again, fun in my work. I like the relationships, I like the variability, the variety of things I get to do. I work with technology and computers and software as well as patients and all that stuff, and I really enjoy pretty much all of it now. I don't think that has in a weird way, I don't think that has a lot to do with my, you know, my kind of my journey. If if what we're talking about is this spiritual home question, although although maybe, you know, I I come I think I told you the story maybe way back at the beginning, I come from a very secular place in my upbringing. My parents were, you know, ex their families were Methodists. They they met at a Methodist college. So the religion wasn't foreign to them at all. But it just didn't end up being part of their their lives as we were growing up. And it wasn't really part of of all mine and my siblings lives, really. And and in in a way that makes me, I think, significantly different than a lot of people in this corner. It wasn't a problematic space. My parents were devoted to each other. There was a very clear ethos, I think, that was built around mostly my father and his kind of respect for responsibility, for taking care of your family, for trying to achieve something beyond just something straightforward, that education was the vehicle for that, that financial security was a goal that was a responsibility that you had. You needed to do that. And and education was the vehicle for doing that. And, you know, commitment to family and my parents stayed together and are presently living in Denver and I just visited them last week, doing well, living together and are pretty healthy despite being 96 and 93. And so that's a that's a you know, they're obviously getting older, obviously, but but doing pretty well, frankly, planting flowers and hoping for the spring, you know. And so that that kind of setup, that kind of starting point is not really anything like the the transformation that I was talking about with John Breveke. And and and my Christian faith actually, I think, is is is is effect. You know, it comes from that. That is, it comes from that not being what a lot of people, I think, think of when they in this corner, particularly when they talk about, let's say, a secular, the secular world as as something that's kind of intrinsically nihilistic, intrinsically fraught with the relativism, intrinsically a road to perdition and the only, you know, and it's it's got that as its center and some sort of notion that you can't form a ethical kind of framework in that kind of environment without a kind of an absolutist belief in in God and the Bible as the source of those things. It's just not part of my experience. And so it's not something that I resonate with. I think it is possible to do those things because I saw it. And and and so that does affect the way I think about, you know, my my my Christian faith, because I came to my Christian faith in a kind of a different way, kind of. You know, I was I was a seeker in a certain sense. I had a kind of a transition into adulthood that that was very common. It kind of, you know, J.D. Salinger, you know, catcher in the right kind of alienation moment as a young man. And I I had that was very fraught and full of anxiety and alienation. And but I had some skills and capability. So I wasn't going to flounder. But but I definitely felt that. And I just I reached out for things to to essentially mirror that experience for me. And it's not an uncommon thing, certainly in the in the 70s when I grew up, you know, music, figures like, you know, I would just give you the flavor of the kind of guy I was Neil Young, you know, Joni Mitchell, you know, Reggae, that kind of thing, you know, Woody Allen at the time that we are. Not the way we think of what he's very different, very different now. But back then he was he was a kind of a voice of the of the era in a real serious way. And I did, you know, I I resonated with some of that. But it wasn't about being transformed. I wasn't looking to become something else. I was looking for someone to resonate, to reflect back my own experience, to to show me that I wasn't isolated in the way I was feeling and to give voice to it in a more complex way with a more complex vocabulary, et cetera. And so, you know, then I kind of go to high culture. If we count Neil Young as low culture, we'll go to high culture and see Shakespeare and and Hamlet really, you know, as a young man, it was somehow that kind of I didn't know what I was looking at, frankly, but somehow that felt right. It felt like he was speaking for me in some some sense. And and I constantly was looking for that. I wasn't looking for someone to make me different than I was. I was looking for something to dramatize, to enact, to be, you know, to use a Christian term in the way I understand it, to be sacramental, to be to embody it in community for me and have it feel real to me. But but but it comes from the direct experience that I was having. And, you know, and then I take, you know, Shakespeare as Hamlet's better than something else. And then ultimately, I came around to the Christian framework as, you know, as kind of being more complete, as being more full, being more rich, being being the maybe the source and origin for a lot of these things I had already kind of bumped into as as as possibilities to the point where I I came, you know, a few steps past Tom Holland here and just ready to say, I regard it as true. That's that is that seems to be the case to me. And, you know, it doesn't let me down, but it's not. Again, it's not. I don't or I guess I want to say it's something like I don't want it to be. A transformative thing, because I want it to be in my experience. I want it to I want it to be in my experience. I want or I want it to be my experience. And and that experience is the whole arc of my life. And I don't want to see I don't want to believe in being born again. Now that I know that sounds kind of I don't know where that's going to fit with how you might talk about things, but I don't. Well, it should be born from above because that's born again. Really is not a good translation. There you go. I think I'm OK with that. Born born from above is a little closer to what you're talking about. Yeah, I don't resonate with like psychedelics in this sense. I don't want to have it be some momentary experience. I mean, it's not that I don't want a momentary experiences. I do want momentary experience of exaltation and sublimity and all that. But it has to be the whole thing. It can't just be I'm looking for some moment of trans, you know, it's got to be bigger than that. It's got to be all inclusive. And I don't know if that that might still be a bit abstract in terms of describing myself, but that's that's where I'm at. What I what I hear is is is you I mean, I think in some ways you were formed by peak Protestant Christendom, Christian Protestant Christendom in Europe didn't really struggled partly because you have this all of these tiny little nations in the second, you know, in the last 500 years. And they're just flopping back and forth. The Netherlands can't decide if it wants to be Roman Catholic or reformed. And then, of course, the reformed are always splintering. But but, you know, when I when you look at when you look at, let's say, the civilization that achieved the United Nations and the United Declaration, United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, and you look at the you look at the civilization that sort of produced kind of the turn from the turn from the confessional, the the the varied confessional stances of all of all the little colleges out east into sort of the emerging humanities that that came, and especially with your your cogency with respect to, let's say, the the Western canon. And for you, that not only includes Shakespeare, it also includes Westerns. And and so what I you know, what I hear you saying is is something to the point of you, you, in a sense, happily inhabited this. I think in some ways it was sort of that moment of, you know, when you're climbing, climbing, climbing the hill, you have so much momentum. You get this one point where you just sort of get lift off at the end of the hill until, of course, you go down the other side. And I think in some ways that was the the climax of this particular narrative arc of of Western civilization at the sort of in the middle of the 20th century, where the Christianity, Protestant Christianity in America sort of reached a settlement place until, of course, then the movement of the counterculture says not enough and and challenged idols within it. I don't think I express myself fully, though, if I don't go to a little bit more of a admission of a kind of dissonance that I have in my in my Christian faith. And and I kind of want to describe myself as a as a postmodern Christian. And I don't know if that's a good characterization, but I'll give you a little a little rundown here. Just real quick to set this up, I want to tell about a witness, a testimony that a friend of mine gave just recently. And it's a very standard one. He was he he's in a recovery program and he invited me to go to his his testimony. And he tells what you might imagine, a very, very difficult story of being born when his father was in jail, being the oldest of four kids and being given the responsibility to try to take care of those kids in a dysfunctional family where there were drugs and alcohol and some degree of conflict and even violence. And he feels that he failed his siblings because he was responsible for them. But of course, he was only 15. And how can he possibly do that? And then he gets older and he just recapitulates that in his in his adulthood. And it it is a big disaster. It's a very difficult story that he tells. And and then he has, you know, kind of a bottom out experience. And in that moment of that bottom out experience, he, you know, he he describes Jesus coming to him directly, he describes a very direct, real experience of Jesus coming into his life, into his backyard and lifting him out of this. And he then his his life is transformed and he becomes a, you know, it takes time. I'm not I'm I'm his life is transformed. He becomes a different person. He becomes a Christian. He becomes a leader in these programs. He's he's he describes himself as as bringing Jesus to these people and saving their lives. And and there's no real. Well, I mean, that's the story he tells. It's very profound and it's very real. I set that up because I'm going to tell another story about myself. And this is going to sound a little weird. And I hope it doesn't. I hope I try to keep it short, but I'm going to tell a story. It's a parable. It's about my brother. My brother lives in Portland, Maine. And I, you know, I kind of keep in touch with my brother, but I don't know what's going on with him. He's he's on the other side of the country. And so if I start with a kind of, you know, kind of direct experience kind of notion, I really have no knowledge of what's going on with my brother. Here, I'm now doing a kind of dime store version of the modern the development of the modern. OK, sense experience is all we know. I know nothing about my brother. This is inductive reasoning. This is bottom up. This is, you know, kind of. Epist, you know, epistemology of the empirical type. But of course, that's not really true. I do know about what's going on with my brother. My brother lives in the same kind of world that I do, and it has kind of metaphysical constraints to it, and therefore I know he's living in that world. There's one world. It's one way. And he's living in those constraints. And that's a kind of deductive logic. It's a principle that defines what the particulars are going to be. And that means that my brother is bound up in that same metaphysical experience. Just to put a point on this, to make it clear, it's a little quirky, but I know that my brother is not levitating. And I know that because in my world, levitation doesn't happen. And I'm not talking about some trick, you know, some trick with magnets or something. I'm talking about levitating. And so I know that. So that's a kind of that's the rationalist view. That's the world is ordered. The world is one way. But now we come into the problem because my brother calls me up and he says, you're wrong, Jim, I do levitate. And now I'm like, but I'm but I'm seeing him live this out. I'm seeing him insist. I'm seeing him teach his children about this. I'm seeing it affect even some people in my life. And now I have to kind of look at my brother and say, what is going on with my brother? And there's some options, you know, he's he's joking. He's he's being cynical. He's lying. Or we could say he's a liar or he's insane or he's. Ignorant. And then the real question comes is, what is my posture relative to my brother? What am I going to do with this situation? Because there's one thing I'm not going to do, and that is change the metaphysics of the world. I am, you know, the way the world is, is the way the world is. And then I can phrase that in a kind of Peugeot way for me. That is to say, for me, the kind of, you know, Jonathan talks about this like the the solar system view of the solar system is nested in the flat earth. Right. I'm going to the phenomenal experience. I'm going to stretch that to the objective is nested in the subjective. But the thing that I don't know that Peugeot emphasizes enough is the that the objective in it being nested in the subjectives remains objective, that is to say it. It sits in the subjective as the objective, meaning it's not modifiable by my sense of things, by my desires about things. I can't it's immutable to that's the point about it. In fact, is that it's immutable. And so one of the things I can't do with my brother is say, oh, yeah, all right. Well, I guess you do levitate. That's not really a possibility. The rest of the possibilities are unpleasant. I can argue with my brother. I can try to make a case, you know, do a PowerPoint and try to convince him that he doesn't levitate. I could I could reject him. I could exile him. I could feel myself superior to him and I could talk with my buds about how immature and and unworthy my brother is. And that's in the end, the the position that kind of I think we're in. And this is what I meant by postmodern, where we are embedded in our own subjectivity and that kind of relativity notion in postmodern is real. I think. But it's also got this this character of a gap between us and our and our fellow fellows. And I and this gentleman that I talked about, this friend of mine, who talked about his his experience and the woo of his of his encounter with Jesus. You know, for me, that is levitating. And and and that's, you know, that's a that's a gap between me and him. And I can do these things that I was just talking about with my brother. I can think, you know, well, we could do a psycho psychology or something like that. But all those all those things don't get at what you know, the question is how for me, this is a real tension for me, but it's something I think I've come to. I don't know. I wouldn't say comfort because it's not comfortable. I I'll just give you another example of this in my own Christian faith. I I for me, it is an objective fact that the Book of Daniel was written sometime between the year 200 and the year 150 A.D. That's that's an objective fact for me. And I can't see it in any other way than that. And that has all those implications that I'm sure you're well aware of as to what that means about how I look at the text of the Bible, what you know, what it might be for the text to be inspired, maybe even what my attitude about miracles is and all sorts of other things. I go to a church where I don't think there's one person in that church who would agree with me on the dating of the Book of Daniel. And I don't know what other I don't know what the world of Christianity is and what they say about this about this issue. But it is it is the way my Christian faith pays itself out is that I'm I'm in that community and I want to be in that community. Yeah. But I but one of the things I can't do and one I do think just for I don't know, there is a moral reality that says we should not live in dissonance with that, which is objective for us, we should not. The world is for us away and we need to be in a certain sense comfortable in that. And so living in dissonance with that for me is not an option. But it's also I but it's also coming to a kind of maturity about. You know, I don't just I don't know exactly how I want to. Well, frankly, with this friend I talked about, I don't even want to talk about stuff. The reality of what happened to him is profound and it is not to be touched or you know, kind of denigrated or disrespected. So anyway, that's that's where I know what you have to say about that. That's me. Oh, you're certainly not alone. Right. Yeah. So, yeah, I wonder, I tell this long, elaborate thing and it's just a common thing is like, no, it's I think. You're a minority in the church, as you just described. Yes, but you're certainly not alone. Oh, that's true. Yeah. And. It's there's a. It's there's a. This tension that you feel is. Is more common than than your particular stance with respect to the rest of your church, that's more common because that that scales, that scales all the way out and it scales on various different axes. You know, I know these. You know, these, you know, I've made some videos lately and there'll be more coming out where we're reaching peak, we're reaching peak Christian reformed season soon when I when Senate starts, I'm probably going to be doing commentaries because Senate's on YouTube. And so because I'm not a Senate notical delegate, I can pull out salient speeches and say everybody's just watching is the blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. But it's going to be when I watched it's like that person said that thing here, that means this is coming. So, you know, that's my area of expertise, as it were. But with respect to your, you know, when you talk about your friend and his speech and the reason that you you can't and you won't in some ways. Sort of. Maybe what that that person's story is holy. Absolutely. And you recognize that and you you sort of. You know what we do, what we do with our lives with respect to the holy is we sort of put it in a space so that we can in some ways avoid it, and that sounds really weird coming from a pastor, which is supposed to supposed to be drawing people towards the holy. But if you look at what the holy is, nobody goes into the holy of holies, you know, one guy once a year, whether he likes it or not. And. And and so those. So so you've got you in your church in this other larger frame. And. You at least have the. Decency, the love, and I think the good sense to look at your friend's story and sort of be hushed by it, but all of the dissonance that you feel, just like with your brother levitating, I think in some ways. Gosh, how to talk about this stuff. It's so hard. In some ways, that's that's our most. Human quintessential thing about being human that we bump up into the holy and. Have you ever read much Frederick Beekner? No, you know who he is? Oh, gosh, there's. He was a he was he was a main line I think you'd really like him. He was a main line Christian writer. You should start that. He's got some really famous books, but to me, my favorite book of his is called Lion Country and it's a story about a man. There's and it's hard to get the book by its now. Now you get it sort of in Book of Bab with all of his his bad books. Beb is a pastor who lives in. Untourist Florida, who has a diploma mill. And he both is rumored to have once he's a faith healer and he's both rumored to have once raised the dead and gone to jail for child molestation. I just found I just found that book. Yeah, the Book of Bab. And so there's a journalist from the city who decides that he's going to go. I'm going to give away some spoilers here, but the book is still much very worth reading, he's going to go down and expose this guy for who he is. Because quite clearly, no one raises the dead. The child molestation is easily believable. And the and the diploma mill is exactly what we would expect. And so he goes down to Florida and he winds up having a relationship with Bab's daughter, who sort of equal to the journalist, you know, is trying to live neck to trying to sort of live in this space, just like you described of, you know, your brother levitating and your good friend meeting Jesus in the backyard. And, you know, what Vickner what Vickner winds up doing so well is. Is sort of leaving that holy space as holy because. There's nothing you can do about it. Yeah. Yeah. And this is my version of kind of what I was trying to talk about as postmodern in the sense that that whole thing puts a moral demand on us. It puts a moral demand on us as to how we're going to treat each other, not even just treat each other, what our attitude is going to be. You know, again, am I going to exile my brother? You know, and and and the answer is no, I am not going to exile my brother. And but that's a moral thing. And it's a moral thing that stands in the face of some idea, you know, that maybe creates, I don't know, some dissidence, but how important is the idea? And and that's, you know, that's something that colors my faith and I mean, it makes me, you know, kind of come up with these these propositions that I. That are part of my faith, that I'm a kind of a kind of a a radically non confessional kind of person. I see in the in the history of the church and even in the present church that confessionalism just is usually a problem. He's usually destructive. And I don't know that the I don't know that the scripture really argues in favor of it. But, you know, but I'm a conformist. I go to this church and I I'm a member and I and I try to be in communion with I try to be in communion with that confession. So it's a little little bit of a kind of a attention, a conflict, not not attention. It's not attention. A way in which I can. I can say both of those things at once. I can say, I don't know that the. You know, idea structure tends to Trump, these other things. Faith is higher than theology. This is how I put it together. You have with your friend and your brother is is is holy in a way. It's not it's not holy like your stance with respect to the levitating or the Jesus in the backyard, but it's self-sacrificial in a certain way. It's it's it's saying, I know the world is one way. It's one way for me. And I know that's the way it is. But I'm but that's not going to drive what I, you know, what I do, how I how I love people. Yeah. So well, and, you know, and I look in the story of David, David and Absalom and and in that story. You know, the Absalom story, of course, gets going with a rape, you know, Absalom's half brother rapes Absalom's sister. And David does nothing. And, you know, you see this, you see this tension growing and growing and growing. And it finally breaks out in the murder of one of David's sons. And David still does nothing. And then, of course, Absalom then begins to start a coup. And before you know it, there's a civil war and David's mighty men aren't going to have it, so they finally take matters into their own hands like they've done time and time again for David and in a very bloody and brutal way, put down this revolt. And of course, David has told his mighty men, don't touch that boy. Absalom. And so, you know, right there, it's obviously not the same kind of tension that you feel with the levitation or Jesus in the backyard. But it's it's it's these it's these things that we bump up into where we know the holy and part of what secularity said is holiness is just a part of religion until, of course, you start reading Shakespeare and T.S. Eliot and and authors who are atheist and authors who are not. And you begin bumping into the holy all over the place. So then you suddenly have the problem in in pluralism. Wait a minute. How how on earth do we deal with the holy? Yeah, yeah, definitely. Yeah, so that somehow but somehow that's a picture of what my spiritual would be. That's exactly why you belong in this little corner. I mean, because if there's totally if there's anything that's true of the poor trip, Parker on Twitter always sort of shakes his head at me like Vander Klee, you're just you're just a you're just a magnet for heretics. And that might be another one. But it does allow me that being here and I don't know why it's persisted, well, mainly because of you, I think, but because I could have easily drifted off along the way, but haven't. And I think it's mostly because of you. But but it allows me to, you know, I don't know that I was ever there's lots of reasons why I'm still a part of that church and go beyond just what I've talked about, but but it allows me to be there in a in a health in a healthier way. It allows me to love and go know and be with those people in exactly the right way, exactly the way that I should be. And and so that's that's a positive. That's a good thing. And then I can come over here and, you know, kind of express myself. And I, you know, it's a lot of a lot of depth and reality to to living. And and. I don't know. That's a that's the end of that sentence, I guess. Well, I, you know, I think for me, it's very much the same. You know, the Christian reform church is in this existential right right now. And. You know, my for me, the Christian reform church has always been on one hand part of the Christian reform church is this. Let me just step in one comment, because, you know, John Vodonk said that he wanted the quest part of this in there. And the part the part of that that I think is you may be getting out here and I've maybe been talking about as well. Another thing about this is that the the the whole story or the neighborhood of this this problem of a spiritual home is that that has has high stakes. Yes. And it kind of encased in that or embodied in that notion of quest. It's not just, you know, being part of the local fandom of the football club or whatever. This is however you ultimately define the end point or the metaphysical structure you put on it, it's always high stakes. Yeah. Yeah. And no, and it is and it is for me because. I mean, I Phlebas is probably watching Phlebas is Christian reformed and Phlebas has has told me, said, you know, I Paul, I really wanted you to be the great apologist for the Christian reformed church that would go out and multiply the Christian reformed church into the world. And I have I have certainly not achieved that. And and so for me, part of. Well, while on one hand, the cake is baked and the core is there and I do have I am high in openness. Another part of me is also kind of a father of the estuary where when we gather these people who come into the church building for an estuary meeting, but there's not they're not coming to service on living stones and they're not taking communion, is where what what how are we supposed to understand the Christian reformed minister doing this? Or shouldn't shouldn't I be shouldn't I be the guy that's dragging people into the opportunity to make an altar call and to give a clear to give a clear presentation, you know, the dunk, you know, the dunk struggles with that more sometimes in his context than I do because of the particularities of his church. And. So, no, I, I'm, I'm, I'm with you, maybe not in the same ways, but this, this bumping up into the holy or the sacred or the unnameable and not just not being able to know what to do with it, except somehow always having to try to figure out how to live with it. So that's why I started with the home is not tranquil. No, no, it's not tranquil. And and, you know, it's going to be interesting to see where the talks go because, you know, the dunk is talking about these little shells on the Camino. When the dunk thinks about home, he thinks our quest, you know, especially he thinks about the Camino. And when Vervecky is thinking about prepping for this thing, he wants to study groups of people that don't have houses. Right. And it's like book homeless. Yeah. Yeah. And so it's going to be interesting. It's a little and there's not too much of a hint from anybody actually as to what they're going to say, no. And yet probably everything that everyone says, all of us will hear it and say, that's kind of what I expected. Yeah, it's probably true. That's which which to me makes. And this is this is. You know, as I as I think a lot of people ask, well, what on earth are you doing? I mean, a lot of people want to know what on earth am I doing? And a lot of me says, I'm not really quite sure either yet. And then some people say, that's bullshit. OK, but for me, a conference like this after the conference, there'll be videos for people to watch and you'll get to see the talks. But I can go to YouTube and watch YouTube's of Woodstock or you know, other events that happen. But for me, you know, I've been to a few of these things now and. The the vitality of it is is not necessarily on stage, and it's it's awfully hard to know, just like sort of the holy and the sacred, when it will sort of leap up and bite you. Yeah, I can't I can't I can read stories about recovery. But when I but when my friend. Gives that testimony, it's an entirely different thing. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And and so being there, that's, you know, I spent a lot of, you know, kind of time gathered around this little campfire. And I'm happy to make it, you know, incarnate. Well, and I really appreciate you sort of a part of what so so these conferences are different now, too, partly because, OK, so there's there's more VanderKlay out there than anybody wants to listen to. Peugeot and Verbecky are also easy to find on YouTube. Then Don, you know, he's in that estuary thing, whatever the heck's going on with him. But now there's there's also all these other I mean, you can go and see the craziness of Grimm Grizz and his savings throws Chad the alcoholic. I think of Grimm. I think of Grimm Grizz and his rolling the dice is very much this moment of, you know, you mentioned this before, that it's like that moment where I'm deciding, you know, what what am I going to do with my with my brother? And it's wisdom. So so now not only not only do we have, let's say, people who are going to be on the stage, but the real fun of these conferences is meeting, you know, and now that we've done this, the whole bunch of people are going to come up to you now and say, I watched your talk with Paul and I I heard about your brother. And your friend with Jesus in the backyard. And they're going to tell you a story. And some of them are going to be, you know, and they're going to try to try to show me the data about the Book of Daniel. I'm sure some, you know, that's going to come up. It's certainly going to come up. But it's in the. You know, I guess part of why I keep doing what I'm doing is, again, not just the fact that sometimes I, too, live in a space that I it can't contain all of me. So I need another place for more of me to go out to. Definitely. Certainly that's a good way of putting it. That's a good way of putting it. But but it's also that dog gone it if the people aren't just so interesting and not always in a pleasant way. It's going to it's going to be fun. Yeah. What have we done here? Oh, well, we should we should entertain questions. All right. From the comment. OK, you all in the comments stream, if you want to ask a question, just in all caps type question and and then we'll maybe we'll let some of you characters in. We need the Hobo Shanties campfire songs set so that we can sing a lot and try to go to the campfire. I'm not going to camp, but I'm going to try to go over there. I hope. I don't know where it's going to be. Oh, I am, too. I'll give you a ride. The dog is going to have a car for me to drive. But just just the fact that I mean, it is it is the most insane thing that our campfire song leader is a Sikh who loves American folk music. So to me, that's that's just the craziness of this whole thing. This let's see. How did the author of Daniel know about the Korea? OK, we're not going to get into Daniel talking. OK. All right. Thanks. OK, here's the question. What do we got here? Paul, can us lurkers expect from the different upcoming conferences? I've watched the channel for years, but not really involved in the Little Corner Internet Discord hierarchy. I don't know what can I how to describe what to be expected. I'm not sure. I mean, I don't know. Do you have any thoughts on that, Jim? I mean, I've both been to plenty of conferences in our life. I expect people to get to know each other and be surprised by getting to know each other. That was that's been my experience in in in conferences where you go and you're not I'm just going to sit over here and watch the lectures. But you'll meet people and you'll get to know them immediately. It happened when I was in in Seattle. I met Benjamin Boyce, actually, at the conference and talked to him for a good long while. It won't be hard to start making connections very quickly, I think. And I think that's what the that you can expect that. Yeah, yeah. No, I agree. And it's you know, this conference, it's going to be a little bigger than Thunder Bay. And these conferences are always I mean, bigger is kind of nice if you want to fill out the budget and do some things. Smaller is nice if you want to sort of get a chance to talk to the people you've seen on YouTube. So it's I would I would say go to a conference like this looking to trying to find a way to make new connections with other people who really enjoy what you enjoy. So Gavin, Gavin Palmer, the song would be by the rivers of Babylon by Sublime. I'll let people chew on that one. Oh, what did Gavin ask? Yes. What song would I sing at the at the at the fire? Oh, OK. Question is this event to come a Jesus revival tent meeting with Peter, Paul and Mary? Well, it would be nice if Mary were there. Mary Cohen, I'm speaking of. Yes, yes, indeed. Yeah, you know, and she was important. She was kind of I didn't meet her. I want to I spent a couple of emails with her, but she was she was important to me. Yeah, she. And again, she was I mean, talk about someone who could be dogmatic. Oh, man. But what a joy. What a what a solid woman. Oh, so knowledgeable, wise. And experienced been a lot. Oh, and that's part of the funny thing. I mean, people, I think right now in our current cultural moment, people sort of have this allergy to dogmatism. And they don't realize that, you know, and this is sort of Bickner really integrates this into Bev as well. If if you're allergic to dogmatism, you're really going to miss a lot of very worthwhile people in this world. So all right, Ethan. Um. That's right, Ethan. I've delivered a few babies in my day, but not recently, not least, but not recently. So Ethan lives up in Reno and he very much wants to come, but his wife is very pregnant, so no, you should stay home. Congratulations. There'll be other conferences. Oh, that's that's the cat. That's the question you answered. OK, Rivers of Babylon, Rivers of Babylon. OK, I have a brother like Dr. Jim's. How do you show love to someone like that while setting boundaries and defending them? Yeah, it's hard. That's the whole point about it is that it's hard. And, you know, we've been through this with this last five years of whatever has been going on, you know, kind of in the more kind of media slash political sphere. And it's it's been difficult in my family, I'll tell you, it has. And but it's not. We haven't let it, you know, break us. So I don't know the answer to that question. What do you say, Paul? I think. Loving people, some people are easy to love, some people are hard to love. That's just the truth. And I think in some ways. One of the one of the most important qualities to develop if you want to love people is durability. You just have to you just have to not as best as you can get triggered and to hang in there, and that's, you know, I love the old version of you know, long suffering is is the older Bible's talked about that. And to love to love someone well is to learn to be long suffering. So. OK, how does Peterson's idea that you cannot let a loved one drown you as well as relate to y'all's convo? Yeah, I what I'd say to this is I'm talking about me here, my experience. I can see circumstances have, you know, I know there are circumstances in which those choices are harder than they have been for me, I think. And so I don't know that I want to judge other people in their situations. And I don't know how to I don't know. You're the pastor, Paul, I can I can give that to you. Well, you know, on one hand, that's a that's a very that's a very important thing. And so all of my children were lifeguards at one point or another, because that's kind of our way to getting them into the public pool. And it's one of the first things you teach is that don't let the person you're saving drown you. And as a pastor, that's an important thing that you learn. But there and these are in our movies, too. There are also moments and usually they only come once or maybe twice in your life where you have to go in knowing full well that this person will drown you and you're going to die anyway, and so you say, OK, I'll do it. And in many ways, that's sort of at the heart of Christianity is if, you know, Jesus wasn't going to let himself be drowned by us, you never should have come. So that's and in these conversations, you know, there I talked to I talked to some people who will say you shouldn't talk to this person because you're platforming them, it's kind of like, yeah, yeah, yeah. I don't know how much of a platform do I really have? And so I I have to take my cues from Jesus and Jesus. People complain to Jesus about how he platforms people to the whole story of Zacchaeus is fundamentally about platforming, so we're all going to drown at some point. So every now and then, you know, you say, all right, they might drown me, but I got to go in and I don't think that's very non-Petersonian. All right, I'm going to let's see. We just have five more minutes. I'm going to drop the link in in case someone wants to come something they need to say or do. Any any any good books or movies you've watched lately, Jim? My family has done a kind of group thing on silence and the book or the movie both. Oh, really? I haven't watched the movie. We committed to the book after my son and I already wrote, watched the movie and we had a really it was very interesting because I find that that to be difficult. I didn't even find initially I wasn't feeling like I would like it. In fact, in some senses, I didn't like it. But then the conversation really made it much more enriching in my my kids and and we had a really very good conversation about it. So we're going to keep keep that going. And it was complex. We don't want to get into that right now, but it's it's it was good. It worked. It's interesting. I remember the first conversation we had, you sort of talked about the fact and this sort of touches on it, too, that it seems like you've you've developed a culture in your family of of in some ways doing in your family what we've sort of done in this little corner of the Internet, too. Yeah, yeah, I think so. And it's more complicated than that, obviously. But, you know, my son has a sensibility like me. So he drives to kind of engage with more and more ideas. And he's always going off in different directions than I would anticipate. And he's more creative and artistic than I am. He's got a band. He does music. Everybody should listen to the band. It's called the slow. He's got a song called Mexican Gandalf. I mean, come on, how can you how can you go wrong with that? And, you know, another one called Eucharistia and it's this Christian themes in it. Anyway, plug for the band. It's called the slow. You can find it on Spotify. All right. But, yeah, I mean, all my kids are different and how many kids do you have? Three. OK, two girls and a boy. And my wife and I have been married since the mid 80s. And my family still have four sibs and they're all still around as my parents are. So we're all getting together regularly. And my son just moved to Santa Fe. We were just down there. It was fantastic. So fun city. Fun place to live. All right. Question. This is from Mark in Ireland. The doctor, Jim, get a chance to watch Tom Hanks Western News of the World. I have watched that. I can't remember. I'm not going to be able to sketch it out. But I but I did watch that. And that was just recently. No, that's not what I was thinking. I haven't seen it yet. I've heard good things about it, however. Did you see it, Paul? I have not seen it. Yeah, I have not seen it. So, all right. I think, yeah, Matt, we have not had much chaos introduced. That's absolutely OK. And maybe it's a good time to maybe it's a good time to land the plane. Again, Paul, thanks as always. I really love to indulge my my desire to just talk and I really. Oh, a chaos monster has a little bit of chaos. All right, Sam, hey, would be heretics and a real one comes into the room. And I talked once before. Long while ago. Yeah. I was wondering not to psychoanalyze Peugeot too much, but I still think it's interesting that Peugeot didn't either become Baptist on the other end of his spiritual journey or French Catholic as a way of sort of returning back home, but this orthodoxy is sort of like finding a different home. And and I wonder about that. You know, like I'm not saying no one can ever change denominations or change forms of Christianity, but it always is that I've got to not say that. Right. But it always establishes a weird precedent. And then how is that going to affect your children's interpretation of the precedent? If you like so now in Peugeot's family, right, grandparents, French Catholic parents, Baptist parents, grandparents go from French Catholic to Baptist parents go from Baptist to orthodox. You know, it's a it's a difficult thing to integrate into a family multigenerational identity when there's a conversion. So I was just wondering what you thought of that. That's a good question. It's maybe a bit of a challenging question. Yeah, I don't know. We stay CRC. Well, at least up till me, we'll see what happens with my kids. Well, what's your answer, Sam? It was the arc, I think. Yeah, I mean, it it is an arc. And I think that I think it will be interesting watching this new generation of orthodox converts that we see so many examples of in our corner of the Internet, how intergenerational durable this will be, let alone how durable over five or 10 years in these individuals lives will be. You know, I'm hoping nothing but for the best. But I don't know. I it seems like a way of. Avoiding rescuing your father from the belly of the whale sometimes to find a different truth, instead of defending and trying to fix your own tradition, you pick a different one, defend Western civilization. Actually, I kind of like Eastern civilization. I'm just going to go over there, you know, and I wonder I wonder what the long term effects of that will be. And I'm struggling with similar issues myself. But well, here's an interesting comment. The orthodox denominations are very nationalistic. Are we going to have sort of a an American nationalist orthodoxy? Catholicism basically had to transition from being a bunch of ethnic enclaves into being a national version of American Catholicism took a while to do that, right? Like it used to be in like the 19th and early 20th centuries that you could tell which Catholic church you were supposed to go to because the saint would be a person from your country of origin and if you were Irish, you would go to St. Patrick's and, you know, et cetera. And that it took a while for that to desegregate. And it's like it hasn't completely happened. There are some churches in Chicago that are still very, very Irish and some that are very, very Italian, et cetera. But we don't think of the Catholic church anymore as being racially denominated. It's just the Catholic church in America. And orthodoxy seems to be doing that more slowly. And that's partially because they don't have a pope and their hierarchy is still very nationalized. But theoretically, the way that the Orthodox Church is operating in America isn't the way it should. There shouldn't be a church that is here in Chicago that's underneath the Greek patriarch. And then if I go over there, that church is underneath the Russian patriarch. They should all be underneath the patriarch or something like that. Right. Or at least the Chicago patriarch. Yeah, that's what I was saying about you could deconstruct orthodoxy's history in the way. I mean, they've been very, they have the history, I believe, of being very nationalistic, not just nationalistic, but married to the political structure of the of the of the origin country in a in a simple, you know, in a connected way. Which I think that's right. And you're exactly right, Sam. I mean, if they were to be consistent, we would have the Bishop of Chicago and the Bishop of Sacramento, and instead they just act like Christian denominations in North America. But of course, it's falling apart elsewhere as well, because if you look at what's going on in Ukraine, you know, and the efforts to split. I mean, they have their schism problems just like everybody else. Yeah, agreed. Sam, it's good to see you. I still follow a lot of what you do. You're you're a really smart guy. I really I really respect your output. So you and Hank is worthy. You had to mention Hank. I had to mention Hank. He's I got I got a problem with your polar bear theory, but we could have another. All right. Is it time to land the plane, gentlemen? I'm ready. All right. Good. All right. Really appreciate to see you in a week. All right. Very good. Don't have too much fun with that.