https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ja_jd9N7dJc

 I just wanted to make a couple brief comments on the Kathy Newman interview. Of course, many of you have seen it already. If you haven't watched it, you've got to watch it. And I think this is Jordan Peterson at his finest. And I love the one that the video that Lawrence H. does of counting, debating. Just a couple of brief comments. Number one, again, read Neil Postman. And I couldn't watch this video and not think about the way that television and YouTube – I'm using YouTube, so it's not judgment – but this shapes the dialogue. And Peterson, again and again, wants to bring her back to a certain way of thinking. But the entire format of this show is about gaining political points, gaining social points, moving an agenda forward. And so point two is just look how Peterson mastered the moment, not by getting upset, but by – and we know this guy talks fast, the guy gets emotional, but he kept a hold of himself. He didn't berate her. He didn't demean her. In many ways, by, in a sense, by not fighting the fight she wanted to fight, he won. Except, of course, in that one moment – and it's not except, that's in the one moment where he basically got her in her own trap. He won. And so great fun. Watch the video. Watch the counting. I thought the counting was just genius. And that's why the internet is fun. So I just wanted to say a couple things. But also read this book if you've never read it. And if you read it once, like I did 30 years ago, read it again because it talks a lot about how social media and how the way we are engaging with one another is an illusion and how it's – and how we can do better. So thanks for watching.