https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OCZM18dRCf0

 Well, Rafe, this is I know before my trip up to Seattle, we were talking about maybe getting together then, but that got COVID. So wasn't able to do that. No. What would you I'm happy to do anything. I saw your conversation with John. And that, you know, I'd seen parkour and, you know, you see videos of it. That's really cool. Look what they're doing. I had no idea all that was behind it. And so I'm really curious about I'm just curious about you in terms of, you know, if you watched any conversations on my channel, how did you grow up your religious background? What happened to that? All that sort of thing is I'm really interested in. Yeah, so I grew up. Oh, where should I start the story? So my my great grandfather, Stan Janicki, came, I think, originally from Poland, first through Chicago and then homestead in the Skagit Valley in Northwest Washington in 1920. So 100 years ago, they were Polish Catholics. And then my my father, my grandfather on my father's side was a Mormon. He grew up in the Mormon church and then left the church. And then he was the second husband of my grandmother, which was a big kind of no problem. My mom's side, they were kind of mainland Protestants. But my grandfather on that side was from British Guiana. And so he it's hard to know what his life was like before he came to the States because they kind of changed their identity. They were they were classed as colored when they came across Ellis Island and had a lot of shame about that and changed their names, took an identity claiming to be English rather than a Portuguese ancestry. There's all that all that kind of background and story, which is fun. So anyways, my my dad and my mom both for their own reasons, I guess, kind of entered the counterculture and went towards the hippie lifestyle. So my grandfather, they took the original homestead, which had served as a shake mill and logging stuff and then became a sorry, I'm breathing a little bit hard. I just did some sled work to help myself wake up before I did. But my grandfather turned it into a cattle ranch. And then my dad became a vegetarian and planted tons of tree apple trees and everything on it. And it became a little bit of like a not quite a hippie commune because my dad owned it. But it's a big attraction for hippies. And my dad's a world famous natural building architect. He's been featured in National Geographic, New York Times, Better Homes and Gardens. What's his name? Dreamcribs. Sun Ray Kelly. How do you spell his first name? S-U-N like son. Yeah. R-A-Y. Wow. You find him pretty easily. Cool. So wild. My parents are both spiritual and not religious. And they didn't really make any intention to try to bring us up with anything. I remember early on in my life reading the Baha'u'llah Gita with my parents. And they went through different phases. My name is, I go by the name Ray, my name is actually Michael Raphael Sathru Kelly. And funny story about that. So Michael and Raphael are archangels, right? Right. And then Sathru is a New Age Church of Christ ascended master. My father met in a guided meditation when they were trying to get pregnant with me. Wow. So funny history to my names. My older brother's name is Kai Razoos. Wow. And then my little sister's name is Kumara. And that's a Hindu child goddess. So my parents were both interested in that. My dad's a big, big fan of Ganesh. And they were both yogis and taught yoga. And my dad traveled in ashrams in India. So I was around certain stuff like that. And then I had a mentor who came into my life when I was eight years old, who was involved with the Native American religion. There was a group called the Red Cedar Circle that followed the teachings of a man named Johnny Moses. And it was apparently a specific religious tradition here on the west coast called Sosuis. So from like eight to maybe 13, 14 years old, I was sort of practicing that with him. But I was pretty skeptical. And then after that, I pretty much became a hardline atheist. Up until pretty much encountering Jordan Peterson's work. Well, what was the path to atheism? I mean, so I'm always interested in religious migrations, and how to Christianity in between them. What was that? What was involved in that for you? Well, I think that... I don't think that there was any kind of... Spirituality wasn't very satisfying, right? When I first got into some of like Vervecky's ideas, and before that, Peterson's ideas, I joked that I was going to become religious and not spiritual. Because I mean, the joke within the counterculture, this kind of... I think of there's like a class of people. I think class is one of the great underappreciated aspects of the sociology of the United States. It's kind of something that we pretend doesn't exist, but it's actually far more explanatory than we realize. And I think that there's a kind of... I would call them the gentry, the educated gentry that exists within our society. And particularly, I guess, on the West Coast and probably on the East Coast, there is a strain of that, that went through the counterculture, and the appeal to spirituality, the counterculture. And then New Age, which I think is quite distinct also in its own way from that older, hippie style of spirituality. But I don't think that either of them were particularly functional as religious traditions. And so I think that for those of us who grew up with them, we saw these people who professed belief in something, but it was mostly incoherent, as far as I could tell. And I was much more philosophical. When I was little, my mom... Like one of my mom's favorite stories about me is that she tried to get me to clean my room one day. And I said to her, did God make a mess when he made them mountains? And your mother thought, wow, this boy's gonna be something. Yeah. And she remembers going on hikes with me, and I'd run up ahead, and she'd find me just talking to some random stranger about the nature of God when I was three years old. So I had this very philosophical, almost theological approach at a young age. But it was also very influenced by my older brother. My older brother is an engineer. And he's... Story about my older brother is that my mom asked him when he was like, I think three years old, what he wanted for Christmas on Christmas Eve. And he said a banana. And so he gets the banana the next day, and he's so excited about it. He's just like over the moon for this banana, which all these other toys are just meaningless to him. And she swears that he was testing whether Santa Claus actually existed. Because he was like, if I wait for the last minute to request something, will he show up? Because he just has an intense... He really doesn't believe in things unless he can touch them and see them. And that's much more, I think, his nature. But I saw that he was very effective, and that he was very good at things, and that his mind worked in a... There was a clarity to the way that his mind worked that I didn't see in the people who were claiming spirituality around me. And so I think for me, he kind of was a big gateway into it. I was practicing the Sisyrius thing, and it mostly seemed like games of pretend and all these. And also, the joke was there's a lot of ex-Catholics who were finding another thing to be guilty about. And so everyone was getting up in front of this circle and confessing all of their terrible sins to the group and how they weren't following the spirit correctly. And they used to do these dances, and everyone claimed to have spirit powers, and you're supposed to not interrupt the dances because the spirits would hurt you, and everyone was doing black magic to each other. And I just thought it was all bullshit. At a certain point, it just all seemed like bullshit to me. So I think for a lot of people who are my age, atheism was very attractive because it had at least a very simple and clear epistemology that didn't seem to result in lots of bizarre claims. Have you read Slate Star Codex's article, The Godlessness That Failed? Yes, yes, yes, yes. That made quite an impression on me reading that. I thought it was quite interesting. I think I was part of that generation where beating up on the people with religious beliefs was a way of demonstrating your intellectual rigor. So I don't know if that's a good answer to your question. That's a good answer. That's a really good answer. I always take notes when I do this. No worries. So you pretty much became an atheist. What was going on in the rest of your life? Because we've got your... I don't know how you feed yourself if parkour is your day job too, or if there's another element to that. Yeah, so the other aspect of this was, maybe a little bit more about my story, is I was diagnosed with ADHD and dyslexia at a pretty young age. I had clear learning disabilities. They wanted to hold me back after kindergarten, and then after first grade, and then after second grade, and then after third grade. My mom petitioned me through each time, but then after third grade it was like they were not going to let me go through. I had that mentor who I mentioned who happened to have moved next door, and he offered to take on my education. So I had a number of other things that had gone in my life that had caused me to have a fair amount of trauma, I guess. And I was a pretty angry young man, plus the learning disabilities, which my father shared. And he really had a hard time watching me do that, and as someone that kind of go through the same trauma that he did, and as someone who's part of the counterculture, he really just wanted to take me out of the school system and just sort of let me be feral. And there was a lot of fights between my parents about that. And my dad's response to that was to kind of just pull away from me emotionally. He just couldn't really deal with the fact that I was going through this. So I felt very abandoned by him. And so I was kind of an angry kid. And I had this mentor who came into my life, and he at first he was just watching me a lot for my mom because she was working full time and trying to take care of the kids. And we started roughhousing a lot. He would just let me fight with him as much as I want. Really like very intense physical fighting. He said I used to black out and call him the shadow, and I would just attack the shadow, which I can't remember either. So it must have been processing some pretty intense emotions through that. So I was doing that. And then when the next school year came around, we decided to let me, to have him educate me along with my mom. They were going to share the duties of educating me. And so I went over to his house for the first lesson, and I pretty much thought that I had just got off scot-free, and I wasn't going to have to do anything. And he sat me down and had me write lines, and he's like I don't really care what you say as long as you write words, you're going to write a whole page of words. And so I just wrote, fuck you, fuck you, fuck you. I filled the entire page and I got up and left. That was the first day of my education, but he didn't care. He didn't care that I was taking my anger out of him. He gave me that space. And then over that summer, it started reading The Lord of the Rings to me. And so that story was so profound for me that it gave me a motivation. It was like I couldn't get it fast enough. I couldn't wait to have somebody else read to me. Now, the story about me and reading is weird because I learned to read multiple times. I learned to read very, very fast, but then when I was asked to do rote memorization, it regressed me. So I read full novels by the time I was in second grade, and I was reading sixth grade level stuff about the rainforest. I was really interested in the rainforest and wolves and nature, but I tested as if I had zero ability to read at the end of it. And I was not very willing. At that stage, I was traumatized by the school system. But through that, it was like all of a sudden I got interested in it. And so we read The Lord of the Rings, and then I think we went on to The Iliad and The Odyssey. And by the end of that year, I was reading that material to myself. I went from there, I went to Norse mythology, and then I kind of discovered that my ancestry was supposedly Celtic, which turns out not really to be true, but my last name is an Irish name. So that's the way that I thought of myself then. So I got into all the Celtic mythology and history and started reading. We read the lives of the twelve Caesars and all this kind of interesting stuff. So by the time I was 13 years old, I actually started reading anthropology literature from the local library. And I read every book that they had, and then my mentor, Gopal, he found this guy, Peter, who was a local government who was an anthropologist, and he gave me access to his whole library. So when I went to community college at 16 years old, I'd already read 30 ethnographic monographs. So I showed up in this class for my intro anthropology class, and the teachers were like, what are we going to do with this kid who's completely socially inept because he's been kept out of the school system, has a huge ego about his intellect, and is asking questions that a grad student might ask in the middle of our introductory class at community college. So yeah, so that was the other aspect of my education. And then there was the physical aspect. I started training martial arts when I was six years old. And I went in and out of the martial arts for years, but it was always a really powerful outlet for me, connected with the rough house and play. And then, so going back to the Lord of the Rings, I ran around woods a lot with a sword pretending to slay orcs. Right. And I remember around 12 years old having this really profound sense of disillusionment that they weren't actually orcs or dragons. I couldn't grow up and become Aragorn. There were no apprenticeships for rangers out there. And so at that point, I really stopped being as physically active for about three years. And then the 1996 Olympics showed up. And I watched Keri Strug land that vault on her broken leg. And my sister had been taking gymnastics. And I just was so enthusiastic about it. And I started taking gymnastics. I was watching Michael Jordan came back. And so it's got, like my friends were into baseball and basketball. And I got into playing basketball a lot and got into strength conditioning through that. And then the other thing that I kind of want to mention here is I started working with kids at 12 years old. Like in that red cedar circle, I'd be at these gatherings and their parents would be busy. And there'd be these three and four-year-old kids. And I'd end up kind of just taking over and playing with them and doing the same kind of roughhousing that my mentor did for me. And I noticed that like every kid that I ran into had this huge desire to have intense physical play and they weren't getting it met. And so lots of people really appreciated the way that I played with their kids. And so I ended up getting a position kind of as a mentor. And my best friend passed away. He died after complications from surgery for having his spleen taken out. And I kind of took over as the big brother for his little brother. So I went through all this. So yeah. So then fast forward, I guess. I was looking for a job in college and I saw an opportunity to teach gymnastics. And I thought, hey, I don't know that much gymnastics. I've only been doing it for a few years off and on. But I figured I was good with kids. So I started doing that and I fell in love with the teaching. And I realized that anthropology had kind of been destroyed by postmodernism. And I decided that I didn't see a future there. And I saw a future in being a coach. And I with three classes left to go, I left university and focused on coaching. And then right around the same time, I discovered parkour and fell in love with parkour. So yeah, a lot of story there. A lot of background. Great. So great story. Yeah. So yeah. So then, you know, parkour for me was like, you know, maybe this is me reinterpreting the story, but my older brother showed me a video of David Bell, right? And I feel like, and I think I don't think I articulated this in my mind, but I think the feeling was, okay, you can't go slay a dragon like Sigurd, right? You can't go defeat Sauron like Aragorn and Frodo. But there's actually dragons out there. They're just inside you. Out there. They're just inside you. And when you go jump between these buildings like David Bell, that's your opportunity to slay the dragon with yourself. That's your opportunity to confront your fear. There's the chance to do something heroic. That's what I think I was really thinking was like, this looks heroic. This calls me back to the quest that I saw in Tolkien, that I saw in Iliad, that I saw in the Odyssey. And it was as if someone had taken gymnastics and everything I loved about gymnastics. And think about how heroic that moment with Keri Strug was. It was as if they ripped the top off and was like, this is the guts of it. This is the evolutionary root of where gymnastics come from. And that's what Parkour was for me. And so right away, there was this intersection in my interest between evolutionary biology and ethnography with the physical culture that I was experiencing in the martial arts. And there's this desire to think of like, how to move like a hero, right? What are those characteristics? In Irish mythology, there's actually a lot of Parkour, right? In the Finian cycle. So it's also in the Ulster cycle. But the Finian cycle is one of the three major mythological cycles in Irish mythology. There's the mythological cycle, which is the stories of the gods, which is mainly in a book called the Book of the Takings of Ireland. The Leveh Gubala Edirin. And then the second one is what's called the Ulster cycle, which revolves primarily around the hero Kukulin. The most famous one is the Tandukuli, which means the cattle raid of Kuli. And then the third one is the Finian cycle. And I guess there's a fourth one, which is the historical cycle, which we start having kind of semi-historical kings who are the mythological figures. But the stories of Finlacool are around this idea of this kind of band of rangers, very much like Aragorn's rangers, who protect Ireland and live in the forest as kind of like hunter-forger warriors. And they describe what it takes to join the Fianna. And in order to join the Fianna, one of the tasks is you have to be able to run through the woods, and you have to be able to jump over a log as high as your shoulders, and pass under a log as low as your knees, and pull a thorn from your foot without breaking stride. And you have to do all of it without losing any of the hair from your braids, because they wore braids at the time. And that's like that's the description of parkour skills. And the most famous story in the Finian cycle is the story of Jermit and Grannia. And in the story of Jermit and Grannia, Jermit is one of Fin's lieutenants, Fin's the chief of the Fianna. So Fin's an old man at this point, and he's lost his wife, and he wants a new wife. And so he's offered to marry the daughter of the High King of Ireland. But she's young, and he's now very old, and she's not interested in marrying an old man. And so she asks a number of the Fin to take her away. And finally she comes to Jermit, who is famously beautiful, and he's been blessed by a goddess with a love spot and everything. And she puts a taboo on him, it's called a geish in Irish literature, that he can't refuse her. So she uses magic to make him unable to refuse her, and forces him to take her. So they flee. So then Fin sends all of his warriors to try and catch Jermit. Jermit's the best of them, right? So in Irish mythology, like Norse mythology is, especially like the sagas, is pretty realistic. Irish mythology is like Marvel. It's like one warrior will kill 50,000 people in a day, no problem. So there's a scene though where Jermit, Fin sent these warriors, and Jermit's walking, and he sees them, and they don't realize what he looks like. So he goes up to them, and they're like, oh, we're looking for Jermit Uduna. And he says to them, oh, I just saw him yesterday, right? And he's like, he did this feat, it was incredible. You should, you know, like, he's the greatest warrior I've ever seen. And they're like, oh, what's this feat? And he's like, well, he ran up a spear and stood on top of it. And they're like, oh, we don't believe it. Oh, like, we could do anything that he could do. And he's like, well, I'll show you the trick. So he runs up the spear and stands on top of it. And then half their army tries to run up the spear and stand on top of it, and impales themselves. But then he comes back the next day, and he's like, Udwino, have you seen Jermit? It's like, yeah, I just saw him in the afternoon after I saw you guys. And he showed me this feat, it's incredible. I've never seen anything like it. And he has them set up two swords between two men's shoulders, and he jumps up in between them and lands, right? Exceedingly light bounds, what they say over and over again. And then, you know, the army tries it, tons of them die, right? And then the third day he comes back, and he's like, oh, yeah, I saw Jermit. He did this incredible feat. He took a barrel full of mead, and he rode it down this rocky cliff, right? Keeping his feet on it the whole way. And a bunch of their army goes down and dies like that. So now he's reduced the army to a small size, and then he kills them. But these feats show up over and over again. This idea that the warrior isn't just able to use a sword. He's able to run and jump and climb and do flips. It also shows up in the North Sagas, too. There's a beautiful North Saga called Null Saga. It's my favorite of the North Sagas. And there's a moment where one of the characters, Scarpe Heaton, they're about to have a big fight on an icy river. And he jumps across the river, lands on the ice, and slides across the ice and chops the top of a guy's head off while he's doing it. This is like a legendary thing that happens. It's more realistic, right? But it's still this idea that there is an aspect of being able to move with the environment that wasn't captured in the martial arts that I've been training. I could punch, I could kick, I could grapple, but I had to be able to move in the environment. And so I was interested in this idea of like... Okay, one more thing. In the Red Branch, Kuhulun, the hero Kuhulun, he's described as having all these feats, like the feet of the salmon leap. But we don't actually know what those feats are. And so I was like wondering, what are they talking about? And I think it was like some kind of acrobatics. So I was like thinking about this idea of we need to combine acrobatics and martial arts and parkour and all of this somehow had to do with the heroic quest back in 2006. Yeah, so I don't know, maybe it's a good time to stop my story for a second and see what you think. No, no, that's great. And it's, I can see it. In some ways, the whole story, of course, I teach the Bible, the whole story of the Bible is the marriage of heaven and earth. And Christianity has in many ways, and when I say heaven, we're thinking in a sense, the abstract, the intellectual, the spiritual, and it tends to sometimes minimize, it fails. Christianity can get very gnostic-y and sort of floats up untethered and Protestantism, especially, can have a sense to do that. Now, the reform tradition for me usually emphasizes, okay, the goodness of creation and the resurrection of Jesus and all these ways to try and keep things tethered. One of the things that I note in the deconstruction of many Protestant Christians is in fact, sort of this, it's just sort of float away from everything. And actually, the practice of the faith, it's not, there's, people do it, but they don't realize what they're doing because they'll say, well, you should go to church on Sunday. Well, for many people, going to church is about the only physical thing because so much of it is in their head and sort of floating up away from earth. And so, I've been, in terms of watching the, what's the, hollowing of Christendom, a lot of the people are looking at movement, physicality. A lot of the emphasis for many of those people is to find their way back into materiality. And in some ways, atheism is sort of a Protestant movement for that. In a weird way because atheism is both, some forms of it is sort of materialistic. It begins from below, but it also tends to be smart people with sharp tongues on the internet making verbal stories, but there's nothing to do as an atheist, whereas a lot of spirituality, contemporary spirituality that I see people gravitating to, yoga studios, all of this stuff is very physical. And so, your story for me makes a lot of sense. I've got some dyslexia. I had a lot of trouble reading when I was early in school and still visually reading is not the best way for me to get words inside my head. But your story makes a lot of sense for me. And yeah, your story makes a lot of sense for me. And it doesn't surprise me at all. Cool. So I think this thing about unifying heaven and earth, I guess, or spirit, mind, body. With the wall move play, we've come to this idea and maybe this is another kind of little ramble about what we've done, but to fast forward it after many years of teaching these retreats and incorporating- What kind of retreats? Okay, I'll give you the history. So then, I think this is the grounds of the conversation that I think would be really interesting. I feel like what I have to offer is a really unique history of practice of the body connecting to these ideas that I don't see represented as well. I started following Jordan Peterson in 2016 and then I encountered Jonathan Pagiot's work through that. I remember when you had a video about what philosophical pragmatism was and why that explained Jordan Peterson's fudginess around his answer to the question of does he believe in God? And I just couldn't understand it until I saw that video. I was like, bam, that was nailed. So I've been following- I think that video was what, 2017? 2018. 2018. So it's been a while, right? I've been following this stuff and I had that conversation with Vivek and he and I have some more entry points together, if that makes sense. Whereas talking to yourself or talking to Jonathan or some of these other people, it wasn't as obvious where the conversation would be. But as I've observed this and as I've had those conversations, what I hope to be is basically the voice for the body in this conversation to some degree. And so I think that you really nailed it there, but maybe if I can give you kind of the rest of the history, then it will get us up to an interesting point. So 2006, I was experimenting with the idea of martial arts combined with strength, conditioning, crossfit, with parkour. And had this ethnographic and mythological perspective on it that I think was pretty unique. And I worked with another guy who had a similar idea. His name was Erwin Lacour, who went on to found something called Movemat. And we tried to work together, but ultimately it didn't work for a variety of reasons. One of the things that made it not work was that I didn't feel like I was mature in the development of any of the physical things. I feel like I was still really at the novice level in understanding of these things. And I didn't feel like Erwin was past that either. And I felt like if we were trying to put together a synthesis of these methods, we needed mastering at least one thing. This guy named Scott Sonnen, who said something like, if you would be a master of everything, start with one tool. And so I was trying to figure out and so I was like, there's this huge field of things that I really want to be able to synthesize, but it feels inappropriate to try to synthesize that before reaching something like mastering one of them. And I was very involved in the parkour community and I had an opportunity to come down to Seattle and start teaching parkour. And it was like the second or third parkour teaching program in the country. And I did it. And so I spent the next few years focusing on parkour at a very deep level, on a very technical level. And I went kind of very sport oriented, tons of research in the strength and conditioning world. And eventually I was called back to the woods and there was problems, there was a misalignment of vision at Parkour Visions, which was the company that we had co-founded. And in 2013 I left. So I wanted to just take people out in the woods, because I loved training in the woods and I had started training more and more in the woods for a variety of reasons. Whereas parkour at that time was very much perceived as an urban sport, even though it didn't start that way. It started as both, but it was perceived as it spread as urban. So I wanted to take it back to nature. So I set up this camp called, that we called Return to the Source. And I had a video called Return to the Source, which was featured by Prana. And it was about parkour returning to nature. And between the time that we started promoting that and the time that it actually happened, I left that business. And now all these ideas that have been bubbling up around the synthesis of these visions came out. And so I taught that and I asked all the people who'd signed up, like, would you be okay if we kind of expanded the scope beyond parkour? So I taught that workshop. It was three days in the woods. And that was the longest that we'd ever been together like that as a group in a teaching circumstance. And you could tell right away that it did something very different from just group classes. And so we came back the next year and did it for three days. And then I think the next year after that was five days, and then seven days, and then eight days. And we've been doing it for years now. And then I've been doing two-day retreats all around the world. And I noticed that, well, so in 2016, I traveled to Europe to teach a series of workshops. And while I was there, I contracted Lyme disease. This was the first year, I think, that we went to five days. So I came back from Europe and we were teaching a seminar. And on the third day of the seminar, I had the Lyme disease, because it's a 28-day cycle. So I got hit by the Lyme disease, not knowing that that was why I was sick. So I was badly, badly sick. So luckily, I had one of my apprentices who was a wilderness awareness school teacher who was supposed to teach that day. So like, I just left them at my father's property and went to my mom's and like, cuddled under a blanket with chills and fever and puked a bunch. And when I came back, it was like, there had been a group of people and now there was a tribe. And so we had two people there who were capoeira, who were capo ristas, who really knew the songs. And they led all the singing and there was all this group, like emotional processing and talking that happened around the campfire that night. And there was another guy who had a guitar, was a really great musician. They were all sharing this. And then I'd already noticed this in that there was a capacity for emulation that came from multiple days of training, where you'd see people make quantum leaps in physical performance that you never saw before. But the next day in that particular seminar, it was like incredible. And so we started to, and then I noticed this thing where I'd ask people at the end of the seminar, like, what was most meaningful to you? Or what did you take out? What did you want? And always I expected like, oh man, like my Kong vaults are way better. Like that one jump was incredible. And always the number one thing people would say is the people, right? I've never felt more connected to people in my life. I've never felt more connected to nature. And so I realized that the movement is a really powerful medium and it's something that we deeply need to reconnect to. But most people are more desperately craving connection to other people, connection to self, like actually being separated from so many things that get us into our monkey mind, right? Get us into that gadfly of attention, but they don't know who they are. And when you give them a chance to be able to positively construct that identity, it's really meaningful. So that same time, right? So if that was August of 2016, okay, so October of 2016, YouTube serves me a video of this, you know, froggy voiced Canadian professor on the Joe Rogan podcast. And I'm right leaning or was right leaning. I have trouble wanting to map myself to any side of the political spectrum anymore. But at the time I was right leaning and I thought what he was saying politically was pretty interesting. And I appreciated his commitment to free speech. And that part of the interview was interesting, but there was a certain point where it shifts over from a conversation about politics to a conversation about meaning. And that was like my eyes got this big, right? It was huge. And what had happened to my teaching was that I had noticed that I was very scientific and I was breaking things down and being very technical. And I had read lots of scientific literature and I could tell people the statistical findings on what type of intervention would have the best impact. And people respected that and it gave me authority, but it was relatively low impact. And every time that I told them a story about my own life and my own history, it moved them and I could see their eyes start shining. And so I was like, what is this? What is narrative? Why is it powerful? What do I do with it? And when Peterson started talking about his archetypal structure, it was like, okay, fascinating. So I generally taught for many years, basically starting in April through October. So I would have those winter months off because I taught outdoors from traveling seminars. So between October and March, I think I consumed about 120 hours of Peterson's lectures. And before that, I was just reading, I was listening to like strength, conditioning lectures and stuff that would theoretically have much more impact on my ability to help people as a coach. I kept asking myself, why am I listening to this? Peterson's so tangential, right? You know that you're generating insight through it, but sometimes you're like, where am I and what in the world is going on? So I come to my first seminar, which was in LA at a place called Chatsworth Park with these beautiful big oak trees. And I start teaching the seminar. And at this point, a lot of my teaching was sort of implicitly generated. I don't know how to describe it. It's like, I had organically generated all these teaching points. And I couldn't remember them outside of the teaching context. But I knew that there were these beats that I would hit when I was teaching, and then I would recognize the moment to hit that beat in the teaching context. So I was like, I couldn't write down what I taught in the seminar, but I knew that the same things would come up. So I'd recognize the moment for one of my teaching moments. I was like, this is a big beat that I'm going to hit. And all of a sudden, it'd be like, I'd be downloading my own insight, and Peterson's insights would just map right onto it, and I'd be bringing them together. Yeah. Yeah. I did a video right before I encountered Peterson called the Self-Worth Esteeming. And what I talked about in that video was basically this idea that we as a culture, we're suffering, we're anxious, we're depressed. And we've made this assumption that if we like ourselves more, if we focus on creating an emotion of kindness or like for ourselves, that that will solve. And it seems to not work because we're getting more depressed. And if anything, what it seems to be doing is making people more narcissistic, which is actually an insecure position. And so what I said that was what you should be doing instead, it's trying to build a self-worth esteeming, right? That in the long term, your self-worth is much better addressed by becoming the type of person that you would admire than by trying to admire the person that you currently are. And so I think that's the thing. And the other aspect of that was I thought that our culture in many ways has robbed us of those sources of meaning that give us something to admire, right? Because I imagine like in a village, you might not be the fastest or strongest or best looking guy or best looking girl or the best singer, but you might be the best hunter or you might be the best weaver or you might be the best diplomat or you might be whatever. There's lots of ways that you can share value. But we've tended to sort of narrow people to how they can earn and then how sexy they are. And I think that a lot of people's self-worth is undercut because those just aren't a sufficient base. Sorry, I don't know what daughters are interrupting you. Totally fine. Yeah, those aren't a sufficient base for real self-worth. Those were the ideas that I was working with right before I encountered Predictions. And I think you can see how that maps really close. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Okay, so two years of, you know, then, you know, eventually, I don't know, I've consumed, the last time I counted it up, I'd consumed over 240 hours of Professor Peterson. And I've read Maps of Meaning and it took me a year. It's a hard book, right? So, okay, so then through that and through encountering Breveke, I came to this realization that fundamentally what it seemed like people were looking for, what they were getting out of the seminars and why they said they were life-changing to me, was they were looking for a reconnection with themselves and their bodies, a reconnection with nature, a reconnection with a community. So we've kind of talked about these four pillars, movement, mindfulness, nature, and community. And my friend Frank Ferencich has a similar, he calls it the mandala of health. It's not mind, body, spirit. It's mind, body, spirit, land, tribe, and ancestors. So that's kind of, you know, it's the connections, right? And this is what I'm talking about with Breveke is this idea that like religio is what affords connection for us. And so we're trying to rebuild this. So my last conversation with John, which just was uploaded yesterday, was about kind of this intersection between the work of the nature connection world in John Young with this philosopher, David Abrams, who wrote a book called Spell of the Sensuous, and Peterson and C.S. Lewis, because I happen to have all those things, ideas sort of generating in my head at the same time. And at the end of it, at the end of it, that conversation, John said to me, you know what you've done, right? And I said, I don't know, what do you think I've done? He said, you've created a church. So, and what's interesting about that is we have this map of our method, right? It's like, well, so we're trying to help people build more meaningful lives. And we can help them through helping them with body practices, with mindfulness practices, with reconnecting to nature, with building community. And then those things kind of immediately afford a sense of meaning through like changing the way they are in the moment. We can think of that as like the being mode, right? In this moment, I am in play, right? I'm in the flow state. I'm in community. But they also afford a self-transformation over time, which is that heroic archetype, the divine double, right? Self-transcendence, whatever you want to call it. And we were starting to map out like, what is that? So we said, well, what are the barriers to physical practice and the barrier, barriers to solving problems? It's like, well, can you understand what the problem is? Can you see what it is? Vision, right? And then there's, can you articulate it? Can you say what it is? Because you can start to see a problem, but when you can describe it, you have so much more power over it. Right? So there's the power of articulated speech. And then do you have the strength physically to overcome a problem, or do you have the strength emotionally to overcome a problem? And then do you have skills to apply to that problem? So we have these archetypes that we sort of talk about, which is Horace's vision, right? And Socrates is the word, right? And and Thor is strength, and Hercules is strength, and Luke is skillfulness. He's a Celtic god, you know, could be Mercury, if you like the Romans. And then you can look at the Buddha for like emotional strength, or you could look at Socrates. They're both great archetypes. But as I was looking at that list, what I realized was that you could have all of those characteristics and be evil. And that in order for those characteristics to so you can be great and not good, in order for your greatness to be in service of goodness, I cannot imagine a principle that is better to be in service of than agape, right? And that's where I encountered, you know, that's what I got through Viveki. And so then at the top of my pyramid, a virtue is logos and agape. And so in some sense, like I joke that I'm, I don't know, I'm a non theist Christian with Daoist and Buddhist tools. And I'm also interested in animism and some of these other things. But I don't know, it's, I don't know, maybe this is where I pass the baton to you to tell me what I'm playing. That was great. I'm fascinated by this whole thing. I'm fascinated by this whole thing. And it makes complete sense to me. I guess my question is, what can I help you with? Because I'm, you know, you know, actually, you know, I was thinking about the conversation we're having today. And I watched some of your conversations with John. And I was, you know, I, so at the same time, I'm mind reading, because of course, I've got this weird audience. That's, I've got a bunch of these Christians over here, and they've got some of their own, you know, the people who have always been Christians and never left that fold, they'd be a little reactive. And then I've got a bunch of these Peter people who have become Christian now post Jordan Peterson. And they're, they're pretty chill about this kind of stuff, because they're not too reactive. And I've got these other people over here, the non theists who are kind of following me along and, you know, it's kept tolerant of my Jesus stuff, at least they're not, they're not Jesus allergic, like, like a lot of people can be. So and that's just post Christendom, you know, traumatic, traumatic effect syndrome. So so but I was thinking last night about how, how, you know, if someone would come to me and say, Why doesn't Christianity have the kind of movement discipline that say like, Hinduism had with yoga, and some of the eastern religions with martial arts, I would have to on one hand say, I don't know, maybe it does. And it was set aside, that's a possibility. Number two is maybe that was simply part of the other cultural packages that cultures had in order to survive in pre urbanization. And of course, your anthropological, you know, there's those questions that arise. And then other smells and bells traditions of Christianity will say, Oh, no, we're doing all kinds of body stuff. It's just you Protestants have abandoned it as you are floating away in your proto gnosticism. So it can go lots of different ways. But missy illogically, in church, I really see the logically, missy illogically, that's the churches, that's, gosh, boy, good call. The mission of the church is to spread the good news and that, and that school is missy ology, just like all the ology, ology is the is the knowledge of mission. Right. Missy ology is the knowledge of mission. And, and right now, in terms of the kinds of defections that Christianity is seeing, putting on my Christian professional hat right now, many people in the church, the church has done nothing to serve the physicality of believers, and there's zero place for that within Christianity. And I see that as a problem. Now, that opens me up to a whole bunch of stuff over here with the Christian people. But if I was too scared of things, I wouldn't be making videos on YouTube. So I'll brave that. But and so, but and for that reason, you know, I can really see how listening to your story and where you've come and what you've learned it all sorts of lays out that we are, you know, and especially in Christianity, Christianity, unlike what many Christians believe, Christianity is not the assertion that, well, if you love Jesus, when you die, you're this spirit, soul thing goes up to be with Jesus and end of story. No, Christianity is a resurrection, and you get a new body. And it's, it's the end of the age of decay and my body has now suffered for, for so for 56 years of decay in this world and a certain degree of negligence on my part. And, and, and, and, and one way or another, the age of decay will take my body from me. And Christianity says, this is not the way we're meant to be. And, you know, it's, it's so much fun. I watched a couple of your videos, and I realized that a lot of the stuff you do in your videos, I dream about that I often I'm flying dreams, I have a lot of flying dreams, but I also have, I also dream about the kinds of things that you do. And one of one of the favorite someone else mentioned this recently, I think it was I think it was Jackson, you know, who made the Lord of the Rings movie. When I was a kid, one of the favorite parts of the Lord of the Rings was the great run of Aragorn, Gimli and and, and Legolas. And why did that so capture me? It remains one of the favorite parts of the novel. And, and it's strange, because, you know, that's not a great battle. It's what is heroic about that run. And I think you are on to so much right stuff. And the way you laid it out, I think, you know, really, in really connects, well, what part is Christianity playing? And it's, it's, of course, the, the center of the message of Christ, I'm currently working on the Sermon on the Mount for my sermon series. Well, it's, it's this, it's this agapic love. And, you know, I, of course, I have all these Christians in my following. And many of them were very reluctant to go with John Vervecky videos, they were a little annoyed, I get angry letters from people asking me why I'm using him in my videos, I should stop that now. And yeah, yeah, yeah. But, you know, when he talked about agape, the Christians all sort of paused and said, Oh, my, I haven't heard a preacher talk about agape like that. And so he got their attention. So whatever, whatever their complaints about John, well, he said that agape piece, so we can't really say he's ignorant of us. So and so the way you laid it all out now is really exciting for me, although I get excited easily if you haven't noticed. And I, yeah, so what can I do for you, because I'm very interested in your project. Yeah, I think there's a lot, I think just having these conversations, having a forum where I tell the story from the perspective of what's the religious history of this? Where is that? Where does this go? Like, you know, that's an interesting lens, right? Everyone's always going to ask me about movement, but like, Oh, you know, what does it mean that my that that I came like my, my, my father and his family were called the bastards, right? Like their grandfather called them the bastards, because, because their mother got divorced before she married her father. So there's these there's these layers of trauma there. And I'm convinced that that there's so much Christian grammar, and so much religious underpellings to our society. And we're so ignorant of it, that it's it's dangerous. I think one of the huge dangers that we face as a society is we haven't wrestled with how much this is the bones of our father, right? So, but I don't understand it, right? Like, I mean, I understand pieces of it. But but part of part of my quest, I guess, is, is it just understanding myself, right? I'm, I, I did not grow up in a Christian milieu, right? And yet I did. Like, you see what I'm saying? Because, like, I say, I think I'm an atheist Christian. I think because I don't know, because I, I don't know that much about it. Like, I've tried to study it. But there's so much there's so much that is implicit in our cultural structure that probably derives from these Christian antecessors and trying to break them out and understand where they come from. Like, Vervecki's lectures have been incredible in understanding that and thinking about, you know, how Thomas, it kind of separates the body from, you know, the mind and how. So yeah, well, sorry, I'm going in too many different directions. So we'll try to. That's the ADHD thing. I can follow. Yeah, so I speak that language. Just I'm interested in having these conversations about what is, what is in this heritage and how do we wrestle with it? Right? I think that's the right question, right? How do we wrestle with the heritage of our religious background and realize, you know, this is a sort of a hard turn. But I think that we're that, you know, James Lindsay's argument that we're facing a, a kind of religious awakening in the social justice movement and that it is a religious awakening that is not aware of what it is or what it or what it comes from. And then that probably makes it quite dangerous, or I shouldn't think sure makes it dangerous. I'm not satisfied with the Sam Harris argument that we can just get rid of this or the Stephen Pinker argument that that the enlightenment arises, su generis, and that the things that come before it don't have anything to do with how it arises. And I don't think that we can solve the problems that we're facing without it. And, and I think that like, I think that the principle of agape is a stronger principle to orient yourself around than anything that's been, that's been proposed otherwise. So, so whether we accept the resurrection or we don't accept the resurrection, if we throw that baby out with the bathwater, I think we're throwing out, if we throw logos and agape out with the Christian bathwater, I think that we, that we collapse. And I'm not very excited about what potentially, I don't think the CCP and, and the, the, the Marxist Confucianist hybrid is a better world system. So, so there's that. And then there's also like this, you know, so as I've started to explore all these aspects of character development and, and how does, I think there's something about parkour that's almost incipiently spiritual, right? There's a lot of people who come into parkour requesting for something. And at some point, and it's very satisfying initially, and you get that flow experience, but you could also think of flow experiences as in some way along the religious continuum. And there's a point where, where just the physical act of the practice doesn't get you what you're looking for anymore. And so, you know, I've seen some of the biggest guys in this, Daniel Abaka, he's probably the best, he's probably the best athlete in the parkour community. I mean, it's like David was way ahead of everyone else, David Bell, and then Daniel was, and maybe Luley Goroslav, but there's just a couple of guys who just stand out as absolutely, you know, phenoms, so far by everyone else. And Danny basically goes through this phase where he like becomes extremely interested in his Christianity, and he's talking about like, you know, I can do these things because I trust in, in Jesus to support me when I jump off this building. And then around the same time, a couple of other big guys in the community got really into like the super weird David Icke stuff, and tons of people got into Jordan Peterson, tons of people also into social justice stuff, you know, like atheism plus, they want parkour plus, right, you have to, you have to be in social justice as well as this. So, so there's always been this reflex in me to say, like, don't go into those dangerous waters, stay in something very simple, be a movement coach, like do this, like, you know, what is your scope of practice? And a lot of anxiety about that. But then every time that I talk about these things, the students give me this feedback that that was the thing that they liked, that that was more important. And so I keep doing it. And I remember I literally woke up from a dream one day, and I said, to teach anything is to participate in the art of being of teaching being a human being. And everyone who talks about their great chemistry teacher, great English teacher, great whatever teacher, that teacher is not great simply because they explained chemistry well, the teacher is great because they provided, they afforded that individual insight into life in general. And so you, if you teach whatever you teach, you don't have to, you don't have to have a coherent complete worldview that you can give to everybody, and you shouldn't. But letting it have a spiritual dimension, for lack of a better word, I think is actually only allowing it to serve people. So in some sense, I feel like I'm like, I'm, I'm, I'm a parkour pastor. Right. And so those of us who are, who are fulfilling that role for these communities that are self generate, we could learn something from those communities that have been doing this for a long time. That's one reason to have a conversation is that it's like, you know, maybe there's a God shaped hole in the human psyche, and we can't escape searching for it. And maybe within any community that starts getting people towards something very meaningful, there's a pastor shaped hole, you know, it's built. Yeah. And so having a way of, of beginning to learn the best practices for that is a good conversation to have. So that's a, that's an interesting start. You know, it's so I in my sermon last week, my, you know, people asked me why my church is so small, you just gotta, you just gotta feel for these poor people, because I'm having all these conversations with people that are totally strange to them that they wouldn't understand. And all of this stuff is leaking into leaking into their sermons. And they have no idea why I'm why Why do you talk about these things? They're relevant to me, you know, so I was I was, you know, I saw the the rebel wisdom video on game B with with Jim rotten, and, and Brett Weinstein. And, you know, of course, as a pastor, I'm doing all this stuff on the internet while I'm trying to keep my day job and keep the church alive. And so and of course, they always wander into each other. And, you know, I thought of the fact that, you know, Jesus, Jesus didn't write a book. Jesus spent three years pouring himself into a fairly small group of disciples, you know, they're, they're the 12 and the 72 and then the 120. So there are men and women in this group. And, you know, then, pretty radical. Yeah, and and and all all of the accounts from the disciples themselves are that they had no idea what he was talking about through most of it. But they sort of read, you know, the stuff they remembered, we get through the Gospels. And, and then he is killed in the middle of a violent culture war by, you know, both sides. The only thing these two sides can agree upon is that the world is better without Jesus, so they kill him. And then his disciples begin claiming that he begins showing up to them, and that they could touch him and that they knew it was him because they could put their hands on his scars. Yeah. And you have to say, Okay, that's a wild story. But then the fact of the matter is that these disciples, and these stories changed the world and convinced the world that this agapic shaped love is the key to human existence and fulfillment. And now the heart of this agapic love can be seen, I see us Lewis writes about this well, can be seen all over the place. Every mother gives birth to a child, and every mother gives birth to a child at the risk of her life, often in the ancient world at the cost of her life. Every parent raises a child at the cost of their at the cost of their time. And so therefore, to a degree at the cost of their life, that children are incredibly expensive to raise properly. That's right. And, and on and on and on. And you see this agapic love all over the place. And the one illustration in the Bible of the seed dying and coming to life with sort of mirrors, all of this stuff in mythology about the dies dying and resurrection God, you know, the one example of this amongst the Jews is amongst the one group of people that didn't believe any of that other stuff about all these other pagan gods who are running this cycle, and they claim it actually happens. And it's like, Wow, that's a lot to take. And so, you know, when I was listening to your talk with John Vervecki, I was struck by the fact that, you know, here as you, you know, by your story, it makes just, it just fills in the package of, you know, the movement in the woods, and, and you're doing it, and you're entering into a flow state, and, and you get at a certain level, and you know, somehow, this isn't enough. And your body's going to tell you that at some point, because as you talked about, you know, you start getting injuries, why do you start getting injuries? Well, you're getting older, and it's hard on the body. And so then, of course, the, the young practitioner becomes the teacher and has wisdom to give and so on and so forth. But the, the, the Christianity says, or, you know, the God shows up in the temple in the book of Isaiah, and God has a commission for Isaiah, and Isaiah's got to do some things, and everything's falling apart. And the angels show up and they cry out, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, means he's transcendent and far above everything. So he's higher than any Protestant can go, or would dare imagine to go. And then they say, and the whole earth is full of his glory. And, and I think part of what that means is exactly what you've described, that if you go into the physical enough, you, you, you, and this is exactly what Augustine, where Augustine went, you know, any path you go into deep enough, you're going to start hungering for the maker of that path. And so, so that's why, you know, none of your story surprises me. And the really, you know, when you were talking, the one author that came to mind when you talked about the fact that, that Christianity is so deep in, in our body, and when you talked about the fact that, that Christianity is so deep in, in our bones here, and we keep finding our father's bones, is Chesterton. Because Chesterton has all these weird passages about, you know, the guy who, who sat on a sailboat away from England, landed back on England, not knowing he's back home. And, you know, having all these discoveries about, look at these people. And Chesterton talks about, you know, what if people from the other side of the world came and we, Chesterton keeps coming around to this idea that we keep digging in only to find ourselves, and that this stuff is inescapable. So again, a parkour pastor doesn't sound in any way strange to me, because, of course, but now you have a problem. You just have different problems than what I have, because, well, what does this mean? Sort of like the, you know, the pastor of the IDW. What on earth does that mean? I've got congregants like Sam Harris, you know. Yeah. So I love you. I love where this is going. I still don't know how I can help you, though. Well, this is helpful, right? Just having a conversation, right? I don't say, when I say I don't know how I can help you, that isn't sort of a dismissal by any means. It's an honest question. Yeah. Sounding board and more. You know, a couple things that have popped in my head that I wanted to just share, I guess, and think about is the role of the body in Christianity. And are you familiar with the work of Scott Atron and Pascal Bouillet and the cognitive anthropologists on religion? No. That's kind of interesting, right? So they have a whole theory of religion as, you know, like, human beings basically have an overactive agency detection mechanism, because it's much better to think there's a bear in the woods when there's not than there is. So we tend to see agents when there's not than there is. So we tend to see agency in everything. And then this basic tendency is very easy to kind of, it's very easy to leverage for cultural technology. If you want a psychotechnology to transmit over time, if you can connect it to that agency detection, then it works better. And part of this idea, though, is that the religions are actually not, I think that there's this very Protestant notion in the West that religion is about espousing a specific belief in a God, right? And I think when you look at religion as a global feature, you see that it's more than that. And sometimes it's not that. So there's these, so instead of you can imagine that that basically like, I believe in Yahweh, I believe in Jesus, I believe in Allah, I believe in Ganesh. Like, you can think of those as far fundamentally the same. And then there's just a difference in the propositions. What the cognitive anthropologists say is basically, rather than that, you have this underlying substrate that gets lots of cultural technology glommed onto it. And those cultural technologies can be very different. So Islam and the thing that it, the functions it takes in society is very different than what the Orthodox Church is in the East, or what the Roman Catholic Church is, or what the Protestant Church is. And those things are quite different from what Taoism does or Shintoism does, Confucius, right? There's functions that society has, right? Like, how do we organize marriages? How do we organize contracts? How do we organize, you know, social gatherings? And how do we create a common narrative and understanding and identity? Whatever those functions are, some of them get kind of connected to this overarching thing in different ways. So I think it's an interesting way to look at it, right? And it gives you a little bit more flexibility in how you're considering these things. But as I was going through this, like, what exactly am I doing? One thing that came up for me was in the West, at least in the post-Protestant West, physical culture is not connected to to religious culture. But that's not the case in the East at all, right? Like you mentioned yoga, but like the same thing is true in Chinese martial arts, right? Why is it Shaolin Kung Fu, right? The Shaolin Temple is a Buddhist temple, right? And the internal martial arts, Ba Gua, Jing Yi, and Tai Chi Xuan, or Tai Chi, are all very specifically Daoist. And they're not just, it's not just that Daoists practiced that martial art, it's that those martial arts were part of a set of Daoist practices that were interrelated. There was a type of astrology, or a type of fortune telling, a type of Feng Shui, or whatever it is, that are all part of this one cultural package. And Shintoism, sumo wrestling, is a game that was played in ceremonies and in celebrations at Shinto temples. That's where sumo comes from. So the idea of physical culture as being integral to some kind of religious structure, or of using physical culture as a means to afford transcendence is very normal on a more wide scale, right? And then there's this question about, you know, Nietzsche's criticism, one of Nietzsche's many criticisms of Christianity is this idea that Christianity had sacrificed the body, right? That the body was something that was profane, that we were trying to get out of, right? There's so much aesthetic, aestheticism in in traditional Christian practice. And, you know, his thing was to reclaim that, to reclaim the experience of being here on earth. And so as I'm trying to understand how we, we wrestle with the Christian tradition, and how, how can we adapt it in some way to, or how do we relate to it in any ways, in a way that allows us to solve the problems that we have in front of us? It feels like, for me anyways, that those, some of these things that have been separated out in the Western tradition, they need to be reintegrated, because we're kind of a disintegrated people. So I'm curious to, to, yeah, sound those ideas out with you, like, what do you know about that? And what do you think about that? And what do you think about that? What do you know about that history? And how do you see, you know, how did we become that? You said, like, atheism, like, if atheism is a is an offshoot of Protestantism, right? Is the stereotype of the internet atheist not the, the, the, the intellectual in the market with the giant ear and the atrophy body that Nietzsche was describing? Yeah, you know, like, when, when Peterson says, don't call me an intellectual and the same tell them, because don't call me an intellectual, right? Like, people are surprised by that. But there's a, there's a reason behind it. Yes, you know, in some sense, in a vervecian type of description, an intellectual is like someone who's overdosed on propositions. Yes, yes, yes. And so I don't accept the proposition of faith in Christianity. And yet I find that the the story affords me profound transformation. Oh, there's so much there. Let me say a few things. Yeah. You said the body is the body is something, you know, the body is something to reclaim of being here on Earth. Christianity is about the reclamation of heaven and earth, not just the harvesting of souls. It is the, it is the story of Christianity is that humanity is responsible for the corruption of God's good intention. And the, so that's, so our death is, this gets really complicated in a lot of ways, a lot of ways. But the main storyline, as I understand it, is that in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, the creation 2.0 begins. Now, what that means, I was having a conversation with a friend of mine who grew up Roman Catholic, is a university professor. If there's someone I know who is a good friend that you would say is deep into new age, she was into martial arts, you know, teaches seminars, Native American spirituality, all of this stuff. You know, he's very respectful for me and in sort of this broadly, you know, respectful of what I do. And part of it's because I work with black people and homeless people. And, you know, that kind of gives me a pass for a bunch of people and a bunch of things. But the one day when I started talking to him about the new heavens and the new earth was the only time that he ever sort of stopped and said, is that what Christianity is looking forward to? And I said, yeah, you'd have a hard time figuring that out listening to a lot of Christians, but that's basically what the text is about. You know, the lion lays down with the lamb, neither will they harm or destroy an all my holy mountain. And so the Christianity does not imagine leaving earth. It imagines earth becoming what a good God always intended it to be. Okay, so there's a cyclical aspect to that. How do we relate to it in a way that solves the problems that are in front of us? I just had a conversation, the one before you talking to, I'll post that anyway, I won't go into it too much here. But one of the most open aspects of Christian theology is eschatology or the doctrine of last things. And that's never been settled in Christianity because the question is, okay, so Christianity imagines the world set right. How does it get there? Well, there's only rough sketches of it. One of the main things is Jesus does it. But that leads to the question, how does Jesus do it? And what's our part in it? And over time, that answer goes through various, various transitions. In the end of the 19th century, Christians imagine that, oh, now that we've got science, Christianity plus science makes new world. Well, that died in the killing fields of World War One. And since then, Christianity has been struggling with, struggling with these issues. And so fundamentalists, in a sense, say, I'll fly away. And the main line has said, no, we're good secularists, we'll roll up our streaves, sleeves and fix it ourselves. And so you can understand the social justice strain, as secular atheist or Christian, they're all sort of continuing that progressivism from the 19th century. It's just taken on different forms now into the 21st century. But these, these arcs go very, they work in very, they're very big arcs, at least big compared to our lives. So what there's a strain of Christian theology that works what's called realized eschatology, which says things like, we, we begin to taste the life of the age to come, we bear witness to it in small places, and we anticipate God finally completing it for us and with us, but we're not sure of the details. And so when I hear about your little parkour church, I think in those terms, because the flow state that you get into those moments of, in my system, I would call them glory, that moment of when you've solved this particular, when you've been able to master this particular physical element, and you're celebrating it in community. And, you know, it was, you've never had a better this this one day of practicing in the woods that that you'll never forget because you touched something that day. And it some of it was you contributing to it, but a lot of it were things apart from you. But in that day, you tasted glory. And this gets into CS Lewis and, and sense such which is this idea of both a, a nostalgia and glory together that you tasted something. And it's sort of like, you know, the heroin addicts first hit, they taste it then and they spend the rest of their life chasing that first high. And so yes, problems will be solved all along the way. But every single solving of a problem brings new problems. And so it's just in the solving of that problem that you begin to taste glory. And, and that's where the what I look at as sort of the ontological argument for Christianity gets triggered. Because, gosh, it's the time in the bottle thing that I talked to John Verbeke about in my last conversation. Or it's Dan Fogelberg, why can't we make love stay? Why can't I put time in the bottle? Why is my body wearing out? And, and, and that's where you see the physical, it's got to be, it's got to be all of the things together. And okay, I've mastered the one, now I'm on to the other. So I don't know if any of that makes sense. But it is the reintegration of all things. It's heaven and earth coming back together. And it's you tasting something that maybe you've never fully actualized or realized, but something in you says, this is what you were made for. Some some things I wanted to pick up there, for whatever reason, one of the things I want to share is, there's an interesting thing, which is that I'm working with the guy who who's helping me with my online marketing, and he's kind of my business partner now, he's come into business just within the last year. And he, you know, he's helped with funnels, he's helped with all these things. He was an online course developer for Oral Roberts University. So you can see the punchline here, right? Oh, he's a devout Christian, right? Yes, very strong believer. Yes, a particular kind of Christian, Oral Roberts, that's keep going. This is fascinating. That is not incidental, by the way. What aspect of Christianity? So go on. Yeah. So he, you know, one of the things that he's very attractive in my work and something he's, you know, he described himself as a Jesus follower, a lot of, of, of Christian history or Christian historical theology is something that he feels is not in tune with what is actually revealed in the Gospels. And one thing that he places a lot of importance on is that idea that, that this isn't a story of souls going to heaven, that it's, that when Jesus returns, the body as well as the soul, the whole thing is united and redeemed. And it all comes out in the kingdom of heaven, which happens right here. Yes. Now, this is not the impression that I get of Christianity, right? This is not the impression I think most people have of Christianity. Christianity is, has been in some sense, or appears to me to have been perceived and to have been promulgated in many ways as a, as a, as you said, as Gnostic as, as a, oh, and he has a real, real passion against Gnosticism. But, but we, we're, there's a, there's a renunciation of the world. That's a big part of Christian tradition and an idea that, that through the profession of faith, we are afforded this potential to transcend the world and transcend our bodies and to enter heaven as a separate place. That's how I view Christianity, Christianity as a whole. And I think that's the separate place. That's how I view Christianity as the, as the primary story that has been told, or at least for a while. So when you say imagine these things being united and it's about the unification of heaven and earth, it's like, how'd that get lost if that's the case? I can see you ready to jump on that question. But, but the other thing it brings up for me is Jordan Peterson and his role in this whole conversation. Because what inspired me about Peterson so much and what made it very different from every other interaction that I have with Christianity was that idea that the kingdom of heaven arises through us proactively becoming the type of people who, who, who have agape, right? Who are, who are not have agape, that's the wrong way to think about it, who are in the process of agape. I think that's a better way of saying it. And I find it interesting because I use metta meditation, right? Which is one of John Breveke's ecology of practices. It's a Buddhist tradition, but it's essentially loving, it's essentially an exercise of cultivating agape in yourself. I sit and I ask, may I be well, may I be at peace, may I love and be loved. And my little adaption to this, I don't know if this is how other people do it. I got one lesson and I've run with it, is I'll, I'll, I'll think about like, what would it mean for me to be well? What did it mean for me to be at peace? What do it mean for me to be, to be, to love, right? I imagine the feeling when my two-year-old daughter runs to me in the morning to give me a hug, right? Like, can I have that, right? I imagine the way that I care for her and can I look at the world in that way? And so I'll sit there and I'll, and I'll do that and it changes me, right? It changes me. Like, that's one of the most profound places that I'm experiencing change right now in my life. I want to come to another place with that around, around kind of the, the falling apart of our culture that's happening and how, how I'm looking at that, because I think that's interesting. I also really want to touch on C.S. Lewis, but I wanted to, I think, I think I'm throwing too many ideas at you if I go through all those. So let's, let's, let's, let's address this little thing that I just said. You talked about your, your line, the kingdom of heaven arises through us becoming the kind of people who are in the process of agape. Yeah. And Jordan Peterson's role in that conversation. Jordan Peterson in this conversation, I mean, I also got a lot of grief from Christians, people beyond my channel. Why do you keep talking about Jordan Peterson? Why don't you talk more about Jesus? Like go to my church channel. I don't talk about Jordan Peterson, talk about Jesus over there. On this channel, I'm talking about Jordan Peterson because I'm trying to figure this stuff out. Why is he so integral? And I, so I was interested, I got interested in Peterson at the same time I was continuing to work through a bunch of C.S. Lewis stuff about cosmological conflicts between the cosmology you find in let's say Genesis one and contemporary cosmology. And my problem wasn't, wasn't, wasn't really the cultural anthropological, anthropological question that it's okay to have the Bible in an ancient Near East text, have a different cosmology than what modern people have. But that conflict doesn't bother me. As a preacher, I wanted to know how I could talk about this, this effectively because modernist fundamentalist thing had made such a royal mess of that. So that got me over to Jordan Peterson. And I began to see that he was very much working on this. Now, the kingdom of heaven arises through us becoming the kind of people are in the process of agape. If I tried to do parkour right now, I would, I would rack myself up pretty badly. It would be a mess. And my doctor would say stop it, because I'm not in any kind of shape. And I have no skills and not particularly athletic. So it would be a freaking disaster. Okay. And this is the difference. This is a difference. We'll come back to that. That's very important. This is a difference between Dallas Willard, who was a philosophy professor at USC, and very interesting Christian died not too long ago. He talked about training versus trying. If I wanted to enter into your discipline, I would become your disciple, and you would assess me and you say, Okay, we need to shape up the diet, we need to, you know, there's some strength things involved. I mean, you would have a list of things that you would have for me physically in order to get me towards and there would be small ways of starting and so on and so forth, training versus trying. People look at the church and and see this is where community comes in because yes, indeed, the goal is to love, but love is not the imagination is is helpful and important in terms of locating the story of love. But where the rubber hits the road in terms of human relationships. Love is very, very hard. It's at least as hard as a lot of the physical things that we do, because people are a mess. And so the story of Jesus is a story of and you talked about the world and one of the funny things about this word world, especially in the Gospel of John, is that it often has a negative connotation. And it's not talking about see this is where it's not talking about it's not talking about the planet, but it is I mean, it's it's a it's this is the problem of time and language. So Jesus, Jonathan Peugeot stuff, right? That's right. That's right. Phenomenal just about these things, the most famous verse in the New Testament, you can find it at football games held up on signs for God so loved the world. Yeah. And, you know, and so then I'll just interject, right, somebody who has been a militant atheist who has said, you know, there's a website on there was on the internet for a long time that calculated how many people God kills in the Bible nurses the devil came up with like 438,000 people. Yeah, yeah, God is a genocidal monster. Yeah. I don't know, there's a point in my life where I just heard like that frame just that phrase God so loved the world. He sacrificed his only son, right? Yeah. It just it's a story. It's a narrative that has so much emotional power. Have you heard this? You know the song Hallelujah by Leonard Cohen? Yeah. Okay. There's a little girl from Ireland who sings a version of it about Christ. Have you heard this song? I think I have. Yeah. I'll send it to you. I cannot listen to that song without crying, right? And that is meaningful to me, whether we accept the proposition or not that the story can move us like that and that by moving it us like that, it brings us closer to the capacity to behave like that. That's something that we lose a lot if we lose sight of it seems to me. Yes. Yes. So anyways, go ahead. Keep going. Well, and you know, that's exactly right. And so then, you know, someone comes to you. Someone comes to you and says, you know, I've seen your videos, and I want to be able to some young person I've seen your videos, I want to be able to move like you do, because when I see you move, I'm just inspired. And, you know, you've read the mythology, and so you've got all this stuff and say, Okay, well, this is how we're going to get you to that point. Well, how are we going to how would you get people to the point of loving their enemies? And well, what do you mean enemy? I mean, an enemy. I mean, so today, I, you know, I was playing around and there's the gosh, why do I do these things? And so, you know, I was playing there's, there's the Scott Adams race, you know, critical or systemic racist challenge. And so I made a video because that was I was thinking about systems and stuff. And so I thought, well, I'm going to put this on Twitter. And I didn't, I hate these people with half a million Twitter followers that actually read their ads. And it's like, Oh, crap, because then he, he said, Oh, this is bullshit. And of course, then I get piled on by the Twitter mob. You get piled on by Scott Adams followers. Oh, yeah, yeah, I got piled on by the Twitter mob. They're calling me all names and that stuff. And that's happening. And at first, it starts happening, you know, my little corner of the internet is unusually pleasant and delightful, because it's full of people like you. And so it's happening to me. And the first instinct in me is to, is to have the the trollish mocker within me speak because that guy is in there. And, and, and then another part of me puts a pause on that and says, now, wait a minute. Now, wait a minute, you know, you know, what's happening here, you know, all of this stuff, you need to back up and, and sift through all of these trollish comments and find the one or two people who are the ones that out of Scott Adams following that you actually want to engage, there's a sociology and find the one or two tweets that you can turn into a tiny little productive thing. Don't, don't start hitting back on Twitter at all these other things. It's, that's a waste of your time. Find someone who has shown an indication and an appetite for to, to receive love. And then in a little Twitter way, give them a little bit of love. And, you know, and I, this is community is ideally prepared for this because every community you form will be filled with broken, hurting, you know, emotional burn victims that if you touch them in just the wrong spot, they'll shout out and they might hit you. And then after they hit you, you have to figure out, okay, how do I love this person? And at that moment with one different particular individual, for vakey and combinatorial explosion takes in and out of the whole realm of ways to respond to this person, find one that actually connects with them in love. And in almost every case, it will cost you some of your reputation or your ego or something else. And it's like, wow, what will it take for me to develop that kind of capacity? This is exactly actually what I've been thinking about recently. I'm not sure if the story is how it went. I can't remember correctly, but this is, this is, it's all connected in some way. I was out training recently with some friends and I, there was a tree that I was interested in jumping around on. So I approached one side of it and there were some kids who were playing on the other side of the tree. And so I came around to the other side of the tree and their father saw me and he thought that I had gotten too close to the kids, that, you know, COVID-19, you know, scary, scary, scary. And you're a grown man climbing in trees, and so people are going to look at you and say, is this guy okay? Are my kids safe with him? So anyway, go on. Yeah. So he, he, he just flips out, right? You know, telling me he's going to knock me out. And, you know, I've been training martial arts since I was six years old. That's probably not going to happen. Six foot two, I weigh 220 pounds, very fit. And, you know, I can generate an enormous amount of physical power and take a pretty good beating, right? So I'm not threatened, but I am very confused by the fact that this guy is so angry so quickly. And I saw, I sort of stand there and I'm just like, dude, like we can have a conversation. And then eventually I get a little bit angry. I'm like, you know, like, dude, I've been studying COVID-19 since the beginning. I'm like, when the early warner's on, it's like, come on, let's have a conversation. And then he starts to walk away and he's yelling, you know, he's yelling at me as he walks away. And I just started laughing, right? I couldn't, I couldn't help myself. It was just absurd, right? This guy was not a threat to me and he was trying to play this dominance game with me. So the next time that I went out to meditate, I meditated on loving kindness towards this guy. May he be well, maybe he'd be at peace, may he love, may he be loved. So I do this, this is part of the loving kindness practice is to think about, can you extend that frame to people even that you don't like, because that does something for you, if nothing else. And so like, you know, the guy I mentioned earlier, who I used to work on natural Erwin, he's one of my least favorite people in the world for whatever reason. So when I was learning meta meditation, you know, there was a point where I was working up to like, okay, I'm gonna have to do this. And it was like, oh, it just, it was just the worst, most uncomfortable feeling to approach. But as I sat down there, and I thought, okay, may he be well, it was like, is the world a worse or better place if he's physically okay, right? If he's doing, if he's healthy, and he's not in pain, like, is the world worse? I was like, no, it's okay. Right. And if he's at peace, it's like, yeah, that's fine. If he's being a good, loving husband and father, does that make the world better or worse? Right? If his, his partner and his students, his people around him and his children are giving him real love, like, everything that I dislike about him as a human being is going to be improved by all of those things being true, and the world will be a better place. And if you really accept the, it has to be rooted in that idea that everyone does have the capacity to contribute to the world becoming a better place. Right. So I did that. And it was pretty transformative. It was great. And as I was meditating on that, I had this, this kind of realization of where I think the martial arts and parkour and all these things connect to this, you know, project of Agape. Because I think people, and I think you really refer to this, they vastly underestimate the demands that that puts on you. And I think that what these physical practices do is they create the type of people who have the resilience, who have the anti-fragility, who have the strength, who have the self-knowledge to apply themselves to something like that. Right. I'm, you know, I'm a child of the West, right. I'm a child of the history of Christendom. But I'm also very specifically a child of the history of the counterculture. And so in some ways, you know, I'm looking at recovering the bones. Are you still there, Paul? Yep. And then also thinking like, how do I specifically see the insight from that counterculture? And I think there was insight there. Yes. But I think that one of the great things that they fail that is that they, you know, like I just have in my head, every time I think about this, I imagine the Beatles singing, love is all you need. Love is all you need. And it's like, it sounds so easy and so sweet and so simple. And I think to myself, you have no idea what you're asking of people, right. That there's no path that leads to enlightenment that doesn't take you into the depths of hell. And so I think that in some sense, what we're, what we're uniting in these physical practices is I'm going to give you the types of challenges that allow you to construct a character that can take on a challenge like this. And this is what, you know, and this is next. But the, I was thinking about what's happening in our culture right now, right. I was thinking about all these cities being burned and all the people who are, who are, who are marching with their signs, who I don't think have ever read Black Lives Matter's website or read the background of the literature or, and I was trying to come from that place of the Gothic towards that as well. But I was trying to understand it and I was thinking, okay, on some level, there's a narrative that I think is just false, right. I think that there's that, that, that people are being told that lots of people are being killed when they're not. But also, lots of people were killed and there's lots of intergenerational, interracial trauma. And like, maybe it's not happening right now, but what about 50 years ago? And how many people have stories that make it very easy to believe that? And if you just say the facts on the ground don't look like this right now, nobody's going to want to listen to you because, because of everything else that's going on. And, and then there's the just general issues of class and Peter Turchin. Now we're kind of, we're just a powder keg anyways. And, and then here's the other aspect of it to me. Someone was asking this in an interview, what happens when you don't allow kids to roughhouse? It's like what, what's going on in the streets is what happens when you don't have a lot of kids to roughhouse. I read this book called the serious book of puppy training, right? I was getting a dog and the book they talk about if you have a puppy, right? And it, the puppies want to bite dogs, manipulate the world with their teeth. They're, they're predators, you know, they fight, they need to express this. And the puppy is going to bite you too hard. It's going to be uncomfortable. Puppies have a little sharp teeth. Now, if you punish that puppy and prevent it from biting, you'll teach it not to bite you. And it might not bite you, but you've set yourself up for a problem, which is that puppy now has no control over how hard it bites when it does bite. And also it's more anxious and more likely to be anxious because it's never had the chance to, to test itself. And I realized that's the same reason why we're so driven to roughhouse human beings are the same way you need to hit. You need to be hit. You need to grapple. You need to tackle each other because you need to test what your body is, how you respond to things. And, and so we've, we've sheltered a generation of children to the point where they, they have no emotional regulation in the face of, of even minor trauma. This is Jonathan Haight's thing. I'm really coddling the American mind. In some sense, my project is the opposite. I'm trying to uncoddle the American mind. I'm trying to get people to, to voluntarily take on the types of challenges that can help them grow their character. And I think that I had this image that popped into my head, which I've been playing a lot with the idea of what is the role of anger in physical practice? Because a lot of people have used anger to become very successful, but it always seems to backfire in some way. And often in my experience, people who are fueling themselves off of anger, they burn out. And so I think of it as the dark side of the force, right? And then I find these people who, who are able to go back to the game forever because they love it and they're driven by love and they're driven by the positive emotion. I find that it's really powerful, but I don't think that it's enough to say you should, you should always be in the light side. You should never use the dark side. And I had a friend recently who's just come back to the sport and he, what he, he tried to do a front flip. He's really a talented acrobat and he's, he hurt his back and his initial reaction was this horrible self-loathing and anger that he could be in a situation where such a simple trick could hurt him. And he meditated on it and he realized that what was underneath the anger was the memory of how much he loved being able to move that way. And so the anger was, was the spark that burned off some dead wood and allowed him to see things. So I was meditating and I had this image of anger as a fire in a forest. And when the forest is healthy and the fire hasn't been suppressed, when the anger moves through, it burns off the dead wood and gives room for new growth. But when the forest, when the ecology is broken and when the anger is suppressed, it burns down the heartwood, it destroys the mycelium in the soil. It's something that we can't recover from very well. And what I'm afraid is happening is that we've suppressed a generation. We've prevented them from, from expressing themselves, from learning to integrate anger. It's like if you, if the first time that you ever express your anger and you have a place to express your anger is when you're 25, right? Your anger is still a two-year-old's anger and you don't want the anger of a two-year-old and a 25-year-old. Yes. And I think that's what we're seeing play out. And it, it, it's so sad to me because I think most of the people who are doing this are affluent middle-class people. And ultimately they think, they believe in their hearts that they're righteous and that they're serving these poor communities of color. And ultimately they're burning down their neighborhoods. They're burning out down the places that they work and, and they're, and they're burning the police who they rely on to keep their neighborhoods safe. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a lot of who it is. That was the previous conversation I had today. So keep, yeah, that's right. Yeah. And that's not to say that there's not police brutality and that it's not inequitable, right? We can make the police better. And there is a horrible history of police brutality. And it's true to this day that there is more physical violence directed toward people of color from the police. And that's something that needs to be addressed. But the way that this is being talked about and the way that it's being expressed is so poorly integrated. Yeah. Yeah. That I just can't, I can't see how it, how it burns off the deadwood in an effective way to leave room for a positive. Yeah. That's what, that's what worries me. And that's why I think that, that this agape principle, and this is where the body comes in. This is where the physical. Sorry, you froze there. Okay. This is where the body comes in. This is where the physical, that's how that's right for where you broke up. Okay. This is where the body comes in, right? This is where these physical practice come in. We have to have integrated human beings, right? And we have to like, you know, for a cognitive science, what we are is embodied, it's embedded in our environment, it's enacted, and it's extended through a network community, right? That's, that's what I'm, that's what we're doing. And you have to have those, those capacities, you have to build people, right? It's it's not enough to say, you know, believe, to me, it's not enough to say believe, you have to, you have to give people a practice that allows them to become the type of person who can be in the process of, of doing that. And that's why, that's why I think that I have a role in this conversation is because I think that I'm in a place where I can help people build those practices. And the reason that I wanted to have this conversation with you is because I don't think those practices give us what we're really looking for until they go beyond helping us cultivate our own greatness and orient us towards good. And I don't see a good that is better articulated, that has a more powerful story than the good of a god. You know, when you're talking, I remember reading a question about these Kenyan marathoners, why were these Kenyans so good? And it wasn't that they were faster than anyone else. It was that they, they had a hot, they had developed a greater capacity to endure pain. I gave a couple of years ago, I did a class for my, I don't often do specialty classes here, but I was once, a therapist once told me, they said, you know, the one, there are a lot of, there are a lot of classes out there for teaching young parents how to parent young children, but there's like nothing out there to help adults figure out how to parent their adult children. And not even necessarily parent, but yeah, still parent, but relate to their adult children. And so I thought, well, I'll do something like this. And my children are all now in their 20s. And, you know, the more I thought about it, the more I thought, no, this is, this is basic Christianity, because what it actually takes, I've got a church full of seniors, what it actually takes to relate well to your adult child that is, that is maybe botching parenting, botching marriage, botching finances, botching their careers, getting involved in drugs and all sorts of other destructive things. The irony is that what it takes for their parents is an ability to endure pain. Because if you're actually going to, when you find your kid messing up, the first response is, I'm going to smack him. Well, your child is an adult, it's beyond the smacking stage. So then it takes the verbal stage. I'm going to lash out verbally, and I'm going to scold and I'm going to nag. Well, scolding and nagging probably isn't going to do much either. What's a lot of what you're going to have to do? Be patient, figure out the subtle dance of love of saying yes and saying no, not bailing out. I mean, it's a whole bunch of Al-Anon type stuff often. And listening to you, when I think about, well, what do you learn in physical training and discipline? Well, you learn, I mean, then suddenly we're very monkish. It's diet and it's physical pain, living with physical pain and enduring physical pain to get to a goal. And so I very much see these things as, and it's dealing with the extent of my athletic career was running cross country when I was a freshman in high school, and I was bad at it. But what you learn is pain, I mean, it's all of these same things. And it's, you know, I watched my sons play varsity basketball, you know, it's dealing with their anger of riding the, I mean, it's just a whole host of things. And no, I think what you just said about what we're seeing going on in the streets now is, I think you're exactly right. And and I think, you know, when I look at, you know, I'm a pastor of a middle-class church. And in middle classness, there's a pastors of different communities in, as we used to say, the ghetto, deal with different things. And, and a lot of what you talk about is something that I've seen many of these pastors work with. How do you talk to a kid who's landed himself in prison? And at this point, it's probably not looking at too much time, but you know that there's a fork in the road here and this can go one way or the other. And the tool that you have is the gospel. And how are you going to get that kid on another path? And black churches and Hispanic churches are full of ex con preachers, because in the discipline of the prison, they had to learn something. And so much of the Christian life is, and again, it's present right there at the center of Christianity, how much pain can you endure for your enemy? So I think that intersects and maps onto a whole lot of what you're doing. Yeah. I had this, when I was thinking about the fire, you know, sorry, you're breaking up a lot, so I'm trying to go where I have stronger. Better Wi-Fi, search a better Wi-Fi. So. When I was thinking about the fire, I was thinking about what Jordan Peterson says about friendship, right? That a true friend doesn't really give you unconditional positive regard, right? Carl Rogers didn't have it quite right. And then it's the same thing with a parent, right? If you love someone with a gap, you're loving, you're trying to serve their potential to come into order in a good way. And that is not the same as giving them just being nice to them. And that's what I think is, I think that that's the hippie mistake. That's the counterculture mistake, right? That's the, you know, love is all we need, right? I was thinking about this idea that, like, this is, I don't know. I went from, in 2008, I voted for Barack Obama, right? I was I was mainstream liberal. Like, we celebrated in the streets like it was, it was, you know, we'd won the Super Bowl in Bellingham, Washington, where I was living at the time. I was raised in the counterculture, super hippie, super liberal, right? Everyone I know has never voted for a Republican. By the time that I encountered Peterson, I was, you know, adjacently alt-right, right? I was so convinced that the postmodern critical theory thing was indefensible, that anyone who was willing to speak truth to that power was someone that I was interested in listening to. There's a little through encountering the IDW that I realized that. I mean, I don't think I ever fully accepted alt-right, but what I realized was that basically those two things are mirrors of each other, and they're both stuck in this idea of a zero-sum game. And alt-right managed to speak truth about the same, not sorry, the IDW managed to speak truth about the same issue. Right? The IDW managed to speak, you're breaking up again, managed to speak truth about the same issues while pointing the way towards a positive-sum game. The answer to choose your side before we all tear each other's eyes out is wait, can we not tear each other's eyes out? It's like, okay, I'm going to choose that side because their skin color is the same as mine. That's the wrong answer. See outside that frame. And that's what they offer. That's what I thought was incredibly profound. Yep. So while I was in that place where I was listening to white nationalists and not accepting what they were saying, but not looking at it nearly critically enough, let's say, I had friends who would listen to what I had to say and who would talk. But would push back on me, but pushed back on me in an accepting, in a way that left the grounds of our friendship unthreatened. And I was thinking that like, I'm not sure I would be the person that I am if not for those friends. And I was thinking about that's agape, right? I was thinking about if not for those friends. And I was thinking about that's agape, right? Agape is being willing to stand with somebody and also tell them, like, don't touch that. You're going to get hurt. That's not good for you. It's not saying like, yeah, I'll hold the thing while you shoot yourself up for heroin. That's not agape, right? That's serving the part of someone that wants their own destruction. And so I thought about that idea of the fire. And I said, like, I want the people who will stand in the fire with me, who will start the fire that's going to help me burn off my dead weight. But they're not going to stoke it so that it burns me up either, and vice versa. And that's what I don't see, right? This idea of allies that's being promulgated out there. Those are not real allies. No, no, no, no. They're non-player characters. They're minions. They're non-player characters. That's what they are. They're people are looking for minions. Be my minion. Yeah, be my non-player. I like non-player character. I like that a lot. Here's a book on how to be a non-player character. I don't see that that has any potential for redemption. No, that's what stokes the fire and burns down the forest. It leaves it a wreck. And so I think it's interesting. Jonathan Haidt says, like, the top three things that Jonathan Haidt talks about is destroying our current kind of society, are the political polarization of the academia. And I can't remember one of them. I'm missing it. But one of them is the lack of free play and rough and tumble play. We've coddled our children. And it's murder, right? And we're creating people who are suffering in the most affluent period in human history because they have no abundance of spirit because in order to create that, you have to work, right? And the practices are about putting in the work, I think. Yep. Yep. Yep. Very true. Very good. Well, we never got to C.S. Lewis, so we'll have to talk again because I'm really curious where Lewis comes into this. A famously non-athletic man who didn't even have a driver's license. Talk about an intellectual, but yet full of wisdom and a great guide in many things. Yeah, I'm very curious to pick your brain about Lewis. I'll have to do it again. Yes. Well, Rafe, this has been a delight and I should move my body. My watch tells me every so and so. Yeah, me too. Yeah. But thank you for this. And by all means, send me that link to the Hallelujah and any other links you want to send me and we'll talk again. Sounds good. And I will pray for your church. Thank you. And hopefully, Lord willing, one of these days, I get up into your neck of the woods and we can speak face to face. That's all that Christianese I talk. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you, John. Paul. Sorry. That's okay. Have a good day. Thank you, Rafe. This was a pleasure. Bye-bye.