https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=5F5mDg8_iNA

 Good. Cool. Okay. Well, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Yeah, for sure. Um, so my name is Teddy Malone. I live in Rochester, New York. I heard you talking with, I think Adam the other day was also from Rochester. So we got a little bit of a club out here. Ben, um, let's see, Roman Catholic and let's see, graduated Boston college in, uh, May. So just kind of getting into the working world and kind of working, you know, just a standard marketing job here in town. And yeah, so that come from, you know, a pretty great family, uh, really nice upbringing here in Rochester, living back with my dad. And yeah, it was a good childhood, uh, had some ups and downs, but overall pretty great and pretty blessed to go to Boston college and study, uh, study what I studied, which was economics. So, okay. Did you ever meet Peter Kreeft? You know, I didn't, but, um, I wish I see, I really kind of got into like Peterson and Christianity right around like senior year. And by then I don't know what it was, but I just didn't, it didn't line up with my schedule. But, um, I've read a few of his books, namely between heaven and hell, which I think we've had a few email exchanges about. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He was, he grew up in Northern New Jersey, went to a reformed church of America church, went to Eastern Christian, and which is my alma mater at Christian school in New Jersey. And then went to Calvin college and then broke all the Calvinist philosophers heart by, um, by joining the Roman Catholic church. So some people are still sore about it, but I, I enjoy that. I don't hold it against them. Okay. Good. Yeah. It's, he's, um, he's got a pretty brilliant course at Boston college on CS Lewis. And one of my friends was taking that and the reading list for that is straight out of one of your, one of your, uh, one of your videos. It's just like screw tape letters and your Christianity for loves, uh, all of the, all of the good ones. So, yeah, yeah. Yeah. So what's on, what's on your mind? Um, yeah, I thought, you know, it was kind of funny. I was listening to, you know, I've been listening to your videos for some time and you know, you just started doing a lot of these interviews and I thought I had no decent story about coming to Peterson. And then I really started listening carefully to some of the interviews you've been doing and wow, like some other people's stories are just very, very incredible. And it's really humbling to hear how people came to Peterson and what he's done for them. Um, so yeah, I thought I would share that and it was kind of, it was interesting too because I was listening to the video you posted this morning and a ways it kind of lines up with a lot of what you were talking about, especially since I just, I went through the Peterson kind of coming to him and learning about him in college. And I was actually, so, um, in college actually kind of became a social justice warrior type. Really? Yeah, really. So, um, that was sophomore year and sophomore year would have been 2015. So if you remember, I think that was like the Missouri protests and the football protests. And so I kind of got, um, I was in a few groups. So at Boston college, they don't have any fraternities or anything like that, but a lot of people would join clubs and groups. And one of, one of the clubs is a volunteering club. So you go into Boston. I worked at a homeless shelter and that one was pretty good because it had more of a physical aspect of going out. But then there's also this group aspect and that's kind of where it leaned a little social justice, um, oriented. And then, um, also there's another group called the Arrupe program, which is, um, it's, uh, father Pedro Arrupe was a Jesuit. And this was about a group that you had probably 10 or 15 people in it. You had some mentors who are professors and you would meet once a week and you'd kind of talk about social justice issues with the intention of halfway through, um, right around winter break, you go down to some Latin American country. And so originally we were supposed to go to El Salvador, uh, but the kind of gang violence there made us go to the Dominican Republic. And so I spent some time down in the Dominican Republic. And that is also kind of another reason I want to talk to you is you did your mission work down there. So I kind of wanted to talk about kind of the mindset of being in the kind of that social justice milieu and being in that, um, kind of head space. And I think that's something that I've been trying to figure out. And, um, I guess I can kind of just jump into it, but when I first kind of came to it, you know, I don't think that there was ever really a, uh, you know, like, Oh, I'm in it. Like, but it was kind of just a slow gradual process. And the way I kind of saw it was that, you know, Peterson talks about this kind of feeling of tendency, especially young people have to, uh, you know, want to change the world. And I think, I think he was relating that to PIJ and that's like another stage that often isn't talked about, but there's definitely, you know, kind of that inner drive to want to change the world. And I think that's kind of really kind of where it comes from. And you kind of started, you know, going to circles and they're talking about these big, big issues of the world and you're kind of realizing, wow, there's a lot more than I realized from my high school upbringing, just my kind of, especially where I grew up is, you know, pretty upper middle class upbringing and realizing, wow, there's so much more to life than, than this upbringing. So you get to college and then you kind of realize that your, your culture, your country is also in ways implicated in it, which I think is very true. Um, no matter what, I think, you know, you can look at any country, you can look at any people. And I think that also holds true, but that means you're kind of really, you have this kind of, Oh, I want to change the world. Oh, I like, I'm implicated in that. Like, all right, like I need to figure something out. And I need to be able to change it as much as possible. So being in it, you're kind of, you're kind of in these circles and these groups where that's kind of all that's on their mind. And so I think what happens is that you're kind of just forced into these bubbles and these thinking patterns and these echo chambers that really emphasize this way of thinking. And that, and I don't know if you, did you end up reading Jonathan Haidt's new book? No, I haven't, I haven't gotten into it yet. Oh, it's, it's really, I bought it, but I haven't, I've got a lot of books. You know, I, I picked it up and I guess, cause I'm within this new generation, the iGen, Gen Z. Yeah. And I just kind of, I read through it and it was very spot on, but it, um, so he talks about the three great untruths of, um, you know, cut or psychological thinking. And so the three are, it's, I wrote these down. It's, um, it's, one of them is us versus them thinking. So it's, we're trying, the second is emotional, emotional reason. And the third is, um, it was, oh, what doesn't kill you makes you weaker. So it's the opposite of Nietzsche's quote. Right. And so I would say like when I, when I read those, those three, they really clicked, especially the first two or sorry, the second two. So, um, the second one being kind of trusting your emotions over facts and kind of trusting this emotional reasoning. And cause when you, when you're in this mindset of, oh, I want to change the world, you kind of just kind of, you're going with your gut and you're not really reflecting on other ways of viewing the same, the same problem. If that makes sense. Yeah, it makes perfect sense. Um, so you're talking with all these people and they're saying, wow, the injustice of, for example, maybe America going down and into Latin America and really destroying some of these dictators that's how could we live in such a society? Yeah. But then as I, as I started to develop beyond this stage, you learn to see in a different way. It's like, oh, well, there's the cold war filter you've put on that. America might've needed to do that because you know, the other option could have been cut. So there's a lot of different ways, but when you're stuck in this kind of way of thinking, you're thinking about the one, the unit dimensional as Peterson always talks about way of looking at the world. And it's always this, I need to criticize myself. I need to criticize the country. I need to criticize the culture that I'm in. And so that's the emotional reasoning. And then the third, third one is what doesn't kill you makes you weaker. So there's kind of this feeling that anybody that challenges you is kind of stepping out of line and that you shouldn't be exposed to that. And because if you're, I think I'm trying to remember how I felt, but it's like, if you, if I'm exposed to that, then maybe that's not a valid way of thinking. And like I'm really attached to this notion that I need to go out and save the world. But then this, I think links really well with what you've talked about in this video that you just did and also kind of what John Rick Warder talks about. And it's this like religion and this really kind of religiosity that's getting into this secular religion. And it's even creepy. And, you know, Boston college by no means it's secular. We don't want frats. We have a lot of Jesuits, but it's even creeping into that kind of Christian realm and the Christian university. And I see it influencing even scholarship to a certain degree. Yes. Yes. Yes. Oh yeah. It is, you know, I and I've tried to make a video about this. I haven't pulled it off yet, but I began noticing this in the, the mid teens, the mid 20 teens in my denomination. And I began looking at this. I'm saying this is a religion and it's got some eerie similarities to conservative Calvinism, which I know well because I grew up in the Christian reform church. And then when James Lindsay makes that comment on intersectionality as a religion, that video that they did, I thought, and he mentions Calvinism. I thought, well, he doesn't really know Calvinism, but I know Calvinism. That is this, we are dealing here with a religion and I've watched it get into the church and people then suddenly believe that, well, if I, you know, I am, I'm, I'm tearing down the patriarchy for Jesus. It's like, Oh, okay. I guess we got to rename God the father then. But you know, we talked about that since the seventies. So no, that's, that's right. It is a religion and, and there's a lot of, Oh, I'm sorry. There's a lot of theology in the theology class. We have to take, I took it senior year, insured a Christian theology. There was a ton of, you know, readings that we had to do where it's like criticizing God the father and why it should be, you know, God, the what? I have no idea. The parent it's like, it doesn't really work that well. It doesn't really work. And he go, God, the mother. And it's like, yeah, but no, things are changing. There's, yeah. And yeah. Yeah. Peterson was Peterson was really helpful for me with thinking about, okay, why is it God the father? Because I, I had simply inherited it as part of the package, but I hadn't done much thinking about what's the masculine. And I had always known, for example, in Luke 15, the father of Luke 15 of the parable of the two sons, the church has long known that that father has integrated within him, masculine and feminine characters. Cause it's not, there's a father and a mother. That's just a father. But the father does a bunch of feminine things in the process of the story. And Christians have known that forever. And they've just said, well, that's God male and female come out of God. So that they're both in, they're both in God. God is not a man, but God, the father God, the son, they, that's, there's an implicit narrative in there that makes some sense. Of course, actually Peter Kreeft would be Peter Kreeft would be all over this. I I've seen him with bald head lately. And I worried that maybe he, he got cancer or something. I don't know. But, I'm not sure. But these, these questions of masculine and feminine, they, they mean something. Right. I mean, even young with his quaternity, I think, instead of the Trinity, even had that kind of heresy, I guess, going on. Yeah. So that, that was kind of the thinking space that I was in as well as, you know, it's, it's, it really is weird being in that kind of religion and that, or that space, because I think you're just, you're really living it and this kind of bubble and the Joe Rogan that you talked about with the Peter Bogosian. Peter Bogosian. Yeah. James Lindsay. I think Joe Rogan is spot on where it's like, you know, these people, we're living in, if you're in university or in bubble and having come out of it, it's you do really realize how much of a bubble atmosphere it is. And so I think that it kind of just perpetuates. But then one other thing that I've kind of, I was thinking about recently was the fact that you have this one, this one kind of faction within university, the social justice. And you also, especially these elite universities, you have a lot of people that are on the financial track, finance track or, you know, lawyer, high and lower track. And these I feel like are the two most vocal factions within. So no wonder that the social justice are looking and saying like, Oh, this is the only other way of being in the world. And in a way, it's kind of like, they really are kind of focused on getting as much wealth and power and maybe not, maybe not power, but you know, they're really focused on, you know, being in the upper class and having a good job that pays a lot. And then they can comfortably and prosperous. So in a way, they're kind of both seeing the world through this lens of economic prosperity and economic opportunity. But then they're just kind of criticizing each other. Whereas, I think the world is so much more complicated and they never really give a chance for that to come in. Well, I think there's going to be a lot of people who leave college that, and I've seen it in a number of cases. So they've, they've got all these, and again, it's not unlike what I see with Christians. They've got all these ideas about how the world should be. Then they get out into the world and it's like, whoosh, you know, you are, well, I'm, well, I'm just going to call these people out, call away, bucko. Yeah. They're all going to look at you like, okay, you know, there's, there's a one Facebook, there's, there's one Facebook group that someone included me in go be postmodern someplace else, you know, like, yeah, go, go up. I got to walk away from you and all this chatter. And the fear then gets me, well, they're going to grab, they're going to grab institutional power and try to wield it. And that's what we're seeing. But then there comes a point when people underneath, I mean, John Locke's idea about the consent of the governed, that is on one hand a philosophy. It's also an observation. A reality, right? That people at some point are going to say, and I, and I do, I agree with Peterson that a big part of the, the election of Donald Trump was a group of people saying, Oh, that's how you want to play. You'll like this guy. Right, right, right. Exactly. And, um, but no, actually to that point, the thing that kind of drew me out of my social justice phase was, um, so kind of coming in touch with reality. And so the way that I kind of came in touch with reality was, so first we went to the Dominican Republic on this trip. And so that was seven, 10 days or so we went out to the, I guess that'd be the West coat or the Western border. Oh, you're near where I was. Yeah. It was, uh, the Lago and Riquillo. Oh yeah. That was just a little North, North. I lived in Barona. Oh, okay. Okay. That's kind of closer towards, I guess, the beaches. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Right on the coast. Right. So, uh, we were there and it was, that was really, um, that was really great experience. Those 10 days, but actually at the end of those 10 days, we ran into a Boston college alumna in a zone of colonial and center Domingo. And she's working with a micro finance organization. So I was able to link up with her and go back down to center Domingo for the summer. And so I spent that whole summer. It was like 10 weeks or so. Okay. Um, so that was the summer 2016 summer and those the summer before the election. And so being down there, um, I really didn't have too many friends and I was kind of, you know, I was working an internship and it was, I really kind of came in touch with reality down there and kind of the hard way. Cause I didn't, I also didn't really speak Spanish that well. So it was kind of just like thrown you went down into the underworld. Exactly. Yeah. And, um, but so I was down there and, you know, in between kind of, you know, becoming an adult living on my own for the first time, um, I was listening to a lot, a lot of podcasts and getting to know Joe Rogan. And it was kind of interesting because the transition from becoming a social justice warrior to becoming what I was before I found Peterson was kind of this, um, it was, I think it was kind of analogous to what Nietzsche talks about with almost like the death of God. So it's, it's, um, and at this point, you know, I was kind of religious and then I went down to Dominican Republic and I started really listening to, you know, all these different podcasts, came in touch with Joe Rogan, came in touch with some like libertarian ideas. And that's that really influenced me. Um, some Jeff, the, and then also Sam Harris. So I kind of got into kind of like atheists and then I was like really kind of set for a little bit. It was probably one or two months. And it was, you know, maybe not a hundred percent set up like 90, 95% of the way there. And, um, and, and so it was kind of like this Nietzschean death of God where, you know, I had this one value structure. And then after I realized it was pretty bogus after I started really listening to other people and I was on my own, so I wasn't in an echo chamber. Then it was like, there was nothing. And then because of that, then I kind of started filling it with, you know, libertarianism and objectivism and I ran, which is, you know, really good stuff in certain senses. But in other senses, it's also ideological possession, um, to a certain extent where, um, is it just the other side almost? And then also kind of that creeping nihilism of not really being sure of, you know, what to believe, if I should be believing anything. And that kind of, that really affected me junior year. So that would have been two years ago. Um, so junior year fall, and I guess just like one example of this would have been, you know, two years ago on election day, I was kind of just like fed up with voting. You know, I was thinking in this very libertarian way. It's like, what does it matter? It's like I'm living in Massachusetts, my vote in New York. It's like, it's not going to matter either way. And I, what I did was I got finished with class at like two or three and I started drinking and I, it was a fun night. It was a very wild, but, um, it was, you know, there, there was no meaning behind it. It was empty. It was escaping the reality of what I was actually dealing with. And then it was probably like two weeks later. And you know, to this point I was, um, falling joke and pretty consistently. And then it was like two weeks later that I heard Jordan Peterson and I can still like remember exactly where I heard that podcast. It was this Duncan right near Chestnut Hill in Massachusetts. And I was just sitting there and you know, at first it was kind of like, Oh, it's political stuff. And then he got into this Carl Jung stuff and he got into this. And, um, you know, I was kind of familiar with young from taking a Latin class, taking Latin throughout high school. And my teacher, you know, everyone, he was a pretty big geek and he'd bring it up every once in a while and say, you know, Carl Jung and Joseph Campbell and star wars. And we'd relate that to like the Odyssey or something. Oh, okay. I wondered how you'd get there from Latin class. Yeah. Yeah. So, um, but then, and then I heard what he was talking about with, you know, this archetypal mother and dark typical father. And I was, I was so blown away. And then, um, yeah. And then from there I started listening to him, taking into heart. And you know, at that point I was still kind of, you know, like trying to be, you know, kind of like mushy and not be full on. You know, God, and it took me probably five or six months. So I had some pretty big struggles after that. Um, I went abroad again actually to Ireland. So I was pretty, pretty blessed with being able to do that twice. And you know, through a couple, it was actually a pretty like spiritual experience that I can, I was like, all right, like God exists. And like, there's no more running away from my faith. There's no more, you know, putting that away. And since then it's, you know, everything that you've heard from other people I would say applies to me. It's, you know, it's day and night who I was before that where my life is going and then where my life is right now and where it can be heading. And, and yeah, yeah, wow. And it's, I don't know. There is something about what you said about Peterson exercising demons. Yeah. Yeah. And like that is, that is so spot on and you know, there's definitely that kind of dark side that was kind of consuming me. Yeah. And you know, for whether it was just drinking to escape or, you know, kind of, you know, pushing off the responsibilities and being a, you know, decent person or a decent roommate. Yeah. And then having that, having that away and see how, you know, it's been a year and a half, two years since I've really taken it seriously and it's, it really is day and night. And that's beautiful. That's beautiful. Thanks for sharing that. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. That's, that's really cool. And you know, when I made the video about Peterson as the unauthorized exorcist, I wondered if people would connect with that idea because that that's what I see him doing with people. And now there's a more literalistic way to understand that. And then there's a more metaphorical way to understand that. And people, people are, you get stuck in this life in ways and things. And sometimes I love the scene in, in the Lord of the Rings when Gandalf basically exercises Theoden king of, of Saruman, because it's just such a vivid depiction of, first it's a vivid depiction of, you know, possession. You know, he's, Theoden has become colonized. He's become the slave of Saruman and Gandalf frees him. But now Theoden, you know, and then soon after that, Aragorn and Theoden want Gandalf or Aragon and Gandalf want Theoden. Okay. Ride out and say, ride out and get involved in the war. And Theoden's like, ah, not so fast. And it's like, see, Theoden is not now Gandalf's puppet. Right. And that means that he exercises all of the responsibility and freedom, but it's now, you know, and this is, this is of course a picture of the freedom we have in Christ. Right. Right. Christ, you know, it doesn't make us his robot. Yeah. We are his, we are his, he is our master, but he wants us to be, he wants us to, wants us to be how he made us to be. Right. So more fully ourselves. Yeah. Yeah. I'm very like that analogy I think works perfectly. And it is pretty, a lot of crazy world where this Jordan Peterson character is, you know, again, that's, that's what fascinates me about this is, people say, ah, you're, you know, no, look, look at this guy, Teddy, you know, listen to a story. It's right there. You know, it doesn't, I'm not saying anything about, you know, that I'm just saying this is, this is what's happening. Definitely. Yeah. And I, when I hear stories like this, I say, well, this is the work of God. God does this. Yeah. Yeah. He liberates us. He frees us. And you know, it was so funny when I remember going down to, I went down to, I had a college trip down to Nicaragua and Honduras and it was mostly tripped on to Nicaragua during the Santa Nista regime. Right. And you know, we, I remember going down there and one of the, one of the women going down on our tour was all excited cause she was going to meet the poor. And I had grown up in Patterson and it's like, huh, you're who, who, who are these glowy poor people that you're all, you have trouble finding poor people. Where do you live? All over the place. And they're not, you know, they're, they're not sainted because of their poverty. Right. Now they don't have the same kind of temptations and burdens that wealthy people have. Yeah. Yeah. But they're poor people. That's what they are. And you know, we went down to, we went down to Nicaragua and I think some of the people were just kind of, they thought they were going to see the glowing left wing revolution. That was the great Santa Nista revolt against the oppressive dictator. And oh, that's true. The dictator was oppressive. And, and, but then the Santa Nistas became oppressive and Daniel Ortega becomes something of a dictator. And it's like, okay, freedom is not such an easy thing. So you've got the tyranny of the left, you've got the tyranny of the right, and then you have the implicit tyrannies within a free society. And you also need to be, you also can't become captive to those because many of those have much more transparent prisons that are not so easy to see. And I think you've described. That's almost like the, I don't know if you saw Nod's recent video with, where he uses anti-rights, the gods that we worship now. Oh, I didn't see that one. Yeah, that's a really good one. And he talks about the three gods that are implicit in our society, but, and three among many, but no one ever called that. All the ancients would understand very quickly, but no one calls out. And it's, I think he uses mammon, God of war Aries, and Eros. Yeah. Yeah, that's true. Yeah. So I think that's, that's very true. But I wanted to ask you about what you thought of the Dominican Republic and just some questions. Well, I mean, I guess coming off that one point is what I saw after we got back from the Dominican Republic. This was the first trip we got back. And it was very much this kind of orientation still to kind of change the world. It was, it was kind of this on one hand, a company, but then on the other hand, try to change, you know, systems and structures. Then I heard, I must have been a few months ago when you were talking about your time down in the Dominican Republic, that you didn't, you realized that that's almost impossible, that their lives are kind of, um, in such a way that the freedom that we want for them, the only way they can really achieve it would be in new life and the afterlife. I, so when I went down there, I, you know, I'm a young idealistic, got my newly minted seminary degree. I've got, I'm working for a mission organization that has money and missionaries and these are poor people and you know, a hundred dollars can make a big difference in people's lives. And you know, what's a hundred dollars? Yeah, it's, it's, it's money, but it's, you know, a mission organization has thousands and thousands of dollars with which to help people. And it's, it's people often misinterpret me. So I had a conversation with Mr. Reagan, then he hasn't, he hasn't posted it yet. And people listened to me. So, well, he's a conservative and it's like, uh, I, it's, I'm kind of hard to categorize because on one hand, as I see racism, oppressive structures, all of those things are true. Um, and when I listened to Peterson, what I appreciated about Peterson was like, yeah, you're not just going to knock these things down with, you know, oh, that's capitalism or the oppressive hierarchy. Oh, no, no, no. These things go way deeper than that. And this is one of the things I learned in the Dominican Republic that I thought, well, I'm going to, I've got theology, I'm not going to teach them theology. And you discover that, uh, they're not terribly impressed with my theology anyway. And, and some of their motivations to have a relationship with me are, are purely mercenary. And okay, so then we're going to do all the community development work and this is going to be helpful. And sometimes it is sometimes those projects are enormously helpful and, and it really helps people, you know, straighten out their lives and get some things right. But it's almost always small. It's almost always dependent upon whether that person is really going to work at themself. And it's, it's not the kind, it's not like penicillin, you know, you've got someone who's got an infection and you give them an antibiotic and boom, things turn around. Well, people are way more complicated than an infection that can be treated with penicillin. And these structures are all inherent in it. And so part of what, part of what I learned in that chapter of my life, I had to learn about my limitations. I had to learn about, you know, if you use Jungian terms, I had to learn about my shadows. And, and, and so I left the Dominican Republic, a much more sober, less triumphalistic individual. And I should see what it did was it energized and activated a lot of the lessons I had learned in Patterson, New Jersey, growing up and watching similar things in my father's ministry. So, and what it did was give me a sobriety about the kinds of world fixing schemes we imagine will somehow bring the kingdom of God in our midst. Right. Because we, we, it's not, we can't do it and amazing things can happen. And when they do happen, it's wonderful, but with almost every fast transformation, there are downsides. So we get rid of the horses and we no longer have all the horse crap all over the streets. Well, I've got these lovely horseless carriages that are, you know, that aren't leaving anything. Well, it's going up into the air. Okay. Well, and we're traveling through highways at 50 miles an hour and there's an accident and people are flying through windshields. Okay. So then we fix the windshield. Well, now they're hitting the windshield. Okay. So now we have airbags and then they, you know, it's, yeah, it's never, it's like fractal. Like it's never ending with. That's right. That's right. And yeah, I think kind of going back to the kind of beginning, it's, that's almost a social justice misconception and wish that to bring the kingdom of heaven on earth. And the, and so I, I like to, there's two things. One of the things that I always emphasize witness, not bringing the kingdom because we can't do this, but bearing witness to the kingdom. And the other is misery deliverance gratitude because what we're doing is not saving the world. What we're doing is bearing witness to, you know, to, to Jesus and his kingdom. And then we do this out of gratitude, not out of a Messiah complex that that has us imagine, well, I can fix you. I can't even fix myself. You know, I look at myself and it's like, Oh man, you know, there's there's a world of things that need fixing in me. And I even, and those are the, that's just the short list. I see, you know, talk to other people know me and ask, you know, they can do a better longer list. I fall short. Yeah. That reminds me of you got me onto the book, the Narnian about CS Lewis. Oh yeah. Beautiful book. Yeah. And when he starts kind of looking at his own thoughts and it's like every third or second thought, it's like some self promoting and self congratulatory thought. And I've, I'm, I too, see those same thoughts and just like we're not structured to be able to fix them. I guess you're right. The best we could really do is be grateful for the kingdom that Jesus inaugurated. And, you know, try to live that out as best as possible. And be, and be encouraged by the promise that, you know, of his, of his final victory that will come. And for me, so, so, you know, I, I had a year in the Dominican Republic, then I had to come back to the United States for my ordination examinations. And I was, I was being ordained and, and so then I'm getting examined. And one of the things that the Dominican Republic really took out of me was this triumphalism. And what that did was say, okay, that these people that I'm, these people that I'm ministering with, most of them are going to die in poverty. They are never going to have much money. They are going to get sick with diseases that have been cured. They are going to be in jeopardy from motorcycle accidents. They are going to be in jeopardy from the thing that ticks me off is that the social justice thing has taken what for me was a really good term, which I refuse to surrender. I still see social justice as bearing witness. It's not. And so all of these people, these friends of mine who are pastors in the Dominican Republic, they are, they are not going to have a nice comfortable life like I can enjoy by virtue of to whom and where they were born. What hope do they have? Well, first of all, there are many joys that they experience in their life that are completely separate from the kind of affluence that we assume is part of what makes life worth living. But also I take serious that God in his justice and in the redemption of Christ will, will, will give them his kingdom that that it is not that, that what justice finally tells us is that just because I was given this amazing opportunity to be born in this amazing time and place doesn't mean the vast majority of people in the world who have suffered horror horribly have no hope. And that's why I can't be a materialist because if, if that materialist conception of the world is as it has to be in their scheme, I don't want to have any part of it. No, it's not. It's not beautiful. It's not, it's not right. It's not, it's not worth being a part of. No, no, no. So that's, that's what I learned in the Dominican Republic. And you know, I pastor in a, you know, in a poor place of town and a struggling church. And you know, I, I, I'm not, I, I can't surrender the hope of glory for people for whom this world has been cruel. And I won't surrender that hope. That's because I, you know, it doesn't make sense when I see the kind of places and ways God has planted glory here. And now it leads me to believe he's just getting started. And CS Lewis for me, the last battle is one of my favorite books of his CS Lewis for me kind of he's able better than many others to flesh that out this further up and further in. We're going to see the true Narnia and that's where his Platonism people say, well, see us. Lucy's yeah, his, his, his true Narnia old Narnia. That's, that's Platonism. I get that. But I still like the image and real Narnia and true Narnia. And I want to see, I want to see the person that has been, their life has been derailed by autism. I want to see them sing. The person who has been hobbled by mental illness, by bipolar or schizophrenia. I want to see them delivered. I want to see them come into the richness of, of the created goodness that's already planted in them. I want to see that come to full flourish and I know it's not going to happen here. And so I, I, I'm, all my chips are, are there, you know, it's not a bad place to have all your chips. No. Why have them in the other place? Exactly. Oh no. It's this person they're mentally ill and well, the best we can do is kill them. It's like, no, no, I won't go there. I have hope for, because of the resurrection, I believe in his redemption. And you know, that's where I'm going. Otherwise, you know, otherwise Jordan Peterson, he always brings up cocaine and this, you know, well, you can take a lot of cocaine. He had to have had a patient that was, you know, you take a lot of cocaine. The one of the YouTube videos that it's like the, the cuts of him saying, just take a lot of cocaine. It's like two minutes on it. And it's so good. That guy who does the, the, the little montage of the Peterson talking to himself. Yeah. I watched those. I laughed so hard. I laughed so hard at those. Well, we got a few more minutes. Anything else on your list you wanted to cover? If you have time for one more question. Sure. This is a, this is actually, I remember when I was kid, I was in a religion class, Catholic religion class. And I was like very perplexed about this. Cause I've always kind of been like thinking about like outer space and aliens too. And so I'm just kind of curious. Like this is the way I posed the question in the class was, you know, if we find out that there's another, like there's an alien such civilization, would Jesus have become incarnate in that civilization? I see that Louis writes about that a lot actually. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He does. He talks about that. Not a lot, but in a few places, he talks about that and he speculates on it and, and what, what shape, you know, would, would did Jesus do this work here to save them too? Right. Right. I don't know. Or did Jesus come incarnate within that to, cause cause Lewis for a while, Lewis, you know, he wrote the, um, he wrote his science fiction trilogy, you know, out of the silent planet and parralandra and that hideous strength. And I haven't really, I really have to get back into those. I read those as a teenager, but I was too young to really understand them then. And so Lewis played with those ideas. Cool. And yeah, I, I don't know, you know, I can't, I can't, I can't know what God's doing with me. Aliens. Exactly. Yeah. But it's a great question. I wish I knew. Yeah, I know. I've been wondering about that for ever since you were a kid. Wow. What does alien Jesus look like? I hope someone makes a, makes a drawing of that. That'd be pretty great. Alien Jesus meme. Oh, I guess it would probably have to be a Catholic or a Orthodox. That's right. The Protestants. Oh, we can't do that. I'm Jonathan Peugeot. Okay, Jonathan, if you're listening to this video, the alien Jesus meme, he'd have some spiritual reason why he can't do it. I know he would, but he's such a good guy. I love Jonathan. Yeah, he's great. He's great. Well, thank you for, for this. Thank you, Teddy. Thanks for, thanks for reaching out. And this is just so much fun. So I'll send you a copy of it and you can decide if we should share it. And this has been a great time. Yeah, sounds good. And thanks for all the videos and do it's really, it's really fantastic. We spent a few hours. Well, thank you. I'm surprised and gratified that, that they're helpful to people. I'm delighted by that. Yeah, they really are. So thank you. Take care. Good to meet you.