https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_c4JTWattnQ

 Hi, this is Paul. I've been doing a lot of conversations lately, but I've still got a lot of ideas for videos in my head and so I got to get them out as soon as I have them. And a lot of the conversations, there's a couple of words that I think, there's really three terms that I really want to spend a little bit more time with defining and that would be the word random, the word supernatural and Jordan Peterson's God in quotes or God aspect number one. On YouTube there's a really nice video about creating random numbers and creating random numbers for human beings is very difficult. Well, why is it so difficult? Well, because there's nothing random about us and in fact the idea of naturalism is that in fact there can be nothing random about us. So what you do is you take a radioactive isotope and you put a Geiger counter and you cook that into a computer and so you have something that is random. But here's the question, is that, are the motions of those particles actually random? If you push this word hard enough, what you realize is that random does not mean random as we imagine it, it really means that which is too complex for us to predict and the reason we use the particles in a radioactive isotope is that it is too complex for us to predict. And so if we grab a number or a measurement from there and feed that into a computer, we will get something like what we call a random number, but the number is essentially something that we as limited human beings are unable to predict. Now if you watch Jordan Peterson Transliminal 2015, which is a terrific video, that's one of the two Transliminal interviews that Peterson did were really terrific and Peterson talked quite openly about a lot of things in there, but one of those things is the participation of random mutations. Now if you do a little bit more research, and this is from, I know the website looks a little bit funny, but it's from Berkeley.edu so it can't be all that crazy, but it talks about natural selection and variation and supposedly random mutations. At the opposite end of the scale, natural selection is sometimes interpreted as a random process. This is also a misconception. The genetic variation that occurs in a population because of mutation is random, but selection acts on that variation in a very non-random way. Genetic variants that aid survival and reproduction are most likely to become common than variants that don't. Natural selection is not random, but yet they use the word random and they're talking about mutations as being random, mutations that are helpful and harmful. And again, mutations are to such a degree that we're using the word random here in a way that we can't predict it. And so they had a little hyperlink and so you go to their page. It wasn't nicely formatted, so I just cut and pasted it here. Unpredictable in some way. There's a definition of random when it comes to natural selection. Now pay attention, natural selection. And if you go back to many of my quotes from the Metaphysical Club, the author of the Medical Physical Club, I think rightly asserts that what happened with Darwin was the conversation came to a point that God was no longer necessary. Now go back to my conversations about about Charles Taylor and the secular age. There was this intermediate stage in the way to secularization and one of the stages that Charles Taylor talks about is providential deism. In providential deism, we first imagined that God made this world, but he set it up in such an orderly fashion. It was the clockwork universe as it was often called. So unpredictable in some way. Mutations are random in the sense that the sort of mutation that occurs cannot generally be predicted based upon the needs of the organism. Now it's interesting too because when you look at language, language is based to this. I had a super interesting conversation today with a young man. He's still deciding if he wants me to post it. I hope he does because it was a this is a bright, bright, bright young man. He doesn't even have a college degree, but he is in my opinion the poster child for someone who's just very smart getting an education from YouTube. And if Jordan Peterson ever establishes his YouTube University, he should go and take pictures of this kid because this kid is it. And I, he just sent me an email and was really asking to have a conversation and I told him my, I told him my protocol now, which is I tape all my conversations and then between the two of us, myself and the person I'm conversing with, we can decide whether or not I will post it and I get to choose and that other person gets to choose like two keys in a nuclear silo. And so, you know, I talked to this young kid and he just a just a bright, bright young kid. Fun to talk to. Anyway, this does not imply that all mutations are equally likely to occur. That mutations happen without any physical cause. And this is the point with random. The point with random is we don't know the cause. We say now it's a natural cause, but the assertion of that word natural in that sentence is by faith. There's no way to prove it. Is there a way to disprove it? Probably not. It is simply an assertion. We don't know what went into it and so we call it random. We could call it supernatural and we're going to get into that word too. Does the random equal supernatural? What's interesting is that in the stage of providential deism, the word random functionally replaced God. Now if you talk to philosophers like Alvin Plantinga, people who want to maintain, for example, theistic evolution, they will assert that in these random what one side calls random, the other side calls moved by God. But here's the point. You can't prove it either way because we use the word random because we cannot stipulate what it is. Now theists often have a hard time with the supposed God of the gaps. Well, we have the random of the gaps here. If it's a process that we cannot predict or we cannot stipulate or we have no access to it, we call it random. Well, it's again God, random. It's the same gap. Now how God gets into evolution. Now Peterson has been all over this. Now one way you might imagine God gets in is the, if you remember back in the 70s and 80s, these enormous weddings by Reverend Moon, the unification church who would just pair up all these people and say, oh you go get married. Well, this is a way that God gets in. But now again pay attention to what Peterson has to say because he says we have these value hierarchies and religious values are one of the values that has been in operation for thousands of years impacting mate selection. Now is this a way that God gets in? God aspect number one? God in quotes? Absolutely. God gets into the marriage selection of the unification church via Sun Young Moon's supposed revelation. Now personally, I'm very skeptical about the relationship that Reverend Moon had with the Almighty, but that's just my theological bias. Supernatural ideas impact human values and impact mate selection and they have for a very long time. But not just of course supernatural ideas, many cultural ideas. When I was in the Dominican Republic, it was quite amusing that in the United States, many men, not all, not so much in the black community, but many white men preferred slender women. There was this kind of image that white, there was a beauty bias, there was mate selection going on with respect to weight. Now many white women who couldn't seem to get the time of day with men, white men in North America, well they get a little bit more attention in the black community. They go down to the Dominican Republic and they were the hot number. I knew many women in the Dominican Republic who were slender and they just cursed themselves for being so flakita and it's the gordas that got all the attention. Well here is a is this a random variable? Is this cultural? Is there no, well, and is there no backstory to the culture? One of the things I have to get get used to is finishing my sentences instead of just thinking them in my head. Well now someone very well might generate a story that, and I hope this guy plays the, wants to post his video because he said some really bright things in this video, talked about, we talked about the monarchical vision, we talked about how he added the element of time in with the monarchical vision, which I hadn't necessarily been thinking about, but he also talked about how, you know, in many ways, and he hasn't read Thomas Kuhn yet, the the structure of scientific revolutions, but I told him to put it on his book list because I read it in college, that place I spent a whole lot of money on, nowhere near as much money as I'm spending on my kids today, but I'm going to keep interrupting myself, it's a bad habit. But science has this sort of crowd sourcing things, and so if one person says, well, I can make up a story that accounts for the preference, the weight preference of men in the Dominican Republic or men in the black community versus men in the North American white community, well, if we listen to it, we think, oh, that sounds right, but how do we know that story is actually true? Basically, we regard it as science if enough people say yes. Now what we do then is really we look at causality, which we call it, but we're for the most part looking at looking at patterns. Now, this is interesting because C.S. Lewis and Miracles, they were, they're, C.S. Lewis wrote this in the 40s and 50s, and they didn't know a lot about particle physics, but he began to get the idea that they were talking about random, and again, if you read, excuse me, if you read C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles, he will talk about the assertion that naturalists have that what is governing us is the whole show, that the universe is in a sense a closed system, and in this closed system, all events are related to and caused by the previous event, and so by faith, what this essentially says is that all random processes by faith are designated as natural processes, and we will not designate them as supernatural processes because by faith we have eliminated that idea, and again what I'm saying is that this is basically a presuppositional assertion. This is a community of people that have decided that this would be the way it is, just like communities of people before 1500 that decided that God had made it. Now the random and the natural. Natural is the whole show, depending on the assertion, the potential monarchical vision, that all that we can see in theory can be accounted for with natural causes, but it's very interesting too that often we use that term natural causes as another way to punt. He died of natural causes. Well, what does that mean? Well, it means that we're not we might not know exactly how or why he died, but there didn't seem to be another human being involved, and I've talked about this in past videos, the language habit that we have of excluding of excluding human agency from natural causes. We do it when we talk about global warming. We're talking about human caused global warming. Well, once you have to hyphenate that and and stipulate it in that way, you are in that moment buying the entire package of free will and human agency and our capacity to change. When when some people write me and write me about their frustration with humanity's inability to really get a handle on our production of greenhouse gases and what the potential is for that. Now, I know that there are a fair number of skeptics in my YouTube comments. Go ahead, leave your skeptical. I personally am a believer that we put pump all this CO2 into the atmosphere. It's going to have a consequence. I'm skeptical in that I'm not quite sure what the consequence will be. The assertion that it will cause warming makes sense to me. It will certainly impact acidity levels in lakes and the ocean. And so my assertion is that many, much of the science is probably correct. The predictions are far harder to do because the systems are far more complex. Now, is this God or is this random? Again, the assertion that it's one or the other, whichever side you're on is a faith assertion. You don't know. But you what you do is you let your world view then inform and fill in the gaps. And so my assertion is that you have the God of the gaps, but you also have the natural of the gaps. And you have that with random. You have that with natural causes. You fill that in in all sorts of ways. And in a sense, what you may be facing in terms of global catastrophe because of the CO2 that we are pumping into the atmosphere and our ability and our inability to stop it politically, that might be natural. We might die of natural causes because we can't get a handle on ourselves politically. And I had a I have some really brilliant emails from a number of you and I won't out you here because I know many of you don't want to be outed. But yeah, we're You know if if if you believe we're cooking ourselves with CO2 and we can't get a handle on it this might be completely natural and this might be as natural a death for many of us as getting to 80 or 90 and too many cheeseburgers or just your heart giving out and growing old is it's just on a bigger scale and we just seem to be a little bit more involved with it. Although how can you say that the sum of your choices made as a younger person to smoke what you did or drink what you did or eat what you did or exercise or not exercise or the amount of time you spent in the sun or all of these things are somehow unnatural. So nature as the whole show depends on the assertion that all we can see in theory can be accounted for via natural causes. But we already know that we are incapable of such accounting every time we use the word random. We usually simply imaginatively expand the data set and stipulate that we can make it up in volume. In other words, well we think that with enough random mutations we will arrive at us. You're punting. You're making it up. It could be supernatural. We're going to talk about that word in a minute. It could be random. The point is every time you use the word random, you're basically saying we don't know. It's too complex. We don't have access to the data. And then what you usually do is flood the data and say with enough randomness we can get there. Again, how many monkeys does it take to write out monkeys and typewriters to type out the works of William Shakespeare? You can google that question. This is all just simply a faith assertion. No one has proved it. No one can prove it. Then we get to the word supernatural. Now again, this is a product of this long process of human history and culture and language. And again, I recommend Charles Taylor's really fat book, A Secular Age. Charles Taylor says, you know, providential deism asserts a division in the whole show. Every so well, what we need to do is eliminate the supernatural. And I hear people say that all the time. I'm gonna have a conversation tomorrow and he's probably gonna watch this first. And so maybe we'll be ready for the conversation because he's making videos too. I'm talking about talking about Andy. And I know he intends for me to post it. So this is gonna be really fun. I'm really looking forward to talking to Andy. But every time you use the word supernatural, okay, define it. That which we can't account for. Well, how much do we really account for and how much do we take on faith? Well, you might say, well, we take a lot of things on faith, but we have reasons for it. Well, what is natural? An event that we can account for or imagine if given enough information we can account for it. It is based on regular patterns that seem within our experience to always be true. But again, that's always based on a limited data set. And the difficulty we have is that if something happens that breaks the pattern, what do we mentally do with it? And a number of times I've used the illustration that Jordan Peterson tells a ghost story in one of the E3 podcasts and the other person that was with him in that hotel room who is a naturalist and he is a scientist and he is a friend of Jordan Peterson's. Jordan Peterson went up to his hotel room. He dropped off his stuff in the hotel room, went out, came back, he had his laptop and a bunch of other stuff there and all of the drawers in the hotel room were open and Jordan Peterson begins to think someone's been through my hotel room, but he's using reason. They didn't take my laptop. So he goes down to the desk, tells the person at the desk, the person at the desk gets terrified and the person at the desk says we have a ghost! And they're terrified of the ghost. Okay, Jordan Peterson, probably open to ghosts. He's an open agnostic, goes back to his room, shuts all the doors, goes back to his room with the person he had dinner with, shuts all the drawers, sits down as a conversation with that person and they turn and they see one of the drawers has opened again. You've got two people. This isn't a delusion. Two people and the drawer opened again and they attested all the drawers, maybe a truck rumbling through and this is not an area of the country where there are earthquakes, so on and so on and so forth. The door opened and they cannot give a natural explanation for why the drawer opened and so I asked the individual I said explain it. He says it's just one of those things and this is what we do. Why do we do it? Because we are limited creatures who can, who have a deep need inside our brains and I talked to another person about this today. Think about Jonathan Haidt, the rider and the elephant. What does the rider do? The rider makes up reasons that make the elephant look good in terms of the social status hierarchy. Once you have a societal environment that is accustomed to excluding supernatural, everyone will simply begin to accept information based on the rider making the elephant look good. That's how we work. That's why sociology of knowledge works and that's how all this talk about natural and supernatural works. Go into a an Islamic community or a church community or another community, they say God everyone agrees and you begin to think okay God. Go into a secular community and they say no not God, science. Well, they say natural and then when they don't know they say random or natural causes but language betrays the game again and again. Now let's talk about technology and natural. Much of what we can do today would be considered that considered magic a hundred or two hundred years ago. Showing up in San Francisco for dinner after having breakfast in New York City. Now you might say that's supernatural. Today we say it's not supernatural. Why not? Well, we have some idea about how we can do this thing. We call it natural because it's a product of our colonizing nature. All right. So we have developed air travel and we have developed jet engines and we can travel now from JFK in New York to SFO in San Francisco. You can eat breakfast in New York and you can have dinner in San Francisco. You can do that. We call that natural. In 1849 that would be called magic and even today when we'd say if you could do this in 1849 that would be magic and we're skeptical and rightly so of someone reportedly having done it. But now nature obliges with our technology but her protests are now follow the language again what we call pollution. So you may eat breakfast in New York City and you may eat supper in San Francisco, but nature has its way and you burn quite a few fossil fuels getting your little butt across the continent to San Francisco in the evening. So what do we make of that? Well, it's unintended. It's natural because we can predict it. We can do the math but we can't control it, can we? Because if we could control it away we would do it in a minute and that in fact is the game of technology where in C.S. Lewis's terms again, we're always we're colonizing nature and nature fights back. We're colonizing nature and nature fights back. Do we see it as supernatural? Today we don't. They would in 1849. So what exactly is the definition of supernatural? Well, our laws of nature are patterns. They're patterns that are that we have seen again and again and again and again. Now we then take the faith leap to say they will always happen. Well, now you have a problem because now you've entered the fourth dimension and if you go back to my flatland video there's in a sense two fourth dimensions. One is the dimension in which there's a tesseract and the other fourth dimension is time. So we see patterns, but how do we know these patterns always persist? Now this is something that of course Einstein got into because he started saying that there's a thing called time space and and gravity warps time and and so they've been working on this and they found more patterns and then of course Rupert Sheldrake comes along and says but why are the constants changing? We don't know why the constants are changing. Is God changing the constants? I don't know, but you see this is where we get into God aspect one and God aspect two. God aspect one would be very comfortable in saying God changes the constants because let's say if you're a pantheist, well God is the constants. God is you, God is me, God is the sum total of everything that is obviously material or relational or so on and so forth. There you have God aspect one. But now again remember Christians have God aspect one plus God aspect two and God aspect two is a will. And I've spoken before about the fact that we tend to default to pantheism and I think we do so because of our bias. Now remember the rider and the elephant. And one of the conversations today I had a conversation about reason and I had to reinforce the fact that reason is a function of consciousness, okay? In these split brain experiments where they've got a hand over here disconnected from an eyeball over there because the brain has been split and these these experiments are really quite interesting. The hand does something and the other side of the brain makes up a different reason that's completely disconnected from the hand. Well, what are the brain scientists saying? Well, our reason is as Jonathan Haidt points out again and again, is us making up a story that seems to account for the data. This is what we do. Well, how do we try to compensate for this? We try to compensate for this in science by having a different brain try to run the data and having peer review and have other different brains try to run the data. And then to add probability because we recognize now we're going to get into the pragmatism talk. We recognize that the world is sufficiently strange and sufficiently complex. Again, read the Metaphysical Club, read about Charles Pierce and the development of statistics. Our measurements are not quite good enough. Our grasp on, read Don Hoffman, reality limited by our tools and by our interactions that we make as good a guess as we can. That's what we do. And then we make up a story and we try to explain the story. We try to explain the story to each other and we see if the story could could all continue. In the one conversation with a very bright young man, I mentioned that if Sam Harris could actually achieve the monarchical vision that he continues to profess we can all achieve together, what he would quickly discover is that the subjective is part of the vision as well. And so his monarchical vision might conflict with Steven Pinker's monarchical vision and hence they would have a conflict. And it would get complicated. That the goal of this imagined monarchical vision is in fact uniformity. But as again Thomas Nagel, go back over all my old videos, as Thomas Nagel points out, you have excluded the subject. And by doing so you have excluded whole ranges of things. And again look at Jordan Peterson, Transliminal 2015. This is the game that we're playing. But we look for patterns and then we call these patterns things and then when we then when Rupert Sheldrake goes to the people whose job it is to maintain the constants, Rupert Sheldrake's first question is why do you have to maintain the constants? Wouldn't you just write the number down and have it be this? Oh no, gravity changes, speed of light changes, these these constants fluctuate. Well, wait a minute. Why do they fluctuate? Apparently constant is in the same family of scientific, scientismistic religious words as random and natural and keep the scientistic clothing, you know, keep the tablecloth, cover the legs, peek under the tablecloth and you realize these legs are moving. Now again, you might say, well, I don't believe you. Well, do the homework. Now have I done the homework? Well, I've listened to some people and this is the way we believe almost everything. We take it on faith. Is Rupert Sheldrake lying to me that there is an organization that that continues to monitor the constants because they change? Do we know why they change? Well, what do we say? The constants are good enough. Well now we're back into pragmatism. What we're really doing is talking about control and prediction. If you can do it again, or if you can do it on request, we call it natural, even if a human person is doing it. So again, this gets into the ambiguity of this world natural. We don't necessarily know how it is done. Now here's a really uncomfortable thing we don't like to think about. Who here really knows what percentage of how anything around here is done? I've got a little bit of grasp of electricity. I've got a little bit of idea about how computers work. I've got a little bit of idea about how an internal combustion engine works, how a microphone works, how my webcam works, how the internet works, and IP addresses and all of this, but I know just a little bit of it. Some of you know a lot more, but what we've constructed here is a society that is just so built, built, built, built, built, built, built, and as Jordan Peter says many times in his lectures, the amazing thing is that anything works at all. And here we are. And we don't realize just how fragile this whole thing is. And many of you have only lived in North America, really don't realize how fragile this whole thing is. When I lived in the Dominican Republic, you could see just how fragile everything was because you saw the chaos and the disorder and on the scale of the world, the Dominican Republic is a fairly orderly place. Now if you go to Belgium, Congo, or some of these places in other places of the world, Somalia, things get darker quicker and you realize that knowledge is lost. For example, the formula that the Romans used for cement was lost for hundreds of years and we couldn't make cement. This is something about knowledge. Now what do we call it? What do we call? Nature in control. We don't necessarily know how it's done, but what you see is repetition and colonization. Now here's the thing about the word supernatural. I think there we've got a motivation here and from what we know about human beings, about the rider and the elephant, we have reason to be motivated. We again read Thomas Nagel. Doesn't want there to be a god. Well, why not? Well, because we don't like it. Well, why don't we like it? Because such a god would place demands on us. Such a god we might feel indebted to. Such a god might make us give up the illusion that we're really in control of ourselves and we're really in control of this world. Now we're in control good enough. Good enough for for the most part the outcomes we're getting. But what do I deal with as a pastor? I deal with the fringes of our knowledge. Oh, you mean that because you've talked about God? Yeah, but pastorally you deal with the fringes of people's knowledge. You deal with the fringes of medical knowledge. You deal with the fringes of all kinds of places where suddenly ask a doctor sometime with a person who is very very sick and likely going to die. Doctor, when is this person going to die? I can't tell you. In fact, most of the pastoral concerns about health that come to me are at the frontier and the limits of knowledge of what the doctors know and I watch this especially with mental health. We just don't know and and I think what we're coming to and again, I made this point with a very smart young man I talked with today. Maybe I'm maybe I'm just pestering him to to think about it. But hey, you know if if you don't want to release it not everybody should be on YouTube. I totally get that but we had a terrifically fun conversation. There's whole ranges of things we don't know. I'm walking home after work. I could be mugged and knifed and die and my children will no longer have their father. I could have a heart attack. I could get hit by a car. An asteroid could strike the earth. Just YouTube. Ten ways the world can end. That's kind of a scary thing. One of the things that we don't want is there to be a god because Kierkegaard, despair unto death. Read that piece and this young man was reading Kierkegaard. Yeah, Kierkegaard's hard to read but imagine the catastrophe of a person who is in such pain and despair about themselves and they kill themselves only to discover they haven't ended their conscious stream. Well, they had they had banked on ending their conscious stream, but now they realize that maybe not all their problems but a certain number of problems have gone on with them because for some reason their consciousness wasn't necessarily simply a product of their mind. See, here's the funny thing about fear. You can use it in both ways and religious people for a long time have used fear to move people in a certain way and this is how people work. If you want to know if you want to know how to get elected use fear because fear is a fear is something that grabs hold of our brain from the back forward and make people afraid of, well, here you have two sides, make people afraid of immigrants or make people afraid of global warming. They might say, well, I have science on my side. Well, guess what? The other person is using rationality, too. They're often simply just starting from a different data set, different presuppositions. And you know what? For many of us, a lot of our fear triggers they're built in by our experience and maybe you've had an experience with a maybe you've got a degree of xenophobia because of a particular experience that you had and someone keeps talking about borders bang you press one button. Maybe you love going out for Thai food and Mexican food and and Ethiopian food and you love the racial diversity. You're high in openness. You think immigrants? Bring them in. But global warming, we've got to do something about that. Have you measured the CO2? No, but I see the science and it seems real to me. Yeah, it seems real to me, too. But have you done the work? Have you done the projections? Have you built the computers that have that have that have run the models? Well, but I believe yeah, that's the point. You believe. We're all believing. We're filling in these words with things that our motivation is involved with. Now, I'm going to have a conversation tomorrow with with someone who deconverted from Christianity and part of the reason when I saw his video I really wanted to have a conversation with him because he seemed like the kind of guy who and this is really hard when we start talking about things where we poke each other in our axioms. Well, the ego gets involved and we dig in and in fact, I think part of the idea behind the intellectual dark web, which only time will tell if they can pull it off, is if we can have difficult conversations in a productive way. Well, what usually makes the conversation unproductive? Our egos? Are our egos rational? Can we explain them? Kind of. Not really. Because the one thing that we can't control is us. Why do I say that? CO2 levels in the atmosphere. Will we? I don't know. Probably when enough of the world gets scared enough. I sometimes like to imagine if Jesus is running around doing miracles, why will the authorities hate him? And actually the comic book people are mining the god stuff pretty well. Superman on trial. Iron Man on trial. I mean via the comic books again these the comic books and the the comic books are in many ways are theological texts today. They really are and that's why if your little girl's dressed up like Wonder Woman or Batgirl, she might as well be in Sunday school because that's the last video I made. Lock up Superman. He's too dangerous. Well, why is he too dangerous? Because he's unaccountable. Well, what is democracy? It's about it's a suspicion of not letting one person get too much power. That's what it's about and the American founding fathers understood this and they built a system and this is why we try to maintain this system and this is why we fear for this system. And the right feared it with Obama and the left feared it with Trump and I would dare bet that just about when anybody is president the opposite side fears it. And this is part of what keeps you know, to what degree will the Senate lose the 50 rule the 60 rule? Well, you lose the 60 rule. You're just that much closer to losing the 50 rule because we've got to get our we got to get our judges through. Oh, okay. Well, this is the way the game is played and what in a sense you do is you take a process and you make it sacred. You put it at the top of your hierarchy in terms of your practice. See and this is why one one person at my meetup very smart guy made the comment that you know, what is Jordan Peterson really giving us? He's really giving us a language to help us deal with what's going on now. And and I think for that we owe him. Thanks. So we try to get a handle on God. Well, what in a sense Jordan Peterson is doing is just trying to he's a scientist and he's trying to enlarge the data set. Not enlarge it imaginarily like the number of monkeys and typewriters you need to come up with the works of William Shakespeare, but he says there is data out there that we can mine but it's in a different form and Brett Weinstein see Brett Weinstein Jordan Peterson on Joe Rogan. Brett Weinstein goes along with that. Well, well how tree rings and glacier ice? Yeah, we're enlarging the data set on co2 and growth and all of this stuff, but he's mining stories and this is why again God aspect number one you can you can be a naturalist and say by faith there is no such thing as supernatural and now what I would say is that my religious upbringing has equipped me to be able to talk with you about faith differences that we have. I was thinking the other day that rebel wisdom it wasn't with the Jordan Peterson interview. It was a couple other guys and I really should track down the reference but one of the persons on on rebel wisdom they were talking about politics and he was saying people conservatives in America usually know they can they basically can mind read and I don't mean literally mind reading in a supernatural sense. They can more reliably predict what liberals what the left is going to do then the left can predict what the right is going to do. Why? because because if you're a conservative and you go to university you have to learn two languages and two cultures. So you basically become bicultural and bilingual. This is also true for African Americans. African Americans know white society better than white society knows African American society. Why? because African Americans have had to adapt and learn to talk white and act white and be white around white people because of a power differential. Okay, that's all social justice warrior. This this stuff is real. The question is how good are the solutions to the inequalities that they create? That's where the debate is and should be. Again listen to Morgan Lowry. He and John McWhorter have great conversations about this. The same is true. I would argue for religious people in a secular society. If you're religious in a secular society and you are going to university and you are dealing in the public sphere, you learn to talk secular. You learn to be able to adopt the secular language. But if you maintain yourself in your religious community, you also learn the religious way of life. And so that's why the religious practice and the faith assertions of the secular community are so obvious to religious people because we play this game all the time. The secular community acts like no, this is natural. This is random. We can easily tell the difference between natural and supernatural. Really? We can't. Is that because we don't understand it? No, we understand it perfectly well. C.S. Lewis makes the point. Joseph was going to divorce, marry or sever the engagement because Joseph knew very well where babies come from. And according to the story, it takes evidence as dramatic as an angelic well, actually he just got a dream with an angel to change his mind. David Hume. C.S. Lewis's point with David Hume is the problem with history and science is that by definition everything in history, even if you're a naturalist, only happens once in every single one of its aspects. And to use some Aristotelian language, accidents. So can you make predictions? Yeah. Most of the time are they good enough? Yeah. But you always have to take into account your data set is limited. And even if you use statistics, there's always the chance you've got an outlier. You have a drawer opening in a hotel room and two men sitting there and not able to give any account why. Jordan Peterson is mining stories. He's enlarging the data set and he's saying we should mine these stories. And as I think about what is impacting so many people, there's this again, this interesting concordism that Jordan Peterson is doing in his biblical series where he says, you know when I see the tree and the fruit and I think this is consciousness. I think this and the reason it's a snake, I don't think that's random. I think psychologically there's stuff going on in this story and you might say well this story is very very very old. How on earth could be they be so smart as to put a snake in it? And when people listen to the biblical series and they hear that, suddenly the Bible has credibility. Not only does the Bible have credibility, but Jung has credibility and all of this other stuff that Peterson is mining has credibility. Why? Because there seemed to be a predictive aspect and what Peterson is really doing is saying I'm mining the stories and I'm getting results. And what that says to people even if they can't rationalize it in their conscious mind is they're saying he's mining the stories and getting results. Might I also not mine the stories and learn something too? Maybe I should mine the stories. Peterson says we watched each other do sacrifice and psychologically speaking the act of sacrifice is associated with the act of withholding gratification and we watched those who sacrifice withhold gratification and therefore because of their power to withhold gratification even within a secular framework, even within the iron box of secularism, they succeed. Religious adaptations offer an advantage over the unreligious. We can mine the religious data, the ancient data, the stories, all of this stuff for that and we can account for it with a strictly secular story. And now many secularists within their religious sphere will look at that and say I can buy that. Brett Weinstein can listen to that and again listen to him on Joe Rogan say I agree that we can mine ancient stories for wisdom. Then he says but we have to evaluate it. Ah but once you go once you say evaluate we're back to the data set issue. Evaluate on what measure? Now you say well Christian people are irrational. That's hardly true. Christian person like me is highly secularized. If you don't believe me compare me to an African pastor. I'm highly secularized. Now again, that's a maybe I'm trading in a trope. I'm sure there are African pastors that are more secular than I am, but generally speaking given my context I'm highly secularized. So when I do evaluations what I tend to do is I tend to look at all the data sets and this is why a Christian who's living in this context and an atheist who's living in this context share a huge amount in common because I might have the additional selection of maybe God did something. They might exclude that by virtue of their faith, but again the difference between natural and supernatural random natural causes are the faith assertions the presuppositional faith assertions that we are bringing to the situation we are trying to evaluate. So it is right and good for Brett Weinstein to run an evaluation of the wisdom that he's mining from these stories and actually I've listened to a number of Brett Weinstein's YouTubes and I really like them. In fact again in terms of the intellectual dark web politically I'm over there with the Weinsteins more than I am with with Ben Shapiro and I think frankly Jordan Peterson. He's a Canadian. He's on a different spectrum. Canadians tend to be center. They tend to have a little leftist shift than Americans culturally. That's a challenge it in the comments if you want to. But this is what's going on. He's mining stories. Now I'm gonna talk to Andy tomorrow and I'm really looking forward to this and I know Andy wants to publish it. So we're gonna have a lot of fun tomorrow and I don't have a lot of time because I'm also talking to Sid Helema and I assume that Sid and I tomorrow will probably publish ours too. So there's a little teaser for tomorrow. You usually get a day late because I go home and I have fiber at home so I upload it at home because I only have cable here at work and so to upload a cable is terrible. So but Andy says in his video to me Jordan Peterson won't answer the question of God aspect two and I keep saying he does all the time and what he says is could be I don't know and what that means is that there are those who religiously say and again I would my assertion is that that is a religious position that they are saying no to what they assert is supernatural. That everything is the whole show. Okay? And random is a natural process and there is no God to tinker with the random. That's their faith. I would say providential deism has impacted me but so has Calvinism. So it's a very strong sense of providence and I would say on one hand yeah, I can buy this the idea of random but on the other hand I also buy the idea of providence and because of my Calvinism providence is a very big deal and if you look at my conversation that I had because days are coming together yesterday with with Alex Smith from Tasmania, who knew all these watchers are from Tasmania? That's so cool. If in fact I do get to Australia, who knows maybe I'll maybe I'll get over to Tasmania probably time and money will limit limit me but you know totally cool. What an amazing world. So See I distract myself. That's why I do PowerPoint. In other words my assertion is that these are all in a sense religious positions. If you get if you get a rash when I say religions, I'll say world views. These are all world views and they all have limitations and they all have open ends and they all have areas they can't account for them. And so what we're doing when we're having conversations is we're saying this is what I think based on the evidence. Well, this is what I think about based on the evidence. And why do we disagree? Because we're human beings and our capacity to know is so small and as I've said is so small and as I mentioned to the one individual I had today, rationality what Sam Karras calls rationality watch Ian McGoqvist is a function of just this tiny slice of our rational mind. And if you begin looking at the other places of our brain that are getting involved well when if I slide the cucumber by my cat and my cat freaks the heck out is the cat being rational? Yes, according to the limitations of the cat's ability to perceive. Now I've got a higher level and I've also got agency involved so when I slide the cucumber if you don't know what I talk about with the cucumber and the cat just go to YouTube and type in cat and cucumber and you'll see. And this isn't a Michelle Goldberg was that her? This isn't a Michelle Goldberg Google it. This is yeah cats cucumber YouTube watch. When I slide that cucumber I know what's happening so my rationality is happening but here's the problem. Is it rational for the Trump supporters when Trump keeps pushing the fear button on immigration which is what he's doing all the time? Is that rational? Well there are concerns with immigration. I'm not a proponent. I'm not a you know I don't think anybody open borders not going to happen. On the other hand global warming. Push the fear button on global warming. The New York Times does it all the time. Mainstream media I don't like that term doing it all the time. So both sides are pushing the fear button. Supreme Court justice it's going to take away it's going to overturn Roe vs Wade. Do they pause 10 seconds and ask well that would put it up to the states. No they don't do they just flood fear floods the mind. Well one of the things that we should do is own the strengths and limitations of our worldview. So we'll see how my conversation with with Andy goes tomorrow. Love the beard. You see Jordan Peterson there's this so Andrew Sweeney wrote a great piece on the individual that did this RSA conversation with Jordan Peterson and there's Jordan Petersonitis and read both Andrew Sweeney and his which is linked in Andrew Sweeney's Jordan Petersonitis page. Read both of them because they're both very good and his one of his beefs is Jordan Peterson needs to be involved in fighting global warming more more regularly. Now I just had another friend who's a pastor and he went to his first ever Jordan Peterson meetup I think maybe in Edmonton. I don't know Pete if you're listening you can correct me in the comment section. Pete if you're listening jump into the comment section. I should do a video with Pete. Pete's a guy you'd all like because Pete's a very likeable guy. Anyway Pete went to a Jordan Peterson meetup session and had an interesting time and then he heard a nephew who listens to Jordan Peterson when he's doing a manual job and then he talked to some women pastors and women in his life who have a very negative have a very negative impression of Jordan Peterson. What's going on? Well Jordan Peterson isn't sufficiently upset by by what? By your world view because you imagine well Jordan Peterson should be out there combating racial prejudice. Jordan Peterson should be fighting the patriarchy. Jordan Peterson should be fighting white supremacy. Jordan Peterson should be helping to defeat global warming. This is all good men should come to the aid of their country especially those who are men men like Jordan Peterson. Well we're afraid. Why are we afraid? Another piece in case I haven't exploded your book list and your YouTube watching enough watch CS Lewis's you can get the CS Lewis Doodle and watch the whole thing it's on YouTube Living in an Atomic Age by CS Lewis Doodle. When the Russians got the bomb the west freaked out. Why? Because they're rational and they could say this could go badly and everyone's freaking out and CS Lewis said why are you freaking out? Y'all knew you're gonna die. Your world view says the whole planet's gonna die. The only dimension in which anything has changed is time. What does that mean? Well what is random? What is supernatural? What is natural? Who is Jordan Peterson's God? Then again Jordan Peterson God aspect one. I think he makes a really solid case now and this is where I'll get into it probably with Andy a little bit tomorrow. So you have God aspect one and I listened to Andy's video today and I think well maybe we'll sharpen this again and I really like listening to Andy and his I think he's got a good mind and he's working with language and he's doing this and saying let's narrow this down. Let's get our definition sharp. Let's work on this together and anyone whether you're an atheist or you know that's fun. Let's get more precise and the only way we do that is if we have long conversations. Back into the intellectual dark dark web. So see C.S. Lewis's Living in an Atomic Age after this and let's C.S. Lewis fill your mind with some good C.S. Lewisness. So there's a oh just about an hour so if you've got your hour commute I've done my duty and filled it nicely. Now a couple of a couple of show notes at the end. I'm I am really going on vacation next week really and I may not do any videos. May not. We'll see. We'll see where the wife and I go and what we do. I'll say this it's not going to be a priority. All right. So hope you miss me. I am thinking seriously about I've been enjoying the conversations I've been having and my new protocol with these conversations is usually that I will record them and and then if we want to share them some some conversations I have there either I don't think they fit my channel or there's too much personal stuff or the other person just doesn't want to be that public. That's totally cool but there's a limit to the number of conversations I can have and as I said to my young friend today the hierarchy the hierarchy limits and blinds and binds as you go up it and again I'm not a I'm not a big fish by any means and it could all collapse. All my Patreon supporters could go away and all my YouTube subscribers could unsubscribe and you know and not just the channels that have been abandoned so it could all go away and that would be fine but the fun of this is in fact having the conversations that I've been having and doing the meetups and so I'm thinking about this may become a I want to warn you ahead of time this may become a Patreon thing because I am on one hand I was reluctant to get into the Patreon thing but I am conscious of those who who send me money. I'm a human being and you send me money it's like I money's helpful and don't I'm a Christian the love of money is the root of all evil so I'm as Charles Taylor would say I'm very cross-pressured but I do want to say thanks to those who are supporting me via Patreon so my thinking at this point and I'm probably as bad as Jordan Peterson saying I'm going to start the Exodus in November but my thinking at this point is I might do some trial runs and the I might do cyber meetups and it might be me and three other people and we might go for an hour an hour and a half and I might state a subject early on and say who would like to talk about this topic and specify if you'd like it to be a public so we have a public meetup where I post it on my channel or we have a private meetup part of my burden is to produce content and it isn't so much that I have a difficult time producing content as many of you can testify to it is it is that I have a limited amount of time to produce content and so if I am using a lot of that limited budget of time for producing meetup content which I think will be really interesting I've got to compensate for it somehow and thus the Patreon because what I I try to balance time I take away from my church time I take away from my family for the YouTube stuff because I've got to be a responsible father and husband and I have to be responsible to the church even though obviously there is definitely overlap with the church and a number of you have been contributing to the church it's finally the church has online giving the problem seems to be my online giving provider really only takes donations from the United States which is good for those of you who are in the United States because hopefully the giving information will track through and we can send you a a tax donation receipt so you can get a little bit off your taxes donations to Livingstone's Christian Informed Church are tax deductible and there's no direct service being offered so that's legal but it doesn't seem to work internationally and some of you have written to me about that sorry but but I'm thinking about doing and again this will be a lot of experimentation for people in a room talking about Jordan Peterson and I've been another another one of the things that I was incredibly impressed by is that there are so many smart people out there that you know like Andrew he's got no YouTube subscribers well nobody knows about Andrew so one of the things that I enjoy doing and I still can do because I'm not bound up in the hierarchy so much is I love to give some visibility to some of you really smart people out there that are having really amazing thoughts and well maybe you won't start a YouTube channel and maybe you'll never have Patreon and but but just give you your a little bit of time in the sun so that the rest of the world can see how smart you are and your good ideas and we can all benefit from it because hierarchies bind and blind as much as they afford access to other people on the hierarchy and other people in other hierarchies so for me someone way down the hierarchy it's it's really cool to mine the resources at this level and to talk to have the conversations that I've been having and my wife says don't tell people this because everybody's going to want to talk to you and she has a point because then everybody wants to talk to me I only have so many hours in the day I can only do so many conversations so and some of these conversations I initiate and I just noticed today that Peterson looks like he's using Zoom for his conversations good job J.B.P. because works really well hey zoom why don't you sponsor me zoom audible books amazon y'all are spending money someplace but anyway so thanks for watching again this whole thing has been enormously gratifying tomorrow I'm working on my sermon too and my sermon I think my sermon will interest a number of people this week I wrote my I wrote my outline a day early but you know I've got people to visit and sick people in the hospital and a church to do but tomorrow I'll probably talk to Andy and I'll probably talk to Sid again and Sid had been to a Jordan Peterson event in Toronto and had written a written a report of his visit to the Jordan Peterson book event in the in the Hamilton entire Ontario newspaper and I'll probably link to that after I talk to Sid so that's what's happening so thanks for watching and see all the good YouTube say subscribe support me on Patreon Patreon is obviously actually the Patreon just kind of gives me less guilt in terms of taking away time from the family and it encourages if I say to my wife look Patreon she says do more videos otherwise she says are you getting paid for these videos that's not really part of your church work so shouldn't talk about my wife on YouTube anyway that's it for today