https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WuB6zmMWC_0

 Hi, this is Paul. Yeah, this video is going to be about what all my other videos are about. We interrupt our program to bring you this important message. We have just lost cabin pressure. All right. Hello, everybody. This is perhaps a randos record, I think. I don't think there have been five people on a randos conversation before. We are going to be doing a commentary on the Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Peugeot video that dropped yesterday. I think, like, obviously this conversation is like right in the sweet spot of what this community likes to talk about and think about. And I thought that the conversation didn't disappoint at all. So I'd be curious in your guys's first impressions. Yeah, well, this is the I will. My first impression is that finally, right? It's like Peter, like Peterson, like this is the first conversation where I feel like he was being real because and it's interesting. It's like, you know, he's noted for how much you pride over how much he he values honesty. But it's pretty clear that there was a level of deception in some of those earlier conversations that he had where he was like portraying himself as being more OK than he actually is. And so in the conversation with Peugeot, he became genuinely vulnerable, which allowed the which which allowed him to go, you know, to go beyond like this sort of like surface level conversations. He'd been having up to this point. So that's that. That was my number one takeaway is just like this is this is real. This is this is him being authentic. I agree with that. I just want I would want to put I love Peterson so much and not that you don't. I just want to push back that I would think in his earlier conversations, I think part of what's going on is I think of it as Peugeot talks about this, too, even in a house, their inner and outer rooms. And to varying degrees based on temperament, people share different things with different people. And it's not about dishonesty. It's about communion and trust and relationality. And there's just certain things that like that my bedroom, my bedroom isn't meant for everyone. You know, my kitchen isn't meant for everyone. The foyer is maybe meant for some people if I don't really know you. And there's just certain things I'm not going to share with you because I don't trust you. And I think Jordan Peterson was right to not trust a lot of those people because he's dealing with ideologues and assholes. You know, as so anyhow, it's a little defense. I agree with you. Right. Well, I don't I'm not saying like it's not that it's not that he was it's not that I'm saying like he was consciously lying. But he was like there was there was a little bit of effort to like put on a brave face. He definitely was. There was some level of like deception in the earlier conversation about what his his personal level of function actually is true. Like I believe at one point he actually said he thought he was about 80 percent. And then he's talking to Pajol. He says five percent. So that's a direct contradiction. So one statement was false or the other. I believe the five percent was probably closer to true. So that's all I'm saying, which is like it's totally. If you're going to if you're going to fact check me. Yeah, I wouldn't want anyone to fact check me either. Don't get me wrong. And I'm not it's not no judgment. I'm just glad to see Jordan get to a place where he can have an authentic conversation and be open about where he really is. My first takeaway was that we should all be praying for him, especially anybody that's been blessed by his his work. Yeah, yeah, for sure. Absolutely. Yeah. And I want to come in Pajol for basically like the way he handled everything was really good because there's a you know, not the Pajol would. But, you know, he even says that, you know, I don't feel like I can moralize with you about this at this time. You know, in the face of suffering like that, the best thing you can do is sometimes be silent. And then since we have to talk about it, talk about it with like Pajol showed a lot of like restraint and grace and concern, you know, that I don't know. I appreciate it. It's like he's familiar with Joe, even though he didn't bring it up explicitly. You know, I wish he brought up Joe. Yeah, well, he just he just modeled the appropriate and opposite behavior of what you see in Joe. I thought it was interesting. I think Jordan Peterson was like more honestly curious to hear what Pajol would say and like was like he wasn't just asking questions to sort of keep the conversation going kind of like in an interview where you kind of have to predict the answer. He like was asking questions where he's like, Please help me, Jonathan. Yeah, like what can I say? Yeah, like Sam at the point where he says like when he talks about his becoming he's like you weren't born orthodox. Tell me how you did it. The way he said that it's like that was like he really meant that question from the depth of his being like, show me how it's done. I don't understand how you how you did it. I want whatever it is you have, but I can't see a way to it. Yeah, yeah, that's a point. I hope we really touch on because his aversion to so called Christianity and Christian practice and church and even because that was a little joke in there. You know, like you're one of the few people who've actually seen me in church and how did that go? So like he has and he said before, you know, like he doesn't want he just his he feels like his skin is like crawling in church almost and it's not and what's crazy is it's not in my opinion. I think the reason he feels that way a lot of it is whether or not his attention to it and his focus on it is misaligned in the value hierarchy, his own personal hierarchy. That's something it just is what it is. And and I I don't think that his reaction to that is necessarily off. You know, I mean, his qualms with with Christian practice in the church, I think are legit. But like, I don't know. I hope we just get into part of that, too. All right. It needs to be it would need to be the right church, too. Right. I mean, I don't know what church he was in before. Yeah, either orthodox or like a crazy charismatic church where he doesn't need to sit still. Just Jordan Peterson running up and down the aisles waving banners. I think that could work. Yeah. Well, actually, you know, that's actually like, OK, maybe this is just because I am Catholic. But since his wife is since his wife is Catholic, that's actually one of the areas where I think like Pazzo like Pazzo kind of overstated the case for orthodoxy a bit. A few times, I think. And it's like, like, particularly as it comes to theosis, because like there definitely is within the Western Catholic tradition and understanding of theosis, you know, maybe not as clearly in some of the later theologians, but certainly it's there in Aquinas for sure. And, you know, I wouldn't like especially since his his wife is Catholic, that's not a tradition you'd want to steer him away from. Yeah. All right. Should we I've got our first clip lined up. Let's see if I can pull this off and hopefully the audio is on the recording when this happens to. All right, this is about five, six minutes long. Okay, can you see the screen, everybody? Yep. All right. Here we go. I'm going to do this on normal speed, just in case anyone watches us on 2x. I don't want to watch this on 2x and then all of a sudden Jordan Pearson's on 4x. I think that would be a little bit crazy. So, might feel like he's crawling through molasses, but that's what I'll do. I think while I have been dealing with these, well, borderline religious issues, well, certainly not just borderline. There's lots of religious people who seem to think that I'm dealing with religious issues. And, well, and that's really what I wanted to talk to you about tonight. So, this book I mentioned earlier. To talk about. Disagreements with my conceptualization of Christ, let's say, and which I'm not sure what that conceptualization is, by the way. Exactly. It's a mystery to me. But I can say some concrete things about it. I mean, I certainly, I understand and appreciate the symbolic significance of the ideal human being. And that finds its embodiment. And I took these ideas in large part from Jung and Eric Neumann. That Christ is at least a representation of the ideal man, whatever that is. And we all, interestingly enough, we all seem to have an ideal. And that ideal has us. So, this is where, okay, I just want to jump in a little bit because Peterson is so, when you're, anytime you're somebody who's so precise in their language and is being very intentional and has thought about things a lot, you have to really listen to what they're saying. And Peterson makes explicit, I'm careful in my speech. And so, like, I don't know, it'd be interesting to see what that book has to say about how they disagree with his conceptualizations of Christ, because even there he said, I'm not even sure what that is. What you think you're disagreeing with, I'm not even that solid on it. But also, he's really careful because he's trying to talk about things within his area of expertise. So, he talks about it within psychological terms, but he always, like, he said, it's at least this. He's not denying things there. He's leaving space. But I think when a lot of people, when people who either temperamentally or culturally lean a little bit dogmatic and fundamentalist in their Christian traditions, they hear that and they're like, well, he's denying the incarnation. But like, listen to what he's saying. He's saying, like, I believe that Christ, and he's meaning Jesus, is the ideal manifestation of these archetypes. That's not a denial of things that you want him to affirm. You're just not listening well enough. Yeah, yeah. And this book that he's mentioning that these Catholic writers associated with Bishop Barron, I think, like, that book is, like, looming over this conversation. It seems like you'd read it that morning or something like that. And so anyway, I'm curious to hear that book, but I think that that's a large part of what's going on in this conversation. All right, I'll go back. Right. And that's where it's very interesting to consider the role of conscience, because your conscience will call you out on your behavior. And so it seems to function as something that's somewhat independent, or at least as something that you can't fully voluntarily control. Because if you could voluntarily control it, then you just tell the pesky little bastard to go away or to pat you on the back continually. Because there must be few things in life more pleasurable than being a fully committed narcissist to really believe that everything that you do is right and that you're a good person. And I suppose if you could wave a magic wand and rearrange your mind so that it was constantly telling you that you do it, but you don't seem to be able to do that in relationship to your conscience. It trips you up. And so it tells you when you're not living up to your own ideal. And that means that you have an ideal and you don't even know what the hell it is. But you certainly know when you transgress against it. And I know that there's a strong line of Christian thinking that's identified the conscience with divinity, sometimes with Christ inside, sometimes with the Holy Spirit. And those are very interesting conceptualizations. But you can think of them psychologically and you can even think about them biologically, you know, to some degree, because we're so social. If we don't manifest an appropriate moral reciprocity, we're going to become alienated from our fellows and we won't survive and we'll suffer and die. And we won't we certainly won't find a partner. And so to some degree, the conscience can be viewed as the voice of reciprocal society within. And that's a perfectly reasonable biological explanation. But but the thing is, is the deeper you go into biology, the more it shades into something that appears to be religious, because you start analyzing the fundamental structure of the society. And and it becomes something. Well, it becomes something with a power with with a with a with with a power that transcends your ability to resist it. So, OK, so you can think about Christ from a psychological perspective and you can think about Christ from a psychological perspective. My critic, this particular critic that I've been reading said, well, that that doesn't differentiate Christ much from a whole sequence of dying and resurrecting mythological gods. And of course, people have made that claim in comparative religion. Joseph Campbell did that and Jung, to a lesser degree, said that. But the difference and C.S. Lewis pointed this out as well, the difference between those mythological gods and Christ was that there's a there's a representation of there's a historical representation of his of his existence as well. The difference and CS Lewis pointed this out as well, the difference between those mythological gods and Christ was that there's a there's a representation of there's a historical representation of his of his existence as well. Now, you can debate whether or not that's genuine. You can debate about whether or not he actually lived and whether there's credible objective evidence for that. But it doesn't matter in some sense, because this well it does. Well, it does but there's a sense in which it doesn't matter because there's still a historical story and so what you have in the figure of Christ is an actual person who actually lived plus a myth and In some sense Christ is the union of those two things The problem is is I probably believe that but I don't know I don't I'm amazed at my own belief and I don't understand it like because I've seen Sometimes the objective world and the narrative world touch You know, that's the union synchronicity And I've seen that many times in my own life And so in some sense, I believe it's undeniable, you know, we have a narrative sense of the world for me That's been the world of morality. That's the world that tells us how to act It's real like we treat it like it's real. It's not the objective world But the narrative in the objective world touch and the ultimate example of that in principle is supposed to be Christ But I don't know what to that seems to me oddly plausible Yeah, but I still don't know what to make of it. It's too it part because it's too terrifying a reality to Fully believe I don't even know what would happen to you if you fully believed it If you all right, I'll stop before Peugeot answers Man like watching that again, that's like my third or fourth time watching that now it's so Raw like a I almost don't even know how to react to that Yeah, it definitely is raw I Yeah It's hard for me because it's like you can't the thing that I get frustrated about with Peterson critics is I Don't know what do you want from the guy like what more than that Could you possibly want from him like he's? Um Clearly he's struggling With these ideas and wrestling with them in a way that is genuine, I mean you're not you're not faking that emotion And it's He is I mean there's so much there's so much in like a technical way You could wonder about the language that he's using and what exactly he means by it And And even being terrified by his own belief and that he thinks he believes it I think the difficult I honestly think the difficulty with a lot of Peterson critics Is that they can't understand what he's going through because he takes it more seriously than they do And So I don't think they really understand his struggle because I don't think they've ever really wrestled with it to the degree that he's wrestling with it well, that's part of the irritation I think too is because he's drawing something he's drawing attention to something and Saying that it we at least at least need to deal with it and pay attention to it Whereas his opponents are like no no no This is a thing we already discarded long ago that we don't even need why are you even bringing this up? Like this is just something from our past that you're trying to that we that we've evolved beyond and you're trying to drag this Thing back like why are you doing that? So actually I think it's part of why they mistrust him because it's like they That's exactly what they're afraid of I really want to know what he I do on it because I do care about I Really want to know what he means when he says the the objective and the narrative though Yeah, like what is his using narrative? What are those? What are those in his conception? I would like to I wish kind of was Jonathan would have asked him to Clarify what he meant there It's it's clear. It's it's from his maps of meaning right? It's it's the the world of action versus the world of things Gotcha So it's it's like that. It's it's the narrative is you know, what what should you do? What what is a value and then the other one is just what is what is you know? And what can be ascribed objectively through this this scientific method? I was wondering When he talked about them touching though to me it's like to me like he's almost he's almost he's really getting close to participation there when he talks about those things touching because Because that's because that to me when he says touching that means inner penetration, right? So that means that the objective is no that means that the objective world is no longer purely objective So just wait I need greater clarity too because even what you just said Michael I don't understand and that seems to be confused with stuff I've heard Peterson say all the time because what's interesting is like although Peterson is a scientist I think one of my favorite things that he's ever said and that he talks about and they talk about in this video actually when they talk about Chairness and what make what makes things real and what makes you see something as a unity? Versus a thing of full of its parts. Like why do you see a chair? Why do you see a beanbag? And it and that's fundamentally and the way my the best illustration that I like is when Peterson talks about holes and it's almost that reality objective reality is more about attention Than it is about facts and objects, but like that seems different than what he's saying there. So it's almost like Peterson is going back and forth between two things because I would say Peterson talked about like holes and he says even biologically And I think this works philosophically too You don't actually we don't see facts and objects like those things don't exist. You don't see objects. You see potentials You don't see a hole you see a falling off potential But we but you map that abstraction that idea a hole onto the thing so quickly so instantly to bring in barfield you you map that alpha thinking so fast in your brain and Rupert Sheldrake actually talks about this in his book the science delusion is that you You're you're thinking and your thought and your idea about a thing your body actually reacts to stuff before your brain Even conceptualize it so your body is doing things the action is happening before you even think But we think the thinking happens first because the way that the biological mechanisms work is that there's like this like I don't even know what it is microsecond gap that happens and Like there's a little pause and so you think the thinking comes first, but it doesn't so you You're And so Peterson I don't I don't know because because I would say objective reality to him is more almost About attention see there's all this like there's like modern Smuggling that comes in because I think people when they talk about objective reality mean We'll just you know, like in my neighborhood science is real. What do you mean by real? You know like I don't Peterson's definitely modernist and I think that that's where his great struggle is In terms of why why this is ripping the parties He is trying to keep as Pagio was saying he's trying to keep his foot in that world well also straddle me this other world and it is it's it's literally ripping him apart to some extent and I Find it odd that he fight well Those worlds are touching all the time. They're Yes, see, you know, it's only that they're only distinguished in our mental concepts and so I think I think that's kind of what he's he's realizing in those moments that not only do they touch but that they're actually one in the same really that they're that there's That there is this this great overlay and I think I It's a I think he experiences that as a sort of falling into something that he doesn't want to do he wants to keep his feet firmly on the ground of something he can control and He's scared he's scared of what what happens if he trusts and I'm I'm glad that Pagio let him down that like belief isn't about propositions. It's about it's about trusting the author It's suspend its suspension of disbelief in saying okay, the author has a hasn't isn't gonna waste my time He's gonna tell me a good story. Well, that's yeah, that's the basis of reality I mean, this is stuff that we talk about in the box with her at all the time is reality being ontology is rooted in communion and It's rooted in in being a person I tried to bring this up in my book hub last night and I feel like everybody just Got mad at me and stared at me blankly but like the center of reality is is personal and and that's why it's I mean, this is where I like I Use the terms Eucharistic knowing and mamanistic knowing like you either know things communally through faith Which is fundamentally non Non-manipulative non coercive by its nature or you know things in a way you think you know things in a way Where you can manipulate and control the world to your personal T Los? But to step into communal knowing means you cannot step into communal knowing without relinquishing that sense of control over reality Which I think is like it's interesting, you know Peterson like that Right Peterson talks about psychedelics a lot but I don't know if he's ever personally used them or not and if he did I'm sure he would have terrible trips because as long as you're trying to as long as you're trying to hold on to that point of view of of Control and you're resisting the experience Which is definitely trying to kick you into an another way of experiencing reality altogether where that is just not on the table Then it's bound to be an unpleasant experience and I haven't liked that which is why I've had a lot of unpleasant experiences But I because but I know that that's why So when you see if you saw me because like that's what he's saying. He sees these touch points Which he sees most clearly in Christ where the narrative where I would I think the story narrative thing is is a helpful distinction Because the store I think of the story as what is Like story to me is almost like fundamental reality whereas narrative is like your ideas about the story which is necessarily a layer of abstracting from the reality But like when he sees those two things meet in Christ So I agree like Michael was saying this earlier Nate you were saying this is everything is like that. That is the That's what I call iconic vision when you see everything is iconic Simultaneously transcendent and imminent at the same time. It's sacramental Well, everything is like that but like that is I think if you try to if you come into the world with like a modernist frame where it's where those things are necessarily divided and Then you start seeing those things all over. I think it's gonna be like what you said with psychedelics It will be incredibly disconcerting and feel overwhelming and you'll start to feel crazy, but it's not But it's because you're you're tapping into what's really there and you're it's not it's literally blowing you apart Yeah, it is literally blowing you apart. But you need but the thing is is that you need to be blown apart. Yes So, yeah The strange thing is that I mean he's he's articulated That these things are connected before and so it's weird And so it's weird he's he's kind of and this is the modernist frame that you could you can know thing In box X and not have it connected over here in the other parts of your knowledge and in So he's it I feel like he's done all the hard work of a conversion But he's he and he knows it more in his body probably than anything else. I think when he's moved to tears, he's experiencing another reality But he doesn't he doesn't want to completely give in to him because he doesn't he doesn't trust it It's a it's certainly a losing of control that he doesn't want to embrace at this moment or he's if he's weird It's going to crush him or pull him apart You know, I found it interesting, you know Paget at one point talks about in the orthodox tradition that the gift of tears And and I don't know if anybody else has had experiences of this but like Um there's there's there is a feeling in that where there is a sadness and joy commingled And it and it can feel like It can't feel like if if you were to embrace it fully it would crush you but I think That's that's what he's he's he's kind of standing at the doorway of if I walk into this reality I've so imbibed these truths in other ways and to think that they're actually real Like the weight of that I feel like he thinks is is going to crush him He's afraid of it. Also, he does seem to think that there is real value in him standing outside That's standing where he's standing and calling others in is is more useful to some larger purpose than than him being inside Here's where that figure of beatrice sort of like, you know deep romantic attachment attachment Can kind of be a really good way of understanding this because there is simultaneously this overwhelming longing, but there is also a fear of rejection And it is the fear of rejection that is peterson's block in my opinion. That's how I read it That's interesting Um, okay, I think i'll i'll go into our next clip which I think deals even more with some of the stuff that we were just talking about That's right Yeah, it necessarily and and so god I saw that pro wrestling. There's a great documentary, uh, uh bret hart Called hitman hart. It's one of the best documentaries i've ever seen and it Portrays pro wrestling as a stark religious Battle between the forces of good and evil and bret hart who at one point was the most famous canadian in the world was overwhelmed by His the archetypal force of his Representation as the good guy. It's a great documentary hitman hart And and it shows you how how you know pro wrestling is is it's not the world's most intellectual activity To say the least and people can easily be dismissive of it but one of the things I loved about the documentary was that it attempted to Understand from within what was compelling about what was being portrayed and it was a religious drama It just yeah, it was shocking and brilliant and so So that is that is actually there is a there's an objective part of that that there's an objective way in which These patterns kind of come together and manifest. Let's say higher and higher versions of this drama Uh, and so the sports drama has a certain level but it's it's limited to a certain extent because it still Happens as a confrontation. Let's say between two irreducible sides and so what happens in something like the story of christ is that That gets taken into one person until all the opposites become the king and the The the the criminal the you know The highest even in the image of the cross you have this image and as christ is being crucified They're putting a sign above his head saying that he's the king as christ is being beaten They're giving to him a crown and so Christ joins together all the opposites and so in his in his Story you see if you if you're attentive to these patterns you see the highest form Of this pattern being played out and one of the aspects that has to be there for it to be The most revealed or highest form is that it also has to include the world of manifestation I mean, it can't just be a story. It has to be connected to the world So that's why christians insist on The the the fact that jesus is not just a story that he's an incarnated man that he was incarnated But I don't believe their insistence I don't believe well, this is this is because I don't it isn't obvious to me and I think Maybe I derived this criticism from nicha, but You know people have asked me whether or not I believe in god and I've answered in various ways No, but i'm afraid he probably exists. That's that's one answer Um, yeah, no, but i'm terrified He might exist that that would be truthful answer to some degree or that I act as if god exists which I think is I'd do my best to do that, but then there's a real stumbling block there because There's no limit to what would happen if you acted like god existed Yeah, you know what I mean because I believe that that acting that out fully I mean Maybe it's not reasonable to say to believers. You aren't sufficiently transformed for me to believe that you believe in god Or that you believe the story that you're telling me you're not you're not a sufficient You're not the way you live is a sufficient testament to the truth And people would certainly say that let's say about the catholic church or at least the way that it's been portrayed is that With all the sexual corruption, for example It's like really Really you believe that the son of god that that jesus christ was the son of god and yet you act That way and i'm supposed to buy your belief And and it seems to me that the church is actually quite Guilty on that account because The attempts to clean up the mess have been rather half-hearted in my estimation And so I don't think people people don't manifest Christians don't manifest this and i'm including myself. I suppose in that description perhaps Don't manifest the Transformation of attitude that would Enable that enables the outside observer to easily Conclude that they believe yeah That That section and it kind of reminds me of like the ontological Argument, right? Which is like one of the most kind of controversial but interesting proofs for god like Imagine a being okay. Imagine a being greater than that being Okay, keep doing that until you're imagining the greatest possible being And we all know that it's greater to exist than to not exist So therefore the greatest possible being exists And that's god, right? You know, it's and and some people are like wait a minute You pulled a fast one on me and some people are like, well, yeah, that makes intuitive sense And you know the I think anselm was sort of the originator of that argument and people have argued about it back and forth For a long time. I think ducart liked it, but other people don't it's sort of like all right Okay, make the story a little bit better Okay, you know you've gotten to the point where it's the greatest possible story that can be told Okay, and we all know that stories are better if they're real than if they're not real What exactly that means is hard to say So therefore the greatest story ever told has to happen Right it and then it's like well, wait a minute. I'm not sure some people would be like yes And some people like no, I can't follow you that far and I feel like that that's exactly what peterson is doing It's like well, yes, I have to admit that jesus is the greatest possible story ever told He seems to seep into everything it you know, it's like he goes down the furthest he goes up the highest right? You know yada yada yada But can't is this just a really good harry potter novel? Is this just a really good harry potter novel Or is this something that you can base your life on? I feel like that that's where where he's at Don't you think that's what he's what he's kind of saying is I do I do believe that like it makes sense to me whether it's psychologically whether it's archetypically whether it's the Like when peugeot was talking about it's the union of all these things. He's not he's nodding in agreement You know, he's being crucified and crowned Peterson acknowledges all of that stuff But then where does he go? The problem he has with that is that all all of the church and the professing christians. He's like, I don't I don't think you really what it what it would mean for me to believe that terrifies me and and and the incarnation of all the believers in that profession He's like you don't act like you believe it so so to me it's really coming down to Not an ontological argument and an abstraction of like this makes sense in like this is rationally Cohering and making sense You know, it's it's a james thing like even the demons believe in shutter the demons believe in god, but peterson is saying You're not you're not acting like saints You're acting like pedophiles so like That I that's a struggle. I think is It's the you know, like the the buddha quote people love to bring up like I love your christ You know, but I don't I don't believe these christians and that's I think that's a struggle that people really have which probably The record showed that was a gandhi quote, but or gandhi. Yeah again fact check me see I don't My facts aren't good, but then that comes into why is that's why he rides in church So got here's the thing i'm glad you i'm glad sam i'm glad you pointed out was gandhi because I think like here is where and here my christian anarchism is going to come into the conversation because I think that the problem and the reason that peterson is not able to see that is that in the process of Of of being focused on preaching the gospel about jesus The church lost the gospel of jesus Like where is the where is the where is the where are the genuine kingdom building efforts in the church today like especially in the modern age where we have allowed The the secular market state to like take over every single aspect of life that the church used to have a role in Like where is that? And I think that it might be easier for people like peterson to see that if we took the gospel of jesus as seriously as we took The gospel about jesus and I bring that up because because of of tolstoy and the connection to gandhi because gandhi was heavily influenced by the kingdom of god is within you and and in in in And uh in establishing his non-violent movement so I think that like We can't christian christians need to like Seriously take non-violent seriously or it's going to It's going to perpetually be difficult for people to take what we say About jesus seriously If we were Living in a way that would is that was in accordance with the gospel of jesus It would be easier for people to believe the gospel about jesus Well, right nate and that's a lot of it is I mean we've we've especially in america. I mean christianity has been conflated with um I mean i'm on board with you with statism and nation-building and that's how a lot of people I mean truly it seems like a joke but that's how a lot of people think of Like one of the primary ways that they are building the kingdom is like they're donating to a political party to get a president elected You know, let me poke eastern orthodoxy a little bit. I think that that part of it was So back in the days when there was no Separation between church and state like the byzantine empire was a church a theocracy of the theocratic monarchy right for like a thousand years and so when the state, you know extends some poverty programs say imagine, you know, the the welfare reforms of 800 ad in In constantinople right they are They are viewing themselves as kingdom building when they do that when they conquer some lands from the muslims You know, sorry about that's a violent example, but they are kingdom building kingdom expanding etc Right, they can tie those things together, right when the state does something that is christ-like It is the kingdom of god because we have you know, the patriarch and the the emperor, etc and that literally in some sense was Christendom the same way that the church is the one true church. The empire was the one true christendom And you know that that kind of has fallen apart You know, it fell apart in the east it fell apart in the west and who knows if those two things could or even should ever be tied back together but we kind of have this weird way where in our christian America being kind of a christian country kind of not a christian country At least certainly a christian in a very different sense than the byzantine empire was You know, is it christian to? vote for a new Poverty program that we think is you know doing the work of christ, but it's paid for by taxes And distributed by the state and the state is officially secular And so I think that's part of and that and that's related to what peterson is saying, right? You know like where where is this kingdom? Where are these christians? Where are these alleged saints that are supposedly believing that the story became real? Because all I see are pedophiles and uh creationists, which is the very legitimate question that jacob keeps asking too, right? It's like If we want jews to take the christian claim seriously Then we need to take the kingdom seriously, yeah But this is where it's too I don't know it's I agree with you I mean with those critiques of orthodoxy Uh, but like you know, and I haven't read the kingdom of god is within you, but I am i'm very much Uh with nate with christian anarchism and also christian personalism and why? Again back to the whole like two different ways of knowing whether it's communal Eucharistic or mamanistic which is about coercion and control where you're trying to fix the world through systems and external things But christianity is fundamental like How do you change the world? You die You know chesterton what's wrong with the world? I am like it's very it's very The violence is always imposed on the self Whereas the state cannot function that way like the state is of a completely different nature and and um, and I think that's the That's the struggle. I think that's the struggle with a lot of peterson is he sees all this institution and structure and churching stuff as as a lot of mamanistic knowing as a lot of Control and manipulation and he is I think rightly repulsed by that and so he has these So I think he has this internal dilemma and conflict of like i'm very compelled by this By this vision of of jesus and christ and that all makes sense to me but then this thing which is the purported Bought his body and his instantiation seems to be in Seems to be in contradiction to that And so he's just like I don't know. I don't know what to do with that I Think a lot of it has to do with like a misunderstanding of power I think if you talk to if you like if you if you ask like I think if you ask the overwhelming majority of christians What they think god's power is like what is the nature of god's power? They will give you something that just resembles human power only bigger No God's power is nothing like our power at all God's power is his pure energy which is related to his fundamental nature, which is love Which is the driving force behind creation? What's that verse god's power is made perfect in? I think yeah, right exactly. Yes, but somehow like but we yes, but we somehow lose sight of this all the time. It's like I don't know very many christians who like when they think about god's power I think that's like when they think about god's power, it's like they're not thinking they are thinking in terms of human power only bigger It's just like a really powerful superhuman and that's peterson's critique and you know and to point the finger at myself too like I I'm not very good at like where where I am most real which is in my community and my family I don't often with my kids where I could most model christ or with my wife Modeling that kind of power with them either very often So so I mean I get it like it's it's a universe hard. Yes. Yes, it's hard And it's not and that's that's the thing about christian anarchism too It's like it's christian anarchism's goal is not to like It's not the goal of christian anarchism isn't to like change the state it recognizes what the fundamental nature of the state is The goal of christian anarchism is to go about uh for the church to go about its business As if the state weren't there It we should have we should be we should just have no concern about how the state conducts itself because it's its structures are inherently like About power and domination and hierarchies of power and domination It's irredeemable by its nature. It will always tend toward the totalitarian Now the current direction of its totalitarian impulses is through enslavement through absolute freedom Which actually ends up breaking down into ultimately a narrative about power Because it's using it to control people Since we're talking about politics and power. Um, did anybody else find it interesting that I don't know Pagio makes the link between Peterson and cyrus And then and then I don't know anybody anybody who's followed the whole trump phenomenon knows that within the evangelical sectors that same Kind of like all the prophetic people are going oh trump is cyrus, you know um because because and and that label fits because right you're you're necessarily outside of Of the christian order you're you're almost explicitly not christian And yet you're fulfilling some sort of god-ordained role I I don't know. There's something really interesting there and they both came to the forefront around right around the same time in 2016 so I just I just found that really interesting just I don't know. There's um I don't know like I think you know when I when I think about you know the prophets and whatever How god speaks to people like you can get it right and get it wrong at the same time And I don't know. Maybe there's There is some movement going on but we're just we're just fundamentally misunderstanding it. I don't know in in in the way the even evangelical churches is structured but you know, it was amazing to see how you know trump got kind of Voted up the ladder with this sort of um this crown of uh of god's approval, um in spite of uh his his um His character and and and peterson's almost the exact opposite, you know, he's somebody who he Who you know the reason he squirms in church is is first of all he's he's judging the church itself But also I think he he's judging himself as well like that what you were saying earlier about nate about that sense of rejection He he he's he's He's imagining this perfect god and what he would that perfect god would say about his life and knowing that he he doesn't measure up And he's he take he's taking this He takes it all deadly seriously, you know, yeah, he's gonna he's gonna go up the hill all by himself he's gonna push that rock up the hill take the cross and um But but you what you can't say about him if you spend any time interacting with him He takes character deadly seriously, you know and i'm sure he's made many many mistakes, but um I don't know. I there isn't a person I would trust more to try and tell the truth when everything was on the line I can't I can't I can't think of somebody that I would trust more. Oh, he's 100 I would say he's he's a better man than I am for sure. You know, it's like and um, I think I think what I think what and it'll be interesting to see if you can never come to a place of like Of acknowledging like I will never be good enough I think that will change kind of a little bit about how he feels about the failings of the church, right? So I I just got done critiquing the church quite a bit, but that's but you know I I have to be able to forgive the church because i'm not i'm not doing any better job Than what i'm critiquing in the church at large. I'm failing miserably, too The kingdom is a hard thing to to live into it's a hard thing to it's a hard thing to act out Also, I just hasn't said anything but i'd like to hear him say something about what he would have hoped Pagio would say To to peterson about job and just to set it up. I I found it interesting at the end They start talking about st. Michael and st. Michael famously is the archangel that in the bible is always purported to be Fighting with satan directly Right and and satan plays a really interesting role in in that that story of job And I don't know if anybody remembers this i'm sure sure some rando out there can recall chapter and verse But somewhere peterson tells a story where he has this dream And in the dream he's fighting satan And then god at the end tells him. Oh, i'm letting you fight satan because I know you're gonna win Does anybody remember that? I don't know where that came from. But Anyway, I I feel like that's almost verbatim what the story of job is Yeah Yeah Yeah, I I mean I've been I mean, I kind of don't know where to start like I I wish I there's something between The suffering of job and and the renewal and the and The birth of creation and then you see this also in the suffering of christ and and so When you know the the symbolic weight of scene is christ goes to the cross and then when the soldier Stabs him in the side with the spear out comes a rush of water and blood well that That's birthing fluid like okay, so That's how at adam was taken from this or eve was taken from the side of adam adam gave birth to eve through his side And and christ gives birth to the church through um Through the suffering of the cross now I bring that up because it's like what sherry sherry was asking just earlier on boxer, um, what what's that pattern between between why why do Uh good people suffer. Well, it's it's almost like a It's it's almost just a childbirth narrative. You have you have the woman who? Carries the child and then the birthing The birthing process is painful and um I I wrote down john the pageau is like a midwife in this video he's like Like peterson's just like sweating and like what's going on. I can't do this. He's like He's like well, let's talk about trust. Let's talk about you know, and he's like just so calm and like just trying to keep You'd be like i'm not gonna moralize you right now honey. Just keep going. Yeah. Yeah and and and That's you don't So when my wife was I was a terrible I was a terrible support person for my wife when she was giving birth to our sons and it's one of my one of my regrets, but um we had a for our youngest son, we had a really good midwife and she was just like Like always there what do you need what and my wife will be like I need to stand up stand up You're like I need to sit down. All right, I need to get in the bath. Let's get in the bath You know, there was no like There's no rationality to any of it. There's no And there's no talking to her be like you don't really need to lay down You're just giving birth and you just need to go through this and like that's that was kind of my attitude and it was That was such a bonehead anyway, um but You know is is So sherry asked the question like what's this pattern of like this sort of the good person? ends up suffering and what and why well job suffered to in a way to it's too complicated to just get through here, but christ suffers to to Give birth to the new creation. He's he's the he's He literally starts the new creation through through what he does and So is that what's going on here You know, it's definitely giving birth to something. I mean we we're having this conversation right now because of him Well, and and here's the thing though. The child could be stillborn the mother can die Yeah Yeah So I mean hence we should all be praying for for for jordan. Yeah, it's not clear what's happening or Or what will happen and i'm like getting emotional about this and it's you know, part of it's about peterson, but it's just part of part of it is you know, just our culture and our future and stuff like that and You know there's No guarantees And Yeah, so I just uh You know I I'm really interested to see what happens because I think peterson's On the edge of something important. Um, and jonathan's there too and um Yeah, I don't know what's gonna happen, you know it because it's like the the world that the job Lived in before his trials was not the same world after is a whole different world and and part of what job had to come to was exactly what How uh what peugeot was talking about was trust like he had to trust that this was a good creation and this was something good And What god's doing is good despite the way the way it looks So yeah It's an acceptance I think and it's and it's outside of your expectations what i'm um One thing that i'd love to bring two things is that um Peugeot has said this before and i've had this intuition also that I think we are in the midst of a spiritual Re-awakening and a religious revival of sorts and I do believe that with I don't know I mean, I don't know how fast it's going to happen. I would say i'm anywhere from Zero to 50 years but but I think imminently a return of like mass overt religious uh Conversion expression practice is going to happen and I don't I mean a lot will come with that like that's not just that's not something that I just Nate has said this before and I agree and this actually came up in my book club last night. That doesn't mean Overt religiosity isn't just I think at a really superficial level you go. Yay but that doesn't mean that it's going to be easy and without chaos and difficulty and um struggle it's just everything will be All the chaos I think that was like suppressed and push-pack and inside and in Psychologies and medicated through all these other different things is going to be Apparent to everyone I think and I think Peterson and Peugeot were in the middle of doing that giving birth to that, but I agree like you can um You could die in that process and it's uh He what I see is happening is like the death of I see the death of identitarianism happening, uh both inside and outside the church um And I think a lot of that is what Peterson's Peterson is like uh Because everybody everybody from every angle wants to use him the people that don't like his you know What were what they perceive to be his politics don't like him and they use him and they write hit pieces Certain people in the church when he doesn't say the things they want him to say don't like him and they want to use him And they want and they write articles everybody is wanting to they want Jordan Peterson to be A superficial I would say idolatrous avatar for their identitarian projects and he refuses to be it which is a big part of his suffering, you know combined with health and personal things and Stuff like that, but it's I don't know. He's he is a job figure and it is a trust figure and I think Personally, that's what's going on with Jordan right now is he It reminds me of parolandra and I bring this up a lot But it's the green lady and and it's one of the most promised things that stuck out to me is when she's talking To ransom when she first sees ransom and she mistakes him for the king and she's excited about it Ransom and she mistakes him for the king and she's excited to see him and then he shows up and she's And she has it's funny because her reaction that is like, oh, I thought it was the king and it's not So she doesn't even she doesn't necessarily have disappointment And that and that confuses ransom is he's just like how could you not how is that not disappointing like how are you not? Frustrated that you expected the king and how are you not let down? And that is like a revelation to her because she's like, oh in your world it's possible to have an expectation and then when your expectation isn't met, when God brings you something other than what you expected, you are the kind of people that could hold your desire onto the expected good rather than the good that was truly brought to you. And so a lot of, I bring all that up because I see a lot of what Christianity is and what theosis is in my opinion is, and it is connected to Job, is a leaning not on your own understanding and an acquiescence to letting God be God and a submission and obedience to him is like whatever you bring me I will accept it. It's an acceptance of letting God be God. And I think identitarianism is the opposite of that, where it's not, you could use all this language about God but you're not allowing God to be God, you're using all that to manipulate and control your world. And I think Peterson is, Peterson is like the incarnation of someone on a rock. He's a rock on which many people will be broken because he's not gonna do that for any party and I think it frustrates. But in doing that he's gonna bring to light that like these Christians, these social justice warriors, all these different people that are in all these different identitarian camps, that's not the true difference. The true difference is those who use truth to manipulate and those that non-coercively, non-violently, non- manipulatively let God be God in lieu of Job, you know. Because that was the thing, that's the whole thing of Job, everybody's trying to understand. Like we need to figure this out. Well the other thing is Job has such a key role in that book because the whole, like the twist in the book of Job is it's not just let God be God. God needs Job and trusts Job also. Because if Job cracks and curses him then the gig is up. God's not really good, he's just powerful. Because that was the bet, because Satan's like, looks at Job, says, of course Job worships you, you protect him. If you take away that protection he won't, he'll curse you. And so the bet, you know, the way I think about it is, God you're not truly good, you're just powerful and protect things. Like if you weren't, if you didn't control everything then you would, it wouldn't be this, it wouldn't be good. And God, you know, in wisdom you can see just how, what's better, a world where everything is controlled and manipulated like a machine or a world where things are actually free and cooperate. And the world where everything is actually free and cooperates is a better world. But the protection has to be taken away, it's an awakening or Job is thrust out into the harsh realities all at once. The harsh realities of every type of human suffering I would say. So he's like an archetypal sufferer. But God needs him to cooperate despite this. And the miracle of the book of Job is that he says in the end, he's like, yeah there are things going on that are beyond what I can imagine. And when he says that he's not saying, he's saying there's goodness happening here that's beyond anything that is happening to me or that I can perceive. And God doesn't hold back, God shows Job everything. But he needs Job's, he trusts Job. He's like the reason why you're chosen is because you were the best man. And so, you know, it's this weird interplay between Job and God and how that whole story works itself out because in a way God gives up control and trusts Job. I think one thing that's interesting is, we kind of touched on this, like people keep trying to turn Peterson into some sort of archetypal figure or another, but neither Peugeot nor Peterson seem to know what archetypal figure he's being turned into. Right? They're master pattern recognition people, they're master symbologists or whatever the right word for that is. And neither Peterson nor Peugeot has any clue what archetype or pattern or character Peterson is really playing. And there is certainly a lot of Job there, right? And Job is obviously kind of a four type of Christ in many ways. I'm not saying that Peterson is a four type of Christ or something like that. But all Christians, to some degree, are another, are a post type or however, what the right word is of that for Christ, if you stick to, you know, the way, I guess. Following in the pattern, what else is there? Right. And you can see a lot of Peterson's actions are very similar to Jesus where there's just this culture war clash, right? Vanderklaai talks about that all the time that Jesus was like this lightning rod figure in the center of a white hot culture war fight. And every side kind of wanted to use him, but no side felt like it could control him. And that's kind of what inevitably leads to his death. And I certainly hope that Peterson doesn't have some sort of tragic mob death in front of him. But there are some ways in which he has been attempted. His character has been, has had attempted assassinations on him multiple times, but yet he keeps walking. Well, maybe, I mean, there's the pattern of Paul, like Paul doesn't, in the book of Acts, Paul doesn't die at the end of book of Acts. He gets to Rome and, and, you know, he goes to Jerusalem, who's maybe possibly going to be killed. And then, you know, he cries out, or, you know, then he's like, no, I'm a Roman citizen. And then all of a sudden, the Roman authorities are involved in the like, make sure he's protected. And like all this insane stuff happens that doesn't happen in the story of Christ. Like what I remember when I was young, and I first read through the book of Acts, I was like, I was like, oh, Paul's gonna die. Because I didn't know what, like, I didn't remember what happened at the end of the book of Acts. I'm like, he's following in the pattern of Christ, he's gonna die at the end of the book of Acts. No, the whole point was to get the gospel to the heart of the empire, to Rome. And, you know, so, so like, you know, I, we're talking about Job, and we're talking about Jesus, and we're also talking about Peterson, and we're like, you know, but the way these patterns play out is not a one for one. And, and there's comparisons to make, but we don't know what's gonna happen. Because you can imagine, let's say, Peterson just cracks and something terrible happens. You know, he dies, he, he starts rambling and being very resentful and terrible, and acting out of the worst side of himself. He, I don't know, he just becomes incoherent and just sort of, you know, goes into insanity. We can imagine all these different things happening, like what would be the result of that? Or even he comes to Christ and he regains his, his self and he becomes strong again. Like what, like any of those scenarios can still play out, and we don't know which one. And, and there's not necessarily a, you know, because, because God had, you know, God had plans for Paul, and it wasn't to die in Jerusalem. It was to go to Rome. And so when he's sitting there in the prison, Christ comes to him and says, says, be of good cheer, you know, just like you preach here, I'm going to take you to Rome. And then he, you know, then the rest of the book of Acts is just his story of getting transferred from one authority to another, preaching through the Roman Empire on his way to Caesar for his appeal. And just like, you know, so I'm like very interested in Peterson's story. And even though I see like parallels between like, you know, and Jonathan's a, Jonathan being a midwife or whatever, like it's, it's weird stuff to say, but, but like, you know, who knows? Like it's, it's, it's a strange time. Well, I mean, I think, I guess that's because at the end of the day, a person isn't an archetype, right? I mean, which is part of what the Catholic critique in the book that Peterson was talking about. I'm pretty sure that that's like, it's like, it would be, it would run along. I haven't read it, but I suspect that it's going to be similar to, to what David Bentley Hart's critique of, of Peterson is, is that the, the archetype of Christ is not, is not Christ. Like you were talking about an actual, and like, like an actual person can never be reduced to just a mere archetype. So, and may in fact overlap with many archetypes simultaneously because persons are relationally defined and archetypes are sort of like these sort of general categories and one, and a single individual person can actually fit into multiple archetypes simultaneously. All right. I've got one more clip. I'll pull that up. This is which I can't really relate here that of, of the necessity for that community is that this, whatever our fundamental moral load is, immense though it is, crushing though it is even, requires the participation of others. So even if you were the perfect you, you would need other people to be along with you. It's a collective enterprise, even though it's an individualistic, even though it requires the perfection, it requires as much perfection as is possible at the individual level. That's not enough. There has to be that communal elements as well. You need help. We all need help to aim as high. The highest aim requires communal endeavor. Yeah. And it's also because it actually is the way that everything works. You know, it's like the chair aiming to be a chair is, is it constitutive of parts which are joined together towards a, a same goal and therefore hold together as a being and manifest the chairness of the chair. And that's the same with you. You have all these thoughts, right? You have all these feelings, all these, these contradicting things inside you. And you need by aiming up towards, you know, I mean, I believe that the image of Christ, let's say by aiming towards the image of Christ, you constitute your being into that being that's able to attend, to sacrifice, to love, and then that scales up with people. I agree. Well, I think you are aiming. This is another, something else I tried to point out to Sam. You are, you're aiming, you're either aiming at Christ or something lesser. Yeah. Or if things get really out of hand, you're aiming at something opposite and you don't want to be doing that. But, and this is a matter of definition in some sense. And it's actually not impossible to understand is that you aim at something better. Generally speaking, I mean, maybe you're out to cause pain, but forget about that. You aim at something better. You wouldn't do it unless it was better. In fact, it virtually defines better. Like the whole idea of better is predicated on the idea that there's an aim that's beyond you. And then the highest of those aims is the amalgamation, the highest aim is the amalgamation of all higher aims. And that's a perfect mode of being. And that by definition, that's a psychological perspective again, that by definition is Christ. And then, but then there seems to be something too convenient about CS Lewis's insistence that that also had to manifest itself concretely in reality at one point in history. And I'm not like, I, I, I don't understand why I should believe that. And I don't, I tend not to believe things without a why. There's always a why. And yeah, and I, there's, there's a hurdle there that I, that, that, well, that I waver on constantly because while I already said that when you think these things through, at least my experience has been, if you think them through sufficiently, you end up with the choice between impossible alternatives. And so- Yeah. But it has to do, one of the ways to see it maybe is, is it has to do with the recognizing of the goodness of the world or the goodness of creation that, that the world is capable of manifesting these patterns. Right? So I'll stop there. I think that's his problem right there. Yeah. Right. And he, and he lays it out, right? He's just fully like, how many people of his, I don't know, fame or popularity will be that existentially vulnerable about their own religious state and doubts and all of that stuff is just crazy. And, and it's, it's, he can only be honest, right? That, that's not something that you can, that you can fake. And there, there's something about that clip that reminds me just a lot about like Kierkegaard. I feel like Kierkegaard is probably the, the best guy on, on this particular question of like, what is faith? How do you go from not faith to faith and stuff like that? Cause at, at some, you know, reasons like my, I have a two and a half year old daughter and she's currently in the midst of the why, why, why daddy, why this daddy, why that daddy. And sometimes like, no, I just got to the last why honey, you know, there is no why after that one, that, that last answer should have satisfied your whys. And, and, and Jordan seems kind of like he's there with this whole question of faith. Jordan, there is no more whys past some point, you know, like Jonathan Peugeot starts talking about, you know, recognizing the goodness of being. I think that honestly, I would say Jonathan, like, you know, the, the recognizing the goodness of being is actually kind of downstream from the faith thing, right? You know, I don't think you go from the goodness of being to having faith in it. I think it's the having faith that turns you into the sort of person that sees a goodness in being. I don't think I, I think. Yeah, the goodness in God, not necessarily being what is being the goodness in God can maybe help you with faith, but when you were talking about the why thing, this is, I've realized this a lot. So I have kids, my oldest is 13 and, and this happens a lot, you know, he's a smart enough kid. And so he is, he's very much a debater and an arguer and something that I've begun to discern in my kid and I've started just telling him is because it's interesting because it parallels my own kind of religious and theological journey through kind of more of a abstracted modern rationalist Christianity to where I am now, which is much more communal and knowledge as being and personal. But like with my, with my son, this happens all the time is like we just, we get into conversations and very soon I realize where when we're talking about something and there's something, I realize what's really, I've come to the realization, I can see the pattern, that's what's happening. And I do the same thing. So it's not just my son, but he'll, there's something he wants. There's an outcome that he wants. And so he brings it to me as the authority and the one who's able to give it to him. And we start having watching Netflix, something, wanting a treat, whatever it is, wanting to go hang out with a friend. And we start having this conversation. And a lot of that is that what's going on right there within this talking, theoretically, it's what I call non-talking talking, but it's, we're having this back and forth of we're giving wise. He's arguing his point saying why he wants what he wants. And I am either just letting him do it or I'm telling him why he, we're not going to do that. And there's a lot of times where that conversation, it happens with my daughters too, where that conversation keeps going and keeps going and keeps going. And I realize, oh, this isn't, like, this isn't a, this isn't real communication. This is just, this is just people leaning on their own understanding, giving the wise and wise and wise and wise and wise. And so I've gotten to the point of what's essentially happening with my son is that he's not, he's not believing something if he doesn't, there's a way you can do that honestly. And there's a way that you can do it dishonestly. Like he's maybe just arguing to get his way when he maybe really somewhere conscious, like subconsciously realizes, sees my point. So that's one thing. I don't think Jordan Peterson's doing that, but there's also a way in which you can be like, I'm not going to do what you say, dad, until I can understand it. Well, then though, what's happened though, there is like, you're no longer the relationship. Then your obedience to me is it's not to me. It's to your abstracted ideas. It's to your answer to the why. So you're actually submitted to reason to your reason. You're not submitted to me. So that's not faith. That's, that's rationality. That's, that's disembodied, depersonalized rationality. That's not trust in a person. So I've gotten to the point with my son where I'm just like, you're not submitted to you. You're not obeying your ability to understand. That's not what you're obeying. You're obeying me. And I'm not going to play the game where I'm explaining it to you and giving you the why. I'm not going to do that anymore. You obey me because I'm your father. And the discussion, I used to hate that answer. Like, you know, when people, there's a lot there. Yes, yes, there is. When people used to say that, like, you do it because I said so. That's actually a theologically beautiful answer. But people hate it. Yeah. So, you know, just, I just really quick on, on, on, on, on the fundamental goodness of being and God. I think you're, you're, I think you're just positing the same thing. Let me, I'm going to bring para-laundry in for you here, Luke. I think that like the image of the fixed land and the floating land is perfect to understand the difference between, between the mode in which God is like true being, being itself, absolute existence. That the fixed land represents that, right? Because it's absolutely like solid. It exists in an absolute sense. Whereas the, whereas the, the floating land, this is our, this is our natural state. This is how, because we're in the land of becoming, we were constantly in a state of, of change and flux. And we, we can't, so we have this desire. So we have to, we have to give up that desire for certainty. I mean, that's really, I mean, we can't, we can have, all we can have are the best reasons we can have in our finite mode. We are never going to be able to have that absolute certainty which I think is kind of what Peterson is longing for. It's like he wants to, he wants to know the why of all wise, like the why that cannot be challenged, like this absolute like fixed ground. But that's not, that is not a position open to us in our mode of being. Yeah. Which is why, which is why we always, and this is true, not just about faith in God. This is, this is how we have to operate in the world. If you have, if you waited around for absolute assurance of anything, you could not live. Right. You could not function in reality. So yeah, anyway, that's, No, that's really good. I've never, I've never actually seen that, that symbolism in Perilondra, because that's the thing is they're forbidden from the fixed land until their deification. Right. I didn't see it until this conversation. I saw it as this conversation was going on, because you reference Peril, you would reference Perilondra earlier, which put it in the back of my mind. And then we started talking about being, and I had mentioned the difference between being, becoming and earlier. And I'm like, Oh, that's what Lewis is doing. That's what that symbolism is. Yeah, that's really good. And Jordan has articulated this before. He knows that there's an infinite number of whys. He's articulated that really well and in other places. It's funny, but he still wants, and I'll say this, that that, that descent down the depths of the whys is the U-shaped journey to some extent. And there's a reason why we have a high status for that, because there is a real, there is a real suffering for other people that you can take on by going down those paths. Like in some sense, I know Descartes becomes a villain in a lot of our stories because of like, Oh, he created this, you know, separate world, but there was a real, he initiated his own sort of U-shaped journey by, with this radical doubt. And there was benefits that other people were able to reap from his going down that path. And I think the problem we have today is that most people don't actually go down the radical doubt path. They try and cite other people's works and it's more of a status game because we have so much status associated with doing that. But I think he's playing that game very honestly, but I think, I think he could, you mentioned Kierkegaard, I think of that story of the king and the milkmaid. And that's really what he needs to see things as is he wants, he's like, well, if God's real, why, and I've been in this place, why doesn't he just write it in the sky? Why doesn't he leave this, like I follow this, you know, this detective novel to the end and I find the key that fits the lock and I'm there, now I'm a Christian. And in the laws of mathematics somewhere, it's like I am God, I exist, here I am. Yeah. But that's not how a love story works. It's a love story. Yeah, God is a lover who wants to be pursued. That's exactly it. And he could come that way. He could come like the king, you know, with his banners and overwhelm the milkmaid and be like, I'm the king, you love me, right? You want to be rich and successful and powerful and all these things, come on, love me. And that's not what he wants. Because it wouldn't be love. It's not, it's actually not what you want. I mean, here's the mercy is it's also not what anybody else wants. They maybe think they want it. They don't want that. Yeah. Yeah. He doesn't know. We don't want that either. If we were going to write our own life story, we wouldn't write that either. Right. Right. It's a deception. It's, I mean, all like this is all deceptions. All deceptions look real. I mean, Christ, anti-Christ, that's it. It's all there is. The real thing and counterfeit. That's it. Everything's like that. Yeah. And the end goal is theosis, right? Which is, it is a sexual union between the bride and the bridegroom. And we're kind of in this intervening period before the wedding is consummated. So there is, yeah, there's a lot of trust that goes into that period. And if we didn't have that longing for that certainty, we would not be drawn into the process of our own deification to begin with. No. So, I mean, that's like, it's like, so even though we have a tendency to let it, to have, to get, to get carried away with it and let us lead us astray, it's also the very thing that will lead us if we follow it all the way to the bottom and we reach the bottom of the U, that's what we'll raise this back up to. Which is where this is, and I'll just say it, I say it every time I talk about Jordan Peterson in any conversation, my favorite thing about him is tell the truth or just don't lie. Because if you do, like, I don't even, pursuing your certainty, doing an authentic, like true, honest deconstruction, whatever a human being needs to do to be honest, I mean, this probably, I mean, this maybe touches on the conscience thing. It's never wrong to follow your genuine conscience ever. Except that you can, you can trick yourself. Like I found it interesting earlier when he talked about the whole thing, like, well, you know, we wish we could just trick ourselves into having our conscience tell us that we're good people, but we can't. But I think he forgets his own lessons there because we can by degrees, we can envelop ourselves in deception over and over and over to the point where, yeah, okay, now my conscience tells me I'm a good person when I go, you know, rip off bunches of people because I give some amount of it to charity or something like that. I mean, we can, there's all kinds of games we play and the deceptions get layered upon each other to the point where we, our conscience can deceive us. And I think he's, he's elaborated that very well in his lectures. Yeah, he talks about that because he's like, that's why the Dostoevsky is like, do not lie, especially to yourself. And Peterson, I've heard him riff on that saying essentially, because then what you do is you, you contaminate your very, the, the organ itself, your, your organ that is able to see deception, you pollute the very thing. And then it just becomes this, you know, caustic, just like insular closed system that just gets worse and worse and worse. So the worst lie you can say is to yourself. But at the same time, we can't be so afraid of deception or illusion that we remain paralyzed. Or paranoid. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, exactly. So. Well, I gotta get running soon. Maybe we should kind of wrap this up. I don't know if anyone has some good final thoughts to get off their chest. Well, I just wanted to say the three things that Jonathan really emphasized, which I think are just vitally important for, well, the, for today, as well as just myself and personally, especially just come, just trust. So the first one is trust, second one, community, and third one, worship. And all these, like, we as modern Americans or Western folk, we have a lot of problems with these trusting God, being in true community with each other, and then also worshiping. Yeah, I know in that last one, like I have, because you want to like worship is a letting go. And, and it's, it's almost, it's almost a practice of trust and, and, you know, being swallowed up by the, by the thing that's larger than you. And, and, you know, we want to like rationalize it. So like, I'm going to worship because I know that it's the right thing to do or whatever it is. And so I just really like those three things that Jonathan brought up during the whole talk. Yeah, worship is, I think, at its core, it's like, it's, it's like, it's an acknowledgement of our proper position, right? Just so hard, because this is where the deconstruction, I mean, is helpful, probably, because like, even that people's aversion to it, you can hear Peugeot, when he kept saying worship, he's like, people aren't going to like it. But that's because they have, they have ideas about it, like what, what some, what a lot of people just like, intuitively, instinctually feel, because I feel that way too. I mean, you can have that when you think worship, you're not thinking like a joyful participation in what you most value, which is inevitable. Like, that's kind of what worship is. They're seeing like, they're seeing the avatar and like the front of that documentary Jesus camp, like, that's what they see. You know, they see like a manipulated 10 year old girl, like crying at a Charismania camp. And that's, you know, and that's something people have to work through, like for them to be authentic, for Christians to come in and just be like, if that's the word association they have, and they're just like, and then Christians come in and be like, you got to worship God, and they're seeing this gross thing. Like, then it's, then it's a lie for them to be like, yay, worship. Well, it also, but it also, it also forces them to bring into question their fundamental assumption, their fundamental assumption, because like the entire project of, of modernity for sure, and I think post modernity in another mode is assumed that the starting point is assumed there is no God. Now what can we know? So yeah. All right. With that last note, see Panentheism, I think that's a good place to end.