https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Qt8Yd0CxCdI

 Hi, this is Paul. This is the second of three short videos on Jordan Peterson talking to Sam Harris and my observations on the conversation and my observations on celebrity atheism and all of this and in the last video I asked about Whether or not they are using the word reason or the idea of reason like a God now I'd like to ask if rationalism can govern human beings Now I found there's the YouTube's an amazing place and I found a really interesting channel I found a very interesting video is Sam Harris losing his audience to Jordan Peterson by the mouthy Buddha and I'm deeply impressed by a lot of the video talent out there as you can see I don't have any video skills to speak of and so I just sit here and lather into the camera and Some of you watch so many of you listen which which makes good sense But the mouthy Buddha had a very interesting video on Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson But then I was looking back over his other videos and I found one that was on a subject that I've been thinking a lot About lately. I'm at that age now where I have to watch my weight and watch my diet and the doctor Gets on me about my blood pressure and my cholesterol and a number of other things and so I'm doing this and one of the Things that I noted is that We don't know what to eat That's a very strange thing So I've had the same doctor as long as I've been in Sacramento, so I've maybe had him 20 years. He's a wonderful doctor and When I think about the Dietary advice he gave me 10 or 15 years ago and when I think about the dietary advice he gives me today It's two different things. Well, if I hear two different things from my doctor at some point I have to ask Does my doctor know on what basis does my doctor know? Science keeps changing. Okay. Is that a good thing or a bad thing? Well, it's depends on at what moment in time Science comes into my life and says okay Paul eat all these carbs and grains Okay, Paul watch the carbs and grains and eat more of a high protein diet I've lost weight under the high protein diet. I love muffins. I love carbs I love bagels and when I watch my kids eat those things and toast them up makes me makes me miss them Now you might say well, this is is this religion that's caused this problem well, one of the interesting things about Christianity is that right from the start with Jesus the Dietary freedom was a big issue in Christianity there are conversations about this in the Gospels The big showdown that happens in the book of Acts is over whether Gentiles have to follow dietary laws and what happens in the church in Jerusalem is that they Basically loosen the laws but eventually Christians will be free to pretty much eat whatever they want now Religion and food is a very is a very common religion and food Religion food and sex I could do a video just on religion food and sex But what's interesting about Christianity is Christianity is nearly libertine when it comes to food now there this has been an Ongoing conversation if you read Ron Sider rich Christians in an age of hunger a very popular book back in the 70s and 80s Complaining about you know animal diets and so on and so forth Christians have talked about food but food doesn't have a central place in Christianity apart Of course from the Lord's Supper, but that very much has become a ceremonial meal You get a little bit of grape juice or wine and you get a little wafer or a little cracker or a little bit of bread That's not sustenance. It's a it's a ceremony so Christianity in a sense changes the script on religion and food if you're a Buddhist there are some dietary Expectations if you're an observant Jew there are dietary Expectations if you are a Muslim there is the month of Ramadan and there is compulsory fasting There especially with Protestants. There's no compulsory fasting some people engage in it for their own spiritual well-being But churches for the most part at least in America don't practice it much and this continued into the period of the Reformation In fact the Reformation was more liberty when it came to food Calvinists celebrated the fact that they ate sausages on Friday And they weren't just eating fish along with the rest of the Roman Catholics And this is pretty amazing giving the history of the the long history of religion and food It's also very interesting that Christianity and modern medicine have had relatively few squabbles apart from some isolated sex like the Jehovah's Witnesses or Or Christian science that have some real ideas about modern medicine and A few topics like perhaps abortion or stem cell research that was a big conversation Just a few years ago Christian Christianity is pretty much left modern medicine to itself and while there are a lot of biblical literalists out there talking about geology and cosmology and Anthropology I've never heard a Christian go into their doc I've never heard of a Christian go into their doctor's office and demand a Christian anatomy Because if you read the New Testament, you'll notice that Paul says things like if we believe with our hearts But nobody today imagines we're believing with our hearts We imagine we are believing with our brains and Paul talks about the seat of emotions in our guts now Our nervous system is distributed throughout our body But many of us would say well we have we were concocting a lot of our emotions in our brains, too So there has not been a big fight between Christianity and modern medicine for the most part and many Christian doctors are going about their business and Very similarly to non-Christian doctors. It's not a big area of dispute and of course Christianity has been deeply instrumental in the founding of of Hospitals and modern hospitals, but now if you listen to Jordan Peterson on Joe Rogan not too long ago Joe Rogan asked some questions about Peterson's diet and Peterson talks about diet quite a bit and 12 rules for life at the end of the book and and he and his wife and his daughter have had a Number of issues that he's been very public about in terms of autoimmune disorders, and he's very upfront about saying I'm not a nutritionist don't take any of this as Nutritional advice although people will certainly take it that way, but he's just saying anecdotally. This is what I'm discovered he's just telling what he has been finding and what's what's amazing is that if you If you're having issues with your diet or issues with your health you go out onto the Internet's and just a Internet and just a few Clicks away. There's a world of dietary advice that's being given a world of medical advice that's being given and Well, do you believe those people or do you believe the doctors or the doctors in conspiracy? My point in all of this is you would imagine that if there's any regime In our institutional life today that is rational according to the terms of Sam Harris. It would be medicine Okay medicine is Been largely science driven for a good number of years in you know well into the 20th century medicine has made Remarkable progress and we shouldn't you know, we shouldn't discount that medicine has made remarkable progress but is medicine Rational when we hear the promise of rationality that I hear the celebrity atheists speak with Well, why not unlike domesticated animals in the animal kingdom We can give rational input or feedback. So I've been trying this diet for a while Well, how are you feeling the doctor will ask well, I feel this I feel that your can't can't say your cat can't say this Your dog can't say this your horse can't say this and so if anything we should have more information About what to feed human beings Then we have what to feed dogs and cats and horses Why doesn't people chow work now? There's been a number of attempts to try people chow here Here's the one thing that you can eat and this is this will give you everything that you need for health Well, I haven't tried any of those products I have no interest in any of those products and this is beginning to illuminate part of the reason part of the difficulty of imagining the Church of rationality Rationality for human beings because as I mentioned in my last video Rationality is a tool we employ It's not the decider our emotions are the deciders and now our emotions and our rational systems are often in Competition now that's a metaphor They're often debating each other our Mental minions are working back and forth and trying to figure these things out But even when it comes down to something that all of us do every day We don't know now now eating isn't alone in this. We don't know what goes on with sleeping We would imagine that we would know more about ourselves Than we know about anything else and in fact the entire this entire approach to rationality implicitly promises to deliver on Things that are most intimate to our lives The food we eat the way we live our lives the way our relationships go even large complex relationships, but While modern medicine has produced amazing things it still can't tell us what to eat What does that say to us? What does that say about the efficacy of the project now? I am NOT about to advise that people do go to their doctors and start demanding that their doctor enforce a Christian anatomy I am NOT going to tell us we need to get off of using reason and science for modern medicine Far from it as I try to figure out what I should eat. I would long to have Modern medicine give me one answer Because after all isn't this what it's attempting to promise us this unity this certainty this level of knowledge that Affords us the control over outcomes that we want It's that desire that is at the heart of the enlightenment And I would argue that that desire is at the heart of human beings and this story goes all the way back to the Garden of Eden when the man and the woman look around and begin to decide We don't want God picking outcomes. We want to pick outcomes We have reason we see the future we can understand Process and there are things that we want we want to pick So has reason delivered why not what keeps gumming up the promise of reason I'll get that I'll get into that in the next video I was pondering this and talking about this with my wife who both and I are going through this right now and the question What should I eat has changed dramatically from a hundred years ago when I think about my grandparents Struggling to keep body and soul together in the middle of the depression my grandfather as a poor country Pastor and the church often didn't have cash to pay him. So all these Dutch dairymen were giving him butter Well, there's only so much butter you can eat when they asked what to eat They weren't asking about choice. There was there. Do we have enough to eat? Can I stave off hunger? How about us today? Well, we imagine that choice is a good thing And so our problem is that I can eat all kinds of things. I even remember as a child a lot of the conversation about what vegetables and fruits are in season because what you could get in the supermarket was very much dependent upon What is in season now when I go to the supermarket the same foods are there nearly year-round And the only difference is well, these are in season here So a little bit fresher and they weren't just simply brought up from Mexico. Well Yeah, but We should know more we should know better We should shouldn't science be able to tell us what to eat. It sure is trying Is there one voice from science is there a monarchical vision about this is what human beings should eat or Even this is what Paul VanderKlay should eat And that's where I get into this rationality illusion we think we can be rational with nature but Colonizing always involves choice. We think we can be rational with other human beings, but this is nearly laughable If this actually worked we wouldn't be talking about it. I'm not talking about how Reliable my Windows machine has become I remember using Windows when it wasn't reliable We don't pay any attention to it because it's not an obstacle. It's not even an opportunity It's that hand and we simply use it When we try to apply rationality to human beings, we always run the risk of tyranny Because what happens is we say well these people are rational these people are Irrational and so the rational should govern Okay. Well, how are you going to change the minds of the irrational because guess what irrational people behave? Irrationally, how are you both going to preserve human rights which tends to be the The enshrinement of choice with your supposed rationality that is supposed to yield unity conformity and predictable outcomes as a Pastor I see this all the time People get older they have more and more medical conditions and the doctors will begin to tell them. Hey, you've got diabetes. You can't keep drinking Soda Coke or Pepsi like you used you can't keep eating that junk food and then I watch someone Continue to eat that junk food and I'll ask him are you supposed to eat that? Yeah, but yeah, but what well, this is humanity We make rationalizations, which is a really funny choice of words We think we are rational over ourselves, which is probably the most comical thing in fact All of the debates that we're listening to whether it's Ben Shapiro talking to Sam Harris or Jordan Peterson talking to Sam Harris Or me talking about Sam Harris We would imagine if there was any rationality involved We wouldn't be well, there's obviously some rationality involved because we're still talking to each other But the goal is that well somehow we can obtain answers Well, what's taking it so long if we have such great faith in this? We are just really bad at it now Has rationality failed it has failed Has rationality failed it has failed to tell us what to eat. I say well it will in the future Well now we're back into eschatology. It has failed to colonize our own wills. Why? Well, that's the last video Rationality is a tool. It's something we employ We choose first and then pick up rationality as a means to achieve the ends we desire It's far more difficult to talk about rational ends apart from So now we get back to the beginning rational presuppositions as I mentioned in a previous video in some ways Rationality is like building a Jenga tower The outcome That you arrive at at the top of the tower such as the tower of babel depends on Where the tower is standing if you have a bad presupposition you'll get a shaky tower And again the history of thought is littered with this just go back and read history and you'll find If this is our starting point we use reason and this is our ending point and it's not that much different from If you have faulty data and you use correct math to it in order to achieve an outcome Bad data means bad outcomes. It's just the way reason works Works So to colonize our own wills Jordan Peterson On totalitarian countries one of the one of the things that I noticed immediately when I was watching his videos When he talked about in order for a totalitarian country to work people have to self Tyrannize and and in a sense that's kind of what we're talking about here Maybe in a positive sense maybe in a negative sense and this is exactly what happens in religions, too Now my point in all this is not to say reason is bad. I don't think reason is bad reason is an incredibly important tool that we use to employ but It is not I think what the celebrity atheists Make out it make it out to be And then their plea again becomes nakedly eschatological We are waiting for reason we're waiting for reason to govern isn't much different than waiting for Jesus to come and well someday We'll solve death someday. We won't die someday. These diseases will be solved. Well, how do we know? Well, because we solved them in the past well some fairly simple diseases have been solved and then sometimes we learn that just resolving this one disease Doesn't necessarily yield all the outcomes it did when we cleaned up the water supply. Suddenly polio was out there so then we had to Take care of polio and what often happens with these with our attempt to colonize nature It becomes spy versus spy or becomes whack-a-mole. So we develop antibiotics and then the germs get resistance to antibiotics And so we develop new antibiotics and then the germs get resistance and then we say well we should use antibiotics rationally well, but if i've got antibiotics on a farm and i'm trying to i'm trying to make Better money i'm trying to keep the farm alive and the government is telling me I can't use antibiotics in my livestock Because that's rational. Well, it isn't rational for me not to use it and there again we see the trick of rationality where you start Very much determines where you end if rationality is working as we imagine it should Which is something like a mathematical process And that's the end of the second video onto the third