https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MSXb9ABTAD8

 I didn't anticipate that beard length would be the first thing that we talk about, but there we have it. Yeah, that's right. That's right. Well, I am going to jump right in because I know that this is going to go. And I want us to start first a couple of introductions. Both of these guys have been on the channel before, Cale Zeldin and Brett Sockel. This comes in the wake of a recent conversation I had with Brett. And I just this morning was re-listening to my conversation with Cale. And I am really looking forward to this talk today. And now you two have never spoken before, correct? This is our first time. OK, good. Maybe both of you do a little bit of introduction and then I'm going to jump us right in. Sure. Go first, Brett. Yeah. And I'm curious to hear Cale's interpretation of how this happened, because I'll include that in the introduction, because I think it'll be interesting for the audience. So basic biographical stuff. I'm archdiocesan theologian for the Archdiocese of Regina. I run our deaconate formation program up here. I'm a married man, seven children, live in the dream in in Regina, where it's recently come above minus 30 Centigrade. So our front door was frozen shut. Like, it's like the polar vortex in Regina is as cold as you're going to get almost anywhere. Oh, my gosh. So, yeah, and happy to be a guest here sort of every once in a while with Paul. And what was interesting to me, I read the comments, you know, after and I refrain from engaging because I just think it's like it's quicksand, right? Like, if you go if you get into it with people who are critiquing strangers on YouTube, you're dead. You know? Yeah. But Brett, that's because you say clear and forceful things. Like me, I just sort of speak in sort of ambiguous language and I throw off some thoughts here and there. People are really not sure what to sort of sink their teeth into. You're too clear. That's your problem. So I just paint a bullseye, right? So so the interesting thing was leading to this is someone said, you know, I'd like to see Brett talk to Kale. And I didn't know who Kale was. So I went and found the video and watched like Kale's interview with you and read the article that you wrote for One Peter Five that was kind of in the background there. Yeah. And it was interesting because what happens on the on in the comments is I'm generally I mean, lots of people are appreciative. But if people don't like me, I'm a liberal. You know, I get attacked for being a liberal, which is like, which is sort of I mean, I was thinking about this like, OK, so I'm a I'm a single income father. My wife homeschools our seven children. I write books in favor of the church's teaching on things like human sexuality and commending doctrines like purgatory and transubstantiation to our ecumenical partners. But apparently, apparently the fact that I call them ecumenical partners instead of like, I don't know, heretics or something. So, yeah, you're checking all the boxes. You're you're checking clearly all the liberal boxes here, Brett. I mean, it's it's really strange. It's like the Oberton window has gone so far. But I think the Oberton window has split. I think I think there's two Oberton windows and in the like, you know, faithful Catholic camp, I'm now far left, which is like the weirdest thing in the world because I don't have like an angry hermeneutic of suspicion against the pope or something like that. And then you have the marker for Orthodox. It's very weird. Yeah, you know, it reminds me of that that quip. What is it? I think it's St. Jerome who says, you know, the world groaned and woke up and realized that they were all Aryans. And, you know, I think we have woken awakened and realized that apparently we're all either completely, you know, hardcore trads or complete, you know, loosey goosey liberals. And like, there's no, you know, there's no main main thoroughfare there. It's it's super disorienting. And so anyways, the pitch is made that I should have a conversation with Kale. And I'm thinking, does this mean he's like he's the hardcore trad who's going to, you know, bring it down on me or what is this? And I saw that one Peter five and I thought, well, maybe he is, you know, not not the article, but just the mention of the website. And then I went and read the article and I was like, I think I agree with most. Yeah, I think that's right. I, you know, the you know, I never, of course, in my adult life, never considered myself, you know, a trad, you know, in, you know, with a trademark next to it. But I find myself in a sort of a strange position now based in large part, I think, just on the on the sort of the the loud, noisy chatter out there. I find myself in a sort of a different space, you know, and I think and we can get into this, of course, but, you know, I think in large part this is driven by either the perceptions of France's Pope Francis or or or real things that Pope Francis has done or not done. So I think there's I think the reasons for it that are probably worth teasing out. Right, right. And I'll just say when I so I suspected that the person making this suggestion wanted to see me get my comeuppance from a proper trad. Oh, geez. But I will I will disappoint that person, I'm afraid. But I was wrong. They were not. They were, in fact, very perceptive. They they in watching you and watching me saw, I think this is what I got from watching you and reading your stuff is that we're actually really close in a lot of ways. But on a couple of key things, we seem to come from different angles or different sides. And that actually makes for an interesting conversation. Whereas if you were a trad to give me my comeuppance, I don't know how much good that would do. But the fact that we like when I read about your upbringing in the church, it was remarkably similar to mine. But then around that sort of coming of age period, we have some different experiences that inform us differently that I think set us up for how we respond to the current situation in the church. But it means I think we have the same language and experience enough to understand one another. So at that point, I emailed Paul and said, like, I'm actually kind of interested in having this conversation. Whoever suggested it is not crazy and not just looking, you know, to give me my comeuppance. But actually, I think saw something perceptive. So let's see if we can prove them right. Great. That sounds good. Oh, you now, Cale. Oh, yes. All right. I forgot about that. Yes. So my name is Cale Zeldin. I am a teacher. I work at a boarding school in Rhode Island and cradle Catholic. I left the church in somewhat histrionic fashion around the age of 16 through around the ages of 18, 18 and a half. I read my way back into the church during my freshman year of college at LSU in Baton Rouge. And then I decided to pursue a more intense Catholic liberal arts education at a small little college in New Hampshire called Thomas More College. After Thomas More College, I went back to LSU, got my master's degree in English, and I've done a variety of different things, everything from writing. I wrote for a regional golf magazine to I worked in kitchens to golf courses to the classroom. And I even spent five years working and writing in Hollywood. So nothing produced. So there's no IMDB page. I was trying my hardest. So anyway, and Paul, I should say that that's probably the reason that is where I spent the most of my time in sort of interdenominational settings. And I think that was already by temperament open to those kinds of conversations. But I think that that solidified my eagerness to have these kind of conversations. And I think that that drew me rather that kept me at your channel when you were one of the earlier Christian commentators on Peterson. So that's how I found you, I think. Well, and I I've. Where to go with this, because you two just by yourselves, I know you two can go off and you two can have a really interesting intramural Roman Catholic conversation. And I am here to sort of help all of the non-Roman Catholics listen in and understand what's going on. And I re-listen to our conversation this morning, Kale, because I wanted to refresh myself on your story. And I found everything that you brought to watching, watching conversations, watching myself in these conversations is so painful for me because I really am mad I am at it. Oh, that's funny. But, you know, so here I'm doing it again. Yeah, we have. And I wanted to start this out with the mention of Ravi Zacharias. Yes, good. Because I think this situation with Ravi Zacharias, even though the authority and institutional dynamics out there in Parachurch evangelical land. And, you know, what you and I talked about, Kale, and what you wrote about with respect to that article in terms of. What do we do when a cardinal? I mean, this is a cardinal. Right. Right. When we have a scandal of this magnitude and the reason I think we're seeing really interesting things going on in this space today is that there's an overall continued reassessment within Protestantism of the merits of that movement. But at the same time, we're seeing within the Roman Catholic Church a lot of struggle and and Kale, you know, a lot of what you had said to me in that conversation just opened my eyes to stuff that I never would have seen. But listening to it within the Roman Catholic context reminds me of all these little things happening in even a little place like the Christian Reformed Church and all of the internecine struggles. And so I wanted to hear the both of you because I respect both of you deeply and and think you're both such good faith partners in conversation and you're both great talkers. So I didn't want you two to just veer off into, you know, the the trad, the trad drama in the Roman Catholic Church. And I knew you wouldn't because I have a sense of that. But I think we are in a moment of within the church. You know, what happens with Ravi Zachariah for evangelicals is in many ways parallel to the tremors in the Roman Catholic Church because of these scandals. And Kale, I thought you so put your finger on it with respect to where does this leave me and where does this leave someone who deeply and both of you two have such strong credentials? I mean, neither of you are leaving the Roman Catholic Church. It's not going to happen. So I wanted to bring that in so that all those non-Catholics out there and and and hopefully the Orthodox in the process don't get too smug as they listen in, because I think they're doing pretty well right now. But, you know, on this on this question, no one can afford to be smug, right? Because this is a human problem. This is a this is, you know, minor sports. This is schools. This is families and anyone anyone who who imagines that their community is untouched by this is probably in for a rude awakening because the worst setup is is the imagining that it can't happen or or and the kind of making excuses around the power dynamics that let it happen. Yeah, I was at a Catholic evangelical dialogue meeting in Mundelein Seminary outside of Chicago, and there was an evangelical who had written a book. And I wish I would have known this is going to come up. I would have got his name in the name of the book. But essentially, it was a book about power dynamics and evangelicalism. And and a big thing I remember was the sort of the danger of the superstar pastor and particularly the loneliness and the utter lack of accountability in so many evangelical structures for the superstar pastor. And of course, you have to make allowances for the differences of structure when you go over to Catholicism. But the basic human pattern of sin works out in in remarkably similar ways, no matter what the external ecclesiological structures look like and the kinds of excuses we make for people and the way we lie to ourselves because we don't want to see it and let it go on. It's going to happen. It's going to happen in every community. It's what are we are we going to enable it or are we going to have structures and and capacity for addressing it quick and honest? Yeah. And on that, you know, I was struck by the wording coming out of the Robbie Zechariah accounts, you know, and it was always, you know, well, you know, if you if you speak against the pastor, it's it's going to hurt the work, right? It's going to hurt the work of the Lord. And and you see that same language anytime as a sort of a superstar priest or a superstar theologian who sort of has this kind of moment, the sort of in-house status rocket stuff that you talk about all the time, Paul, you know, you you you run that risk of being more important than than the truth. Right. And and and I remember I forget who said it to me at some point. But basically, you know, Kale, you know, Jesus doesn't need your lie. And and I think that every one of these superstars is essentially set themselves up as Jesus needs my lie. Like the work that I'm supposed to be doing for Jesus is just going to have to absorb the fact that I own multiple massage parlors in various corners of the globe. Right. And not to pick on Robbie, because, you know, our own church has got tons and tons of those versions. But it's always that same that same note. And you can see the temptation of those that sort of exists on that next level because the work really is important. You know, and and you know, to your, you know, you know, Brett, you know, your work is important. Like you're a single, you know, you're the you're the income earner for your family. Like your work is not inconsequential. So therefore, there's something deeply invested in the structures that allow you to do your work, which do, in fact, have somebody at the sort of the top of the pyramid, your bishop, I would assume. You know, so it it it it it almost. Becomes it's almost a miracle when it doesn't melt down from the top. I I think you're exactly right. It is so tempting. I have to remind myself. And one of the ways I remind myself is I say it out loud when I'm teaching ecclesiology to teachers or deacons or whatever, is that like in the history of the archdiocese of Regina, I'm like maybe a footnote. Right. Never mind in the history of the Catholic Church. Right. But it can feel every day like what I'm doing is so important that if something were to happen, I can understand the temptation to want to cover. You know, and and I remember. So here's one thing that I think was different about my experience of McCarrick and other things. Sure. Yeah. When I was a teenage boy, I found out that the priest who baptized me had had serially abused my uncle for years. And it was a it was a it was front page news in our little corner of the world. And and it broke. I mean, it was it was a decade or two before Boston broke in the States and whatever. Sure. And so my own coming to terms with with membership in this church happened, you know, earlier and and and had that like a dose of realism about these kinds of things that when I remember very clearly when John Carappi fell and for me. Yeah, I'm glad you brought him up. I was thinking of him, actually. Yeah, John Carappi was was, you know, before social media was what it was, right? Back when you got cassettes to play in your car, recording of talks given in parishes. John Carappi was near the top of the heap in Catholic land. And he was EWGN sort of frontline guy. Right. Right. And he was telling everyone, you know, traditional Catholicism and let's toughen up and let's do the you know, you're kind of a manly. Yeah, kind of a manly, you know, rigorous, you know, cold shower Catholicism. Right. Right. Exactly. And and it broke that he had this like ranch with like drugs and prostitutes and fast cars and whatever else. And lots of people in my circle were shattered by this because he was their ideal of a Catholic priest. And I was like, I was like. Yeah, I'm surprised this didn't happen sooner. Like, yeah, you know, the way he was carrying himself was was just so. Well, the word the words is smug, right? I mean, I think that the smug word, you know, I was reading something just today and Flannery O'Connor has a letter that she was writing, I think, to Brett and to the Fitzgeralds back in the day, the translator, the translator of the need. And anyway, and she says something like she's talking about another Catholic priest and she says, oh, I like this guy. You know, he doesn't have that thing that seems to be endemic to every Catholic priest of some kind of prominence, which is smugness, you know. And I think that that that that word smug follows this whole thing around. You know, and Paul, you know, I don't know what you know. I knew who Ravi was even as a Catholic. You know, is that a fair now looking back on it sort of label or what do you think of that? Well, I Ravi among his cohort was better than average. OK, even though people didn't know about these things. And I'd like to there's a lot of conversations out there. I think I could probably pull up the name of the guy Brett you're talking about with respect to this. There's a lot of conversations out there with respect to power dynamics, with respect to celebrity. It doesn't take away from the fact that it's the it's the pastor of the two bit storefront church, you know, sleeping with the women or the local Catholic priest who has little or no status. This isn't simply a question of the way that smugness or status can bleed in. There are deep questions about the how the the message is compromised and what I like about bringing Ravi into this is that. So the Protestants have their sola scriptura, which tends to get beat up among my Orthodox friends now. And the Roman Catholics have their structure and, you know, the Catholics and the Orthodox and the Pentecostals love to talk about submitting to authority. The fact is that none we have the I think it goes deeper in that we assume that this gospel, whether you instantiate it in sort of a sola scriptura, evangelical frame or a historic apostolic succession, structural liturgical liturgical frame. This doesn't inoculate our superstars against the most common weaknesses we all bear with. And you can find, you know, you just go out there and find salt of the earth Christians, Roman Catholic or Protestant or otherwise who are out there sacrificing and being faithful and embodying it and giving justifications that says, you know, it's hard, but it does work. And again, I often come back in these conversations to I know you're doing a podcast, Kale with Rod Rear. I mean, his story is so when I first heard his story, that to me was so indicative of this moment. But then I I did a conversation with a young woman who grew up evangelical and the Jordan Peterson thing went to orthodoxy. I love that one. You know, finally, she's frustrated with the mask business in her Orthodox church. She sits down in her front yard, opens up her Orthodox study Bible, only to realize I'm being a Protestant again. Yeah, I love that moment. That was great. I saw it. It was wonderful. And so I think it's sort of like once you see something, you know, post-modernity, once you now are a consumer deciding I'm going to be Roman Catholic, just coming to the church in that way at all makes you Protestant. And so I you know, a lot of these conversations wants to want to focus on sort of low hanging fruit culprits. Oh, it's the celebrity. Oh, it's the it's the human nature. But I think there's more here in terms of. Where where can finally we in what can finally we trust Protestants sort of say in scripture, we can trust and and Roman Catholics sort of say in the church, we can trust obviously one was saying Jesus, we trust. But this is where when I look at, say, the drama between the trads and and I didn't know any of this stuff. You maybe should describe a trad for me. But I think, Brett, in your intro, you sort of did well. I mean, if Brett Sockel is insufficiently down with the church, I don't. Well, yeah, I mean, I think that the the the trad versus everybody else. Frame, you know, depends so much on what has happened in the last decade and really what has happened, I think in terms of the Roman Catholic Church, what has happened in the last decade is really set up by what happened, you know, in at the council and not even really what happened at the council, but really kind of what happened as an aftermath of the council. You know, so you know, say the council, you mean Vatican to. Yeah, the Second Vatican Council, which is what bread 62, 63, 64, I think it is. And 65. Yeah, it's 65. Right. It was four. There were four sessions. That's right. And so I think that so much of my own sort of. Resorting of my what I thought was true versus what I don't know it's true anymore is the way in which the Second Vatican Council was taught to me in the 90s, you know, was this very, you know, John Paul II, Benedict the 16th or well, then Cardinal Ratzinger inflected, you know, triumph of the what, you know, I'm sure Brett knows is the hermeneutics of continuity, you know, that that despite some of the sort of the more heterodox aspirations of some of the of the council participants that and some of the early euphoria in the aftermath of the council that John Paul II sort of re you know, brought it kind of back to its sort of main thoroughfare and and sort of made it a little bit more robust. So there's kind of a small c conservativism, conservative interpretation of the council. And I think that that for me, at least largely held throughout my young my adult life. Brett, is that? Yeah, yeah. Well, OK, let's so I just want to say one more thing. And it was it was definitely preached at me that that that the Second Vatican Council was was great and that the and again, you know, it's such a loose term, Paul, as I'm sure Brett will correct me here, you know, because you have the documents of the Second Vatican Council, which have standing in the church in terms of the Magisterium of the Church. And then there's this other stuff that people call like things that came out of the council. Right. And so it can be a little slippery. Right, Brett. I mean, yeah. So my experience growing up was why don't you, Brett, why don't you explain because you're so good at this? Yeah. Explain the Second Vatican Council, where it came out of. And because I mean, again, my conversation with you, Cal, when you begin talking about and describing what's going on, it was like, oh, because this is far bigger than just what's happening in the Roman Catholic Church. We're we're talking about huge forces that are reshaping our world and continue to do so. But go ahead. Right. Yeah. And I will get to a point where I think my my interpretation differs from kale and that that'll be interesting. But I mean, so the Second Vatican Council, called by Pope John the 23rd, meets from 1962 to 1965 issues, 16 documents grows out of in large degree post World War Two crisis in European Catholicism. Right. When John Paul when John the 23rd is calling it, there's a bit of a narrative that like, oh, Catholicism was trucking along just fine. Why did he have to mess with anything? Right. No. And this is my critique of the trads, too, by the way. I totally agree with that. So so I mean, church attendance is already dropping in Europe. There's a major crisis in meaning, obviously, following the Holocaust and the reckoning around that, all that kind of stuff. There's also movements in liturgical theology in particular, but also ecumenism and and what we call resource, which is a rediscovery of the fathers of the church that are that are brewing in the in the first half of the 20th century. That sort of come to expression in Vatican, too. And, you know, it's famous for that, like the single most obvious thing to most people is that we stopped having mass in Latin and started having it in the vernacular, which has nothing to do with the second Vatican Council. Technically, you know, I mean, it the the liturgical constitution suggests that we might do that sometimes under certain circumstances. Yeah. That's about yet. It happens virtually overnight. Right. So that's an interesting, you know, so that was so. But but lots of the bigger questions are things like. Well, let's frame it. The larger question under which most of the things fit is the question of the church's relationship with the world beyond the church. And so there's questions about relations with non-Catholic Christians. There's questions about relations with other religions. There's questions about the relationship with civil society and these kinds of things. And. What happens in the I would say first 20 years or so after the council is the interpretation that is prominent in Catholic universities, Diocesan office, whatever, is sort of a more and more open and very optimistic spirit in terms of what the church is able to engage with the world and what what John Paul and Benedict start sort of moderating that with is a sense that we still need to hold on to some distinctive like if we're going to be salt for the world, we can't just be, you know, indistinguishable from the world. And so that that's one way of sort of. So so in short order, giving a bit of history. So this is why I think, you know, we look at something like Rod's, you know, the Benedict option, you know, I mean, so much of that is driven by the concern that, you know, we no longer have anything to give. And I'm talking broadly here, as he calls the sort of the smaller orthodox communities, right, that we've become so divorced from anything substantive that that that we're we're in danger of sort of losing any connection to our traditions. And therefore, there's some sort of sense that we need to return, you know, to to to to bolster our own communities in the oncoming onslaught. Right. So I do think that there are certain analogies that have sort of come back again that make this relevant. And, you know, that, you know, you you call it a kind of optimism. I think that that that people and I'm not necessarily arguing for this myself, but I think other people would look at what the church does to itself in 1962, 63, 64 and 65. And then with the liturgy in 68, is that right, Brett? 68 that that this yeah, that this wasn't optimistic, that this was painfully naive. Yeah, well, I that you know, I'm. Yeah. And and and I think there were people and interpretations that were painfully naive. How much to attribute that to this or that person or to the church at large or or Pope's or whatever is I mean, you've got to do a lot of digging and and make your case on this or that. But I wouldn't disagree that there was there was naivete. At play for sure. Right. And and then I think what what largely it comes down to with John Paul and Benedict and going forward and the generation, Kale and myself, you know, were really influenced by these guys and the church in that time is the balance between a sort of robust Catholic identity and the question of our engagement with the world. And trying to figure out and these these are two, in my view, these are too often seen as a kind of zero sum game. So if we're going to be if we're going to be ecumenical, that means being less Catholic somehow, or if we're going to be more Catholic, that means being less ecumenical. And I feel like this kind of false dichotomy. And that's just one example of that's interesting. Underlies a lot of of our our. Polarization in the church right now, because I mean, my sense is I've taken part in high level, a rigorous ecumenical dialogue and very, I mean, virtually never, except from people who come in with this funny idea that humanism means watering down your identity and your claims. And why do you think that's funny, Brett? Why do you think that's funny? Why? Why? Why are their ideas funny? Yeah, that that the concern about being something being watered down. Well, I like no, I think people who think it should be watered down, who come in trying to do that, that's a funny idea because it's not it. First of all, it's completely unproductive in terms of dialogue. If you don't come in there with with a sense of who you are and what you stand for. Dialogue is boring real fast. And second of all, because it's just not what the church encourages when it tells us to do ecumenical dialogue. So apart from a handful of people who have this funny idea that ecumenical dialogue means watering down the faith. It's rigorous. And you come out more integrated in your own faith commitments. And sometimes that leads to agreement with the with the non-Catholic partner or or more agreement. And sometimes it leads to just more clarity about where the disagreement is. But do you see why people might be cynical about ecumenism? Well, I'd like to I'd like to sort of redirect. Oh, yeah, go ahead. Sorry. Yeah. Because. There's a real I mean, when I listen to your story, Kale and now Brett, your story about your uncle. I think part of this story is. An institution like the Roman Catholic Church, when it's having centralized pronouncements such as a Vatican council and here, this is then going to come down to the churches. We're living in a context in which other structures are having a far greater impact on the life of the local church than what is happening in a centralized hierarchy. And Protestants are obviously aware of this because many Protestants have given up on any kind of centralized authority structure. Completely. And and are sorting of sort of riding the waves, because, Kale, when I listen to you and I listen to others, that it sounded like their view of the second Vatican council from their from their place and their pew in their local church. Right. Was a sea change. And then when I listen to people who have credentials and position within the hierarchy, explain, listen to Bishop Baron Baron. Oh, no, this is this was about this. And, you know, you make Brett about. I mean, you're talking about things that are happening in rooms full of people with serious educations. And the vast majority of people are in church for an hour or two each week. And then the rest of the world, they're immersed in first newspaper and then radio and television and now cable television, now social media. And so there's there's a real question as to, well, these people with with with credentials or vestments can say what they want. But as a Protestant, not paying a whole lot of attention, admittedly. So before any of my YouTube stuff to what happens in the Roman Catholic Church, you know, yeah, Pope John Paul, he was, you know, the fall of communism. Ronald Reagan, he was a big guy. And then Pope Benedict, I had no idea who he was, because Mary hadn't started talking to me about his book or anything like that. And then he retires. And it's like, yeah, what's that? And then Pope Francis and then the press are all over the place. And Protestants are all over the place, hailing Pope Francis, because. And then when I listen to what he says, it's like, you know, wait a minute here. This is the Roman Catholic Church. Now, suddenly, he's a liberal. You know, and so from an outsider who knows just this much, watching these changes, whoosh through the church and even listening to someone like Bishop Baron talk about, you know, suddenly, I saw Roman Catholics in the charismatic Catholics. And then the you know, it even makes it into a Simon Garfunkel song about the radical priest. So, you know, there's a lot going on here besides just what the the powers that be within their halls are making decision when what's going on in the pew is looking pretty wild. Yeah. Can I try to answer Kale's question in light of what you do? Yeah, because I think they're connected. I actually do think they're connected. Yeah, I mean, so so absolutely. I've seen people say things about ecumenism. So much of my job is correcting these popular misconceptions that that I think, well, if that's what you think ecumenism is, then the trads are right to condemn it. And so so much of what I see in my from my chair in my office is like how the liberals and the in the trads basically agree on their interpretation about the split and just disagree about which side is right. But but my sense is that the the dichotomy is a false one. But but and the bigger question in this, I think, goes to your comment, Paul, is does the church have the voice to communicate its worldview when we were immersed in so much other media and other thought that that my sense of what happens is the division and the polarization in the world basically gets replicated inside the walls of the church. And so the the the interpretive tools we have for thinking about church teaching, and we generally don't use them, we use the tools that the world gives us for thinking about things like liberal and conservative in our political categories. Then we apply them to a question like ecumenism. And it's like you're going to get a mess because the categories don't work. So I think this is part of the problem is we no longer set the terms under which our own theology or public teaching or whatever is discussed. So if we want to say something about same sex marriage in contemporary culture, it will make zero sense according to the categories of the culture. I think it makes a lot of sense according to traditional Christian categories. But all the work you have to do before you say anything about same sex marriage is to lay out the categories that the church is using to think about this. And this is a huge part of my work when I have talks on anything is to is to try to get the Christian people to see in Christian categories first before you go into any kind of controversial topic. I'm I'm a little bit more skeptical. I've heard that line a lot, Brett, that the business of, you know, that you can't simply graft on liberal and conservative on to sort of church matters. And I bought it for a long time. I'm not sure if I fully buy it now. I, you know, I just I'm a skeptic. I don't have an answer to it. I'm just a skeptic about that. So tell me, tell me, tell me why. And maybe maybe let me throw on to that a second before you answer, Brett, because. We give we do the same thing in the Christian Reformed Church, and we're having this and we're having fights you guys won't have because we're Protestants. And so we're, you know, so in the Christian Reformed Church, we're trying to have a conversation about human sexuality. And a conservative report just came down and it's very much along the lines of the Christian Reformed Church. And I just think it's not going to make a difference. No one's going to read it. Those categories, those categories that people are thinking out there in the world are too dominant. And we're going to need to think of a way to engage this world in a very different way than we have been. So anyway. OK, so so the reason why I'm skeptical on this, you know, is in sort of in I'm a kind of a cynic about it, the way that Paul is laying it out is that, you know, look at all of the the euphoria in both the secular mainstream media, you know, the major outlets, ABC, NBC, New York Times, Washington Post, et cetera, you know, mainstream stuff. Look at the way that they are treating President Biden right now and and look at the way in which, you know, the the the establishment Catholic press is treating President Biden right now. I'm talking about, you know, the whatever, you know, like the commonweal I sort of sort of use as my my my basic example of of of the establishment, you know, leftish mainstream media and Catholicism. I mean, they they're very, very excited about this moment. Right. So, well, I mean, they're very excited, right, because, you know, because Joe Biden goes to mass on Sundays. Right. Right. We're we're told all the time. I mean, this is this is this is great. And look, I'm glad he goes to mass. I believe in grace. So, you know, amen. I hope I hope I hope that it has the necessary effect. Right. But. I'm also not an idiot. And, you know, I can clearly see that. And again, Paul knows me enough to know like I'm not some sort of partisan flamethrower, like I, you know, I'm you know, I love what you said in in in your last video with Paul about, you know, we're always a party to Eve or participating in evil. Right. You know, it's just like how are you going to frame it in the least bad way possible? Right. And I think that's exactly right. I agree with you 100 percent about that. So I'm not I'm not I'm not, you know, a partisan flamethrower in that respect. But it is staggering to watch people, you know, use you know, these these labels as well. Now that we have a Catholic president in in office. OK, so technically speaking, yeah, they're right. But look, what does that phrase even mean? I have this is one of the notes that I wrote to myself this morning on my walk. How elastic is that category? And I'm making no pronouncements on the president right now. I just want to be clear to the audience. But how elastic is that category, you know, that you can do to be Catholic? And maybe we can even broad that out to be Christian. So a couple of things that really stand out for me in that in that idea. The first is I wonder what the establishment Catholic media actually is, because my I don't have the numbers, but I just fringe. I just read a piece by Mary Eberstadt. Yeah, I read the same piece. Open letter to President Biden, where she pointed out that Ignatius Press is the largest Catholic press in the Anglosphere. Yeah. OK, OK. Hold on. Hold on, Brett. You you work you work in the official Catholic church, right? Well, OK, here's OK. So so so you work in the official Catholic church. You know that that the people who staff these places and maybe Regina is different. But in my down here and in the lower 48, when you work for the the chance series, it's a. Chances are you're you're an aging boomer and you love the Democratic Party. You know, that's true. Well, so OK, so here's what's this is what's fascinating for me, right? So. From where I sit, I see that people on the right think that the left wing Catholic media is dominant. No point to things like commonweal. People on the left are sure that EWTN has been the most influential force in American Catholicism in 20 years. And they're not they're not they're not both completely wrong. But it's fascinating. And the other thing I see in my in my office is people on my social media. If you if you're right wing, you think the American episcopacy is hardcore lefties. And if you're left wing, the American episcopacy is hardcore righties. But again, it depends upon what you mean by the American episcopacy. Are you talking about the bishops conference? Are you talking about the actual individual bishops? I mean, those things matter, right? Well, so so when you get down to to distinguishing, the people on the left will say there are a handful of courageous left wing bishops, you know, McElroy, right? And Diego or or soup itch in Chicago and Tobin and, you know, in a sea of conservatives and the same. And and and on the other side, you know, there's a handful of brave, you know, too bad we lost Chaput now or whatever. It was a handful of brave conservative bishops in a sea of left, right? And it was really around this, you know, is abortion the preeminent issue? Sure. I saw both sides. Yeah. We're so convinced of a narrative that when when what happened, the bishops said it was preeminent and then then they congratulated Biden when he was elected. And I well, well, well, McElroy got up in the middle of the of the of the plenary session and and and said it's not preeminent. And and a couple of those those those crew got up and made some stink about it. And that's the handful interpretation on the left. But who all but but who all, you know, get to go to Rome and take pictures with the pope right now. Right. Chaput Chaput can't go up and get a picture with the pope right now. And again, Paul, this might sound so silly. But but like those pictures that come out of the Vatican, like those are hugely consequential for people who follow this sort of stuff. Well, it's just interesting to me because I mean, like the highest Christian Reformed official in the land was probably Betsy DeVos. And that's funny. I can't tell you just how how that played in my denomination. Right. Right. Right. You know, daughter of Prince Corporation married into DeVos. I mean, this is money royalty in the CRC. We have all our own stuff. But and so then evangelicals, because we're all too small, you know. But you guys play in the big leagues. And and so but listening to you go back and forth, all of the dynamics sound very familiar. Yeah. Yeah. So what both of you said? Well, I just I wanted to finish the thought, which was when when the bishops did I mean, yes, there was there were voices in opposition, but the bishops did say abortion is preeminent in their in their official documents. One group on my Facebook thought that was the worst thing. Like that was terrible. And then when they congratulated Biden on his on his the opposite group that that was terrible. And my thinking was I agree with the bishops on both counts, actually. But but and there are exceptions within the bishops conference on both counts. Granted. But I thought as a whole, I agreed with both those moves. And the interpretation was this is this is a guaranteed knockdown argument that the bishops are in the first instance, wildly conservative and in the second instance, wildly liberal. And I just thought they they can't win, even if even if as a body, they actually it was the exceptions that were wildly conservative or liberal. It didn't matter because no matter where you if you stood to the left of the bishops, they're hardcore right wingers. And if you stood to the right of them, they're hardcore left wingers. And to me, that like that's a that's a major difficulty in in any ability to have a conversation because we've got these labels for each other before we get anywhere that I don't think you can point out specific instances. But as a whole, I don't think they help. I but but this again brings back where we started this conversation, that Brett Sackold is, you know, father of seven children, single. I mean, this is and this is at play far beyond the Roman Catholic Church in our culture. It's just that you all are have the size and the heft and the reach that you have someone sitting in the White House. And it goes into the question. And I completely understand you, Brett, because I in many ways I see I see the same thing in the CRC has two two wings that are, you know, you know, shelling into the middle and everyone into the middle thinks if I'm going to stop getting shelled on, I've got to go to one extreme or the other. But yet there are deep issues underneath here. That have to be addressed. And of course, one of them is questions of what what Kale said. What does this label mean that the Joe or not even just the label, even the behavior, you know, Joe Biden as a faithful, faith, faithfully goes to mass. Right. Right. And think about it this way, Paul. You know, it's like, you know, I'm a you know, let's say I'm a I'm a I'm a Catholic father of, you know, whatever. Three or four kids. And, you know, I send my kids to the local parochial school and I build houses, right. And, you know, I wake up in the morning, I say my prayers, you know, get my kids up with my wife, we get them out the door. They go to they go to school and I go into the site and I do my job all day. And, you know, I I'm an honest, faithful person. And I go and I do that sort of thing. You know, I'm a good and faithful builder of houses. Right. You know, in the way that you know that it's because I show at the mass on Sundays, I say prayers with my children. You know, I'm doing my best to raise my kids Catholic in this world. Right. You know, and so I don't think that there's I don't think anybody's going to fight. I mean, now, Brett, maybe you and I could sort of on a Facebook page see what, you know, Joe, the builder really thinks, which I think is always is an un an under remarked upon phenomena that we actually know what people think now, which I think is probably the real issue, because we used to sort of wonder what people thought and were blissfully unaware. And it turns out we were, you know, well served not to know what everybody thought about every subject that they post on Facebook. Right. So so that's part of it. You know, the president is not a builder of houses. You know, the president is engaged in high level work, you know, that is setting the tone for the for the polls, right. For the for the for the for the for the country. Like those things are massively more consequential than whether or not you just, you know, you elect to use the treated or the untreated two by four, you know, on the roof work. So so I yeah, I well, I want to go into the I like the idea of, you know, we see what people think. But before we get there, I mean, so so I'm. I'm profoundly disappointed in Biden's stance on a handful of issues, abortion, number one among them, real concerns about religious freedom and those kinds of things. Right. I I feel like part of what's going on in the mainstream, whether it's Catholic, you know, the left Catholic or the mainstream media in the in this sort of glorification of Joe Biden, the Catholic, I feel like it's it's it's. This is just my gut. I feel like there's two things going on. One is like a sense of complete and utter relief after four years of. Fair enough. Fair enough. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I read CNN now like CNN. You know, my right wing friends say CNN is biased. You know, it's just as left wing as Fox is right wing or whatever. I'm not sure it's it's the same kind of thing as Fox is on the right. But I can see their point and it's getting more and more that way. And I feel like it was largely Trump that pushed them that way or their reaction to Trump. I think there's a massive relief among a large segment of society that is showing itself in this way. I also think that sometimes this relief is taking the form of an almost thumb in the eye. Oh, yes. Yes. Absolutely. We are so done with Trump. We are going to pretend for a while that the new guy has no problems. And like, I think that's I think that's part of what's going on. But I also think and this goes to your your your point about knowing what everyone thinks on Facebook. Yes, I think not only do we know what our neighbors think, and I'm I'm there's friends I have at the gym that I just don't add on Facebook because I don't I don't even want to know. Yeah, I don't have any reason to be suspicious of them. I don't want to know. And I don't want them to know about the things I have discussions about on Facebook, because right now we have a perfectly good relationship at the gym. And and who knows what might be out there. But I think there's another layer beyond what it is that people think and now we know about it, is that what they're thinking is being wildly shaped by social media. Yeah. And and I'm clearer on this by watching people I knew before social media. So if I watch my parents engage on social media, I know that the kinds of things they post are really a bad representation of the kind of person they are. If all you saw that was their Facebook wouldn't be a good picture. But it's slowly seeping into their lives more and more. And so I think part of it is is the feedback loop with the social media. That's actually if you were slightly to the right, you're going to get pushed further and further. And if you're and this is why the why there was an overton window that is now split. And so that there's rigid orthodoxies on the right that make me into a liberal. But there's also there's rigid orthodoxies on the left and that make you a raging conservative. Yeah, yeah. I don't even count over there. But yeah, yeah. But but the algorithms are rewarding extreme behavior because algorithms don't care about truth. They care about reactivity. The more extreme the content, the more reactive. And so I feel like a lot of people who who I would have disagreed with a little bit on the little things now we're getting further and further apart. I mean, it's it's it's really it's it's I and so I think that you. Yeah, go ahead. You go. I was just going to say on that point, though, you know, we have a you know, as as Paul keeps reminding us, like we have this massive structure of an institution, right. That that is multi it's you know, it's the original multinational. Right. And it operates as if. Taylor Marshall is like the worst thing, you know, that that that that challenges like, you know, it's it's viability. And, you know, Paul, he's a a trad YouTube influencer. I don't know what you would call him right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, he's very trad. He's a he's a convert from the he was an Episcopalian priest converted to Catholicism at some point. Elected not to become a Catholic priest and as a teacher and has turned into a turned himself into a little industry down there in Texas, it looks like. And, you know, so so the so the power structure. How evangelical of him. Well, yeah, it's very entrepreneurial. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's what a lot of the cradle Catholics who lean more more left are all over that. Sure. That one. Yeah, that's who he's never he was never really Catholic in the first place, which again goes back to that. Interesting question that I keep posing. What does that mean? Right. To be a Catholic in the sense. But, you know, you know, and so so, Brett, to your earlier question, I think I'm trying to connect these things, but whose fault is this? Right. That if nobody listens to the bishop, whose fault is that? Right. Yeah. You know, you brought this up in the in the last video. It's like, you know, and so I know you're sympathetic to this to this line, but, you know, I think you're right. You know, you have you have to lay something some responsibility, deep responsibility at the feet of the men who actually run the show. Yeah, it's there. I think there certainly is responsibility. I see. So social media is really interesting in this regard, because we so at a diocese, we have to do social media, right? Of course. But we can't do the practices that get you the most reaction. Of course. Right. So so we literally can't do the sensationalizing, extreme, you know, extreme polarizing kind of stuff that generates audiences. So we make we make videos with our bishop or or or we share content or whatever. And we get, you know, in a lot of times, a significant reaction from within the mainstream. But we actually can't go toe to toe with someone like Taylor Marshall. It's built so that you will lose if you play his game. Right. And so I was I was talking to a bishop the other day. Not my bishop. If anyone wants to don't look it up, don't look at my bishop. And he was he said he was talking to a local YouTuber in his own diocese who's getting big numbers. And and the YouTuber was telling the bishop, look, if you just talk in this way about these topics, you can have these. This can all be yours. You know, that's funny. And the bishop said, I can't first of all, I can't do that. But second of all, if you're chasing those numbers, you might want to consider whether you're using the algorithm or whether it's using you. That's a great point. It's a great point. I like that. But still, I mean, you know, OK, it's about reach, right? I mean, it's about reach. Well, to come back again to this question of the thing, the thing itself or the thing that works, the. You know, to bring in a Protestant story, you know, there was a time and place when Martin Luther was the devil himself and the printing press was new. And and, you know, would, you know, just about to bring up, I was just about to bring up Luther for you. You beat me to it. I was. And so, you know, Luther had to be gotten rid of. But the politics was such that he wasn't the I think the the crisis that we see, whether it's in, whether it's embodied in the. In the sexual scandals of the evangelical marketplace or the Roman Catholic hierarchy. And I think one of the powers, one of the powers of Trump was that Trump, you know, joined around. It's the end around. He went around the major organs. Absolutely. You know, Joe Biden, I mean, that was his cell. Joe Biden isn't going to tell you exactly what you think. And I think the the deplatforming of Donald Trump from Twitter was was probably, you know, might become one of the far probably more consequential than if he had been convicted by the Senate. Amen. And watch, there's going to be a reaction. A counter reaction to his being dumped from Twitter. Watch. I mean, did you see I don't know if you guys saw this, but he returned home from Mar-a-Lago playing golf yesterday in there in his his motorcade going back to his house is the line with P the streets aligned with people applauding him on his way. I mean, it's he's being turned into he's being turned into Luther in an interesting way. But my but my point in this is that there's a what this sort of creates is a deep. A deep suspicion that. Well, maybe maybe there's maybe there's nothing really there in terms of this faith and belief, and maybe all there is is, you know, the the juice we get from, you know, And this is this goes before social media. So I think it was I forget what year it might have been. James Scop, who teaches English at Dork College and now Dork University and in Sioux Center, Iowa, at the hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the Christian Reformed Church, the heart of his piece he had written a little bit before of a family history of the CRC was that we have lost the ability to basically manage our own weather. And what you said before, Brett, is we are we are all just proxies of the far bigger movements going in and out. And that was before I mean, 2007 is the was the, you know, the first iPhone and that I was seven. Yeah, deeply linked to social media and that power that went out. And so there's a there's a deeper angst under all of this that impacts Christianity, not just the Roman Catholics, not just Protestants and Orthodox. It's coming for you, too. That impacts all of us in terms of is is is this faith that we possess deep enough to possess us more than our limbic reactions to the algorithms that are now pushing our buttons? Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah, one thing I would I would I would half agree with Kailon that I'm going to come back to to what you're saying here, Paul. So I think there are some people are really worried about Taylor Marshall, myself included. I've seen I've seen some, you know, sad things happen with people who are quite obsessed with watching him. But the temptation is to say we need to defeat that. And I think and that's the limbic reaction, I think, Paul. And I think the wiser pastoral move is to say, what is what is he speaking into that we're not speaking into? Yeah, that's a great question. That's a great question. Speak into that. And so one thing one thing that's become clear to me while I hope it is becoming clearer, I'm starting to think about it. I read a great article. I put in a lot of work trying to figure out how conspiracy theories work. And there's a lot of great stuff out there. We actually know pretty well how they work. What we don't know nearly as well is how to how to work against them. And there's a there's a big gap there. But I read something recently that said one of the single biggest factors that lead people to conspiracy theories, whether that's Taylor Marshall's infiltration of the church or whether that's covid vaccines are going to make you infertile or whatever it is, is a lack of a sense of agency. And so being able to not get a vaccine actually feels like doing something when the world is evil and out of control, not getting a vaccine means I can take a stand. And so I'm trying to think now the more sort of email again or whatever to say, OK, what what can we offer these people as to give them a sense of agency and belonging and participation? Because I think and the pandemic has really exacerbated this along with social media. It's kind of a perfect storm. But anyways. But I think it's connected. I think it's connected to something that Paul talks about all the time. I think it's connected to the meaning crisis. And because conspiracy theories work insofar as they have explanatory power, right, because lurking just behind the the conspiracy theory is nothing means nothing. And and I have latched on, you know, you know, I'm talking about infiltration, right? You know, and I don't want to get into the book itself. But but at the end of the day, it offers a kind of explanation of why things really stink now. Things are really horrible right now. And why? And and rather rather than getting into sort of impersonal forces of like, well, you know, the the GDP is this and this has been outsourced and but which are, you know, I get all those things. What these things provide is there's a there's a reason. And I think it gloms on to, you know, whatever this whatever those synapses that fire when you see things line up, you're like, oh, that's why. Yeah, it's not only an explanation. It's a prescription. Yeah. Right. Like follow this YouTube by this coffee mug. Share this link. Be part of the solution. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Yeah. I will say his tagline. But yeah, but that's exactly right. That's exactly right. But it comes when in. I'm sorry. Can I go ahead? I was just gonna say, so, you know, remember, you know, my frustrations is I sort of sit back in my relative obscure perch over here in the smallest state in the union and just sort of watch all this unfold online is, you know, the people in in in in positions of power, you know, look at it at a YouTuber as if it's the YouTubers fault. I mean, my goodness, seriously, you're going to blame Taylor Marshall for why, you know, Aunt Betty's nuts? How about, you know, the reason that ain't Betty is nuts is she's been abandoned because you've abandoned your teaching authority. No, no. Well, you know, it's Taylor's fault. I mean, you know, I'm not going to sit here and carry Taylor's water for him. I mean, he's doing just fine by himself. Right. But but he is not the cause. There might be a little feedback loop thing on the back end of it, but he is not the cause. And I get frustrated with with with, you know, sort of institutional thinking, you know, that that that will point the finger at that, because this is to me, this goes back again. Something that Paul talks about is this is sort of about institutional integrity and and a crisis of credibility. We might disagree about how big the feedback loop at the back end is. And and I like I'm going to want to say, you know, certain people who participate in this are sometimes even acting in bad faith and monetizing people's anxiety. And I think it can be a form of spirits on financial abuse. But if I don't disagree, I don't disagree. But even if even if we had a small disagreement about the size of the feedback, I would basically agree in a very similar way to how I would say Donald Trump is. Not the cause. He's a. Amen. Amen. You know, and there's there's bigger issues now. Now, then you then you you beg a further question. OK, so the bishops or whoever was in charge of American politics before Donald Trump or whoever is supposedly in charge of this environment in which this symptom emerges. How much control do they have and what could they or could they not have done? That's a tricky question. I think there's lots of things bishops could have done better. I I am sympathetic as someone who works in an office when a certain question or crisis happens and we're discerning what a best response is. When I go into a bishop's office in a meeting, a bishop has a ten thousand foot view and has it has a range of considerations that are beyond my experience, which can be paralyzing. And I'm sympathetic to that. I mean, we try to work. We try to work anyway. Yeah. Yeah. You know, I'm reminded of a scene in the mission. Right. And and the the cardinal or the archbishop travels to the New World. Right. And he's a grandee. Right. And he goes and he he sees, you know, the church on the ground. I mean, what what what more stark image of that church on the ground than these, you know, indigenous peoples that are there's a beautiful scene where they're they're singing as if they're like the Vienna Boys Choir. And it's beautiful. And the only thing that's different is the costumes. Right. And and so in that moment, the bishop, the cardinal, I'm sorry, it's been years since I've seen the movie, but the image just popped in my head that, you know, he has been so far removed from what Francis would say, you know, he no longer smells like the sheep. He's supposed to shepherd. Right. Which I think is a great line. I don't know if Francis coined that himself or whatnot, but it's great. Right. You know, that that that my concern about the about the hierarchy is that they have they're so far removed from Aunt Betty that Aunt Betty looks at somebody like Taylor Marshall and says, that's feeding me because I haven't been fed for a really long time. And so I'm sympathetic to that, that that elevated view that you talk about. Look, I do administration work. So I understand, you know, I understand like it never looks quite the same way. You know, the you know, the the story is always a little bit different when you know all the facts. I mean, I'm very comfortable with that, that that level of ambiguity. But I think that the abandonment and this is what I was talking about in my piece on one Peter five is that is the sense of an of abandonment that is a real thing. And I don't know what the easy I don't think there's an easy solution to that. But I'd like to get back to the agency and participation, because I think that's really key because we we have we are now living mediated by enormously powerful tools by multibillion dollar corporations by brand new technology. I mean, we have a novel virus in terms of social media, not unlike we have a novel virus in terms of covid. That's great. And all of that is giving people a sense of agency and participation. Now, you might say, well, you're famous on YouTube and I'm little famous on YouTube, famous on YouTube or Facebook or Instagram. You've got all of this, you know, I'm being seen a certain way. And so you've got all of that over here. And whereas perhaps generations ago, someone who was that Joe, the house builder who had, you know, he's going to have religious and as a as a local pastor, you have a pretty good idea of the of the menagerie of religious and political opinions that are floating around. You talk to all the time, which will keep you humble as a as a preacher. But Joe, the house builder, participated in the drama that resolved the deep anxieties and tensions and anxiety of of heaven and earth, of this life and the next of the redemption of all things and the restoration of God's good creation. And in going to the in going to the church every Sunday morning, he participated in that drama. And now, in a sense, we see a competition between that and how many likes I'm getting. And if I put it that way, it feels well, why should these two things be in competition? But we're just we're just little creatures that, you know, ding ding ding ding ding ding ding ding. You know, we're like that little, we're like that little pigeon in the box. That's the Skinner box. That's, you know, click the button, get a treat. You know, one of the things that strikes me from both Kale's last question and comment and yours is it's really hard. Here's a paradox. It's really easy to know what one person thinks on Facebook, or at least it seems easy. Even it may not be a super accurate representation of what they think. But it's really hard to know what the larger group thinks. So let's say I'm a bishop and I have a handful of contacts with people in the pews. I mean, I spend a lot of time in meetings and I have to read a million things that come out of Rome and whatever else. And I'm moving from crisis to crisis, but I also have, you know, a solid subset of people in my diocese and beyond that I have a relationship with that I get to hear about what their struggles and what's going on in the church and whatever else. And what I don't know and what's really easy to be mistaken about, even though you wouldn't even know if you're mistaken, is how representative my subset is of the broader group. So I get a letter from someone or the bishop gets a letter and he sends it to me and we look at each other and say, is this an individual who is a one-off but is very sort of vocal and engaged because they're maybe anxious or energetic or whatever, or do they represent 2,000 people that we've never heard of? And it's really, really hard to know that. And so when you're doing communications or whatever around different issues, in a lot of ways you're testing your audience as you go because you know a tiny subset and how they're likely to react and what they're looking for and where they might need to be challenged and whatever else. This happens on social media all the time. I'll post something and I'm engaging with people who find it interesting and it looks like the conversation is going somewhere and then someone who I don't even imagine is reading it comes flying in off the top rope. They are livid about I don't even know what. I didn't see it coming at all. Now translate that into a bishop or a bishop's conference or whatever. It's hard. It's really hard to read the tea leaves out there. Right, so there's always the dynamic, right? I mean maybe this is the paradox that Paul can see as a Protestant and you and I can't see it as Catholics is that we have both the hierarchical church with the pope on top and we also have the principle of subsidiarity where you're supposed to be sort of radically local and maybe Paul, a Protestant church, spends more time on that side of the spectrum of things and maybe we should too. I don't know. Well, and it also strikes me Brett that your poor bishop, I've got a lot of feeling for it right now. I'm starting to get nervous that I'm saying too much. But your poor bishop is look at what he's fighting against. Because when we say well, Google knows what the people think. Well, what is Google? Right, you know is Google the shareholders? Is Google the programmers? Is Google the chief officers? Or is Google the algorithm? And you know, this is where you know a lot of talk on my channel, a lot of thought goes into me in terms of extended agents and persons and proxies and principalities and powers. I mean we have language for this from the New Testament that your bishop is dealing with Facebook. If you read some books came out fairly early on from Google about what do we learn about people and the dating websites do that. There's a really good video from iCupid that says everyone's a little bit racist. And again as a pastor that doesn't surprise me at all. That all the men are just interested in the 20 year old women and the women are disgusted by that in the men. And I mean this is common knowledge. But you know we are dealing with forces that are tremendously powerful. And in terms of you know, and I deal with this personally because I have to ask myself should I have a YouTube channel? And the more and my YouTube channel is fairly quite small in terms of YouTube standards, but I wrestle with you know, who should I have on and how should I use it because I am playing with powers and forces that are you know, that are far beyond me and how do I do so faithfully? No, but I love that question Paul and I again one of the reasons why I love you is is you ask that question. You know you genuinely engage in the question. I mean I think about this as a teacher all the time, right? So I'm a teacher. I teach at a fancy lovely boarding school and it's very expensive, but it means that I get to have like 12 kids in my classroom, right? And so I teach my couple of sections and I've got you know, and it's an intimate group and we can do amazing things with the stuff that we get to read together. It's a genuine blessing. But I think about that all the time, you know, well, you know, if I were interested in such things, I mean, how would I scale that up? And what gets lost and what gets gained when you scale that up, right? And you know, but then I remember that even the classroom is a technology of scaling up, right? It's a break from a one-on-one. And so I have to ask myself am I serving all 12 kids in my classroom right now? Or did I miss out? You know, did I focus on the smart kid who really likes the same geeky ideas that I do? And then I neglect the poor kid in the back right hand corner who's like, you know, kind of disaffected, right? So you always have to ask that question, you know, you know, we ask it with our own children, you know, we ask it you're a pastor in your congregation. That's scaling it up, isn't it? Right, you know, so I do I don't I don't think we should get paralyzed by the question, but we really have to keep asking that question all the time. So then you look at somebody like Brett's boss and his confreres, right? That's talk about the burden. I mean, I used to say that and I meant it just like I would never want to be a bishop. The awesome responsibility of being a shepherd of multiples of thousands of souls must be a a thing that you can't think about too much or it would just sort of, you know, blow your mind blow you up. And so do do youtubers influencers, etc. You know when they when they screenshot their their their subscribers and it's like reached 100k subs, you know, and and like and I said, I'm watching I'm kind of laughing it because I'm a I'm that guy. I watch things and and you know, I'm like, wow, you know, I could imagine me kale getting really into that. Right, and you know, I do I do a little bit of this stuff, right? And and you know, I I could see myself really getting into the analytics, you know, I started jogging during covid and I was a real couch potato until covid started. So I started to jog and I jog every day and I had one of those little fit bits and then it was connected to my phone and it would map out my my and I was really that I would post it on instagram like wow, I you know, and I was genuinely proud of myself because I was a real couch potato, right? And so I would go 10 miles on on a sunday morning before mass and like I was super proud of it. And then I started to realize I'm kind of addicted to am I showing off? You know, am I am I am I'm signaling clearly I'm signaling right? I'm not dumb enough, you know, I'm signaling but but what is my motivation here? And so finally I had to take the fit bit off. I I It's not good for me because some days, you know what? It's okay to walk with the dogs. You know, I don't have to make sure I get my run so I can take a picture of it and post it, you know, and I could see myself getting into the analytics of it which robs it. Well, what am I in what am I essentially doing? Like what is real? Yeah Well, and to swing back now back to vatican 2. Oh, yeah, and the I love it. I love it I know i'm so excited paul because I again from someone who knows very little about vatican 2 You know to hear brett your treatment of it in terms of you know understanding the post-world war two crisis and european catholicism and Understand okay, how do we and then okay mediated by pope john paul the second and pope benedict You know here But then this other side and others heard, you know, what what did what did vatican 2 mean very low resolution? Yeah, oh we can have church in the vernacular whether or not there was connected to it on because I know this is how church Communication goes because I watch that even in a tiny little group like the christian reform church, you know What you know? You can have church in english and now we're going to be strumming and you know, it's like the 60s revolution You know, I've talked about tom holland on my channel I mean i'm really happy that one of the next books he really wants to do is something on the 60s because great That's so important. I totally agree. Here's this here's this whoosh. Yeah, that goes through the culture and now suddenly We no longer have to be the uncool church that has Masses in latin and all of the tapestries I mean the protestants have been beaten up catholics for that on their own but then of course what you know what you know You know little now that now the cool now the really cool catholics are going to latin mass and Yeah, so so so I gotta jump in on this one because so When I think of the second vatican council I really don't think of the second vatican council Like in my head and you know, and we all recognize the distinction but in my head It has everything to do with liturgical reform in the late 60s Because brett you're a theologian. I'm not everybody again full disclosure. Kale is not a theologian but you and I both know that We're two of a very small group of people who've actually read the documents of the second vatican council Yeah, so so what do we do with that phenomenon? But do you think i'm right about the liturgical reform being the thing that people think of when they think of vatican too Oh, yeah Before you read the documents you imagine that that was the main thing. Yeah, that's right and then uh when you read particularly sacrosanctum concilium, which is the which is the decree Uh or or the constitution sorry the constitution on liturgy It it does not read like what you were told vatican two Did with the liturgy right so so right away So one more time, you know, we you've got the phenomena of the documents and then you've got the actual thing that people experience And so you brought this up earlier paul, right? It's like Yeah, fine There's like this beautiful book and there's this thing in the documents and it's written in italian and latin in english and it's you know promulgated simultaneously where and then there's like the real thing you know, and I I would argue that that's a kind of Baked in decadence that I don't think we've come to terms with as a church now I'm talking specifically here with brett here like in terms of the roman catholic church We have yet to come. I mean think of all the beautiful Encyclicals that john paul the second wrote I've read almost all of them and i'm sure you've read all of them Like wonderful inspiring benedict the 16th. I mean space alb a I know you you recommended to paul, you know While I what am I I love it, you know, but There's that and then there's like the other thing that aunt betty Encounters in her real life by the way, I don't have an aunt betty but um The thing that that that people actually encounter like so so when I start talking about what is real catholicism You tell me right? Well, and this is and this is one of the things that i've been really thinking about a lot in terms of catholic and protestant because It fascinated me that When I walk look at the roman catholic church now on one hand you've got the buildings boy. Those are powerful Yeah, you've got the you've got the drama Around the liturgy you've got the good but even paul you're dealing with even that is Not entirely accurate right because I grew up in a suburban parish And you know if you if I would take you to that suburban parish like the actual building You'd say this is not what this is not what our lady of you know cathedral looks like You know, so so much happened architecturally liturgically, you know, uh, uh, uh in song. I mean, you know You Again, there's a real disconnect right brad. I mean between those sort of high church Versions of catholicism that you see in movies, you know was not the church that you and I grew up in right? so so you you're You've put me on an interesting kind of hot spot, which I which I I mean basically i've been on it without realizing I'm on it very clearly Which is I mean the reason I have a job is because Uh, there's all this beautiful teaching that nobody knows and so That's why you need to be here. That's right. That's right Right. So I mean like I tell people like if my my job is technically infinite, right? I mean I could I could just do it all day every day. Yeah, I could do talks at every parish I get you know, and and the number one thing I hear Uh when I give talks is is some version of how come no one ever told us this before amen And that was exactly my experience when I was 18 years old and I started reading old things and i'm like well heck Nobody told me this stuff before Right. So, okay So on the one hand I need to remember that the church I live in brett the theologian lives in is a little bit Idealized. Yep. It's analogous to the the the hollywood catholic church that paul and other non-catholics See with our beautiful energies and beautiful There's a watch on tv and and I teach teenagers every day and so I can see exactly what reality is in terms of whatever gets Filtered down right, you know through there. So maybe that's a reason why I i'm a little bit of a I don't know. I hate to call myself a cynic because I am not a cynic, but i'm a little bit, you know Skeptical back the idealist a little Yeah, so here's here's what i'm on the one hand. I think You're you're right And I think one of the things I learn on the job here because I I mean I was trained in the ivory tower, right? grad school, whatever and now I answer letters from parishes and whatever and so i'm i'm having to learn The real church on the ground and and the thing is it's so big That just like the example I gave with the bishop. I learned more and more about it and I still So much of it is a vast mystery to me You know what what people think and what their experiences even after years of talking with these people and meeting with these people and whatever so I need to remember that i'm i'm in the ideal, you know in a way the flip side is um Like my sense from church history is this has always and everywhere been the case Yes, yeah And so so they kind of imagined like oh once upon a time there was a church where everyone was on board and everyone agreed That's right All the things and we just need to get back to that And the reason we're not there is because the bishops have abandoned their charge or the theologians have gone liberal or the 60s Or the social media has come in right, right, so right So there may be some truth in this or that part of it as relates to this or that part of our contemporary experience But there's there was never a golden age, you know, right? This is why we Well, I was just saying this is why we honor our heroes right? This is why we honor our avengers This is why we honor those guys. We call saints. I mean like frances of assisi is Probably the most famous catholic saint, you know everybody knows who saint france is is whether they understand what he was or not is a different story, but everybody knows who he is and All he did was remind the the the removed the removed people who ran the show that hey like You forgot the core you forgot the thing And and you need to remember the thing right right well and and yeah and you could find it you could find similar Characters from every era of trachea. Yeah Where where there's where there's laxity where there's overreaction where there's corruption where you know Yeah, and so I I mean part of I guess you know One thing that that I came to terms with when you know as a young man in the church knowing You know about the abuse crisis in a personal way as a kind of earthquake in our family was um I've never Had even even if I even as a theologian I live in a bit of an ideal world in terms of like I love church teaching and it's beautiful whether or not everyone Knows it and understands and believes it I've never been much of an idealist in terms of like Now that we have the right pope the church is going to be fixed if we do liturgy, right? Like yeah, that's just never been a temptation for me, you know Yeah, I would agree i'm the same way I I am not a worshiper of men And and I uh in but I will say this though Certainly, uh, I have been cured of any kind of latent ultramontanism that I may or may not have entertained in the 90s um And given the last decade, uh, but but also, you know, I think um I thought I was sufficiently Girded to deal with the corruption in the church After boston, like I thought I had kind of mentally sort of done it, right? I mean i'm from louisiana and like literally like the sort of the first Tremor of the sexual abuse eruptions were you know in the next town over in lafayette, you know in the 80s, right? So so i'm you know, i'm not as close to home as as your situation brett, you know So I thought I had kind of sufficiently, you know girded myself for it, but but for whatever reason the mccarrick thing You know blew me up And and and not because oh my gosh a priest is you know doing this we you know There's plenty of examples of that right and but but the and and maybe it's because he was so high up I don't know. I don't know why that one in particular Wrecked me, but it still wrecks me right now. I mean my you know Is it possible? I I could be totally wrong, but just like watching your your previous talk or reading your reading your arto Is it possible that it's the relationship with john paul the second? I mean The the the impression. Yes. Yes, it is. That's very possible. Yeah, I mean in in your story john paul's this great hero And so what the mccarrick thing says is even even john paul screwed this one up Well, that's yeah, and so but I maybe I didn't make that point more forcefully in the piece but I mean I am a I I love john paul the second. I think he was on the whole a great man and certainly an inspiring man But I also you know, i'm deeply skeptical. I was deeply skeptical of the rush to canonize him I i'm a sort of a minimalist when it comes to that that process personally, even though he was a very you know Made a lot of say yeah maximalist. Yeah, um, you know, but I I guess I underestimated how Well, someone like mccarrick could game the system And what that means is that the system is much more corrupt than even I had thought it was right, right Yeah, yeah I listened to a book Uh by john teal and it was largely about benedict's, uh pavis. He but he had this the story of messiel Oh, yeah book. Yeah, totally I mean, I I wasn't shaken in the sense of like my relationship with the church Right for whatever reason I I was ready and I knew he was a monster right but like hearing the details. Yeah. Yeah was like like Magia inducing. Yeah, like like the that the capacity for evil Was really sort of overwhelming and and I read it I read something as someone who went to the small town where mccarrick is holed up and like knocked on the door and did The interview I don't know if you read the interview Reading the interview where he's just like yeah, I think they've kind of misunderstood me and overplayed a few things it really wasn't quite like that and it's just like Yeah Yeah, I mean so at the personal like at the level of shock at the personal evil I I still can be overwhelmed by that. Yeah at the at the like You know, I when we teach church history to the diaconate Candidates here. We used a textbook that was pretty Candid about failures in in church leadership over the years and it was it scandalized a lot of people Yeah, and and what book is that? Oh, I think it's justo gonzalez's church history Where do I have it here A lot a lot of my people like books and so Okay Uh, yeah, justo gonzalez story of christianity volumes one and two. Um anyways, uh, like it doesn't pull any punches and And lots of people are are scandalized because a lot of people in the academic formation are pretty idealistic Yeah pictures of the church and don't expect that kind of thing in church history And it's it's actually you know, part of you is like, oh, I don't like to burst their bubble Well, you got the other part is like you have to you cannot go into ministry with an idealized picture of the church Like it's really good that you know this stuff. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. You'll get out of it fast Ministry or the or the mindset one or the other? And you know to me It comes round back to The Heroes of the faith and and we need them and we should have them we all need them as part of our own development but something something in all of us longs for Again, the thing itself we we long for salvation not just from uh, the political woes of the moment or Long-term crises or the cancer that's uh in me or in my mother or my neighbor We long for the salvation of everything and we long to participate in that and and go ahead Yeah, no And it is a participation and it is a communion and it is not just myself and I think that Every time i'm tempted to sort of make this about, you know, it's just jesus and me Right, which is a temptation right? Like this is a sort of a it's just me and him And you know, I I you know everything i think jesus sees the world just like I do Yeah, yeah, right, you know, but I know I know that it's not just me And that's why this stuff matters to me personally And and I think this is this is what we're longing for and this is part of the reason why we You know again in the protestant side side. Well, we're going to We're going to take the bible and the bible is going to be it because the church has failed me or you know Well, I read these things in the bible that make me nervous so my bishop my bishop will tell me what's right or It's a strategy, right? I mean it's a strategy to to to take the complicated and make simple right and and and and You know so we can talk about Tradism as a strategy we can talk about you know progressive or wokeism in and outside of the church as a strategy And I think for people I i'll speak for myself But I get the sense in talking to you two gentlemen that you know, you know that it's more complicated than these Pre-packaged things that are being given to me You know, it's more complicated But but I guess the reason why i'm i'm way more trad sympathetic than I ever was in my 20s in my 30s Um, and even into my early 40s is that I have the sneaking suspicion that the trads are more Right than I ever thought they actually were And that has given me serious pause and what do you mean by that? So the trad narrative as I understood it in my you know in in my 20s and 30s Was that it was a bunch of sort of breakaway cranks who couldn't Understand that the you know, the church had to um Update itself, right? you know the aggiornamento and By going back to the sources of resource of meant and and that The you know, these are a bunch of weird people who like to wear doilies on their heads and they like to have the priest back Um turn toward them mumbling in latin and that was the narrative that was sort of given to me and there and there and they they they breed like rabbits and they Um are rigid and probably psychologically broken right and that was Pretty mainstream in terms of the way that that even conservatives thought of the traditional movement. Is that fair brett? I think probably I didn't have a lot of contact with trads growing up like the canadian prairies was not a hot spot for that um what what I Didn't either brett like that's what I mean like I grew up in a very sort of very suburban american south, you know, louisiana, but um, You know, I didn't know like what the legionnaires were they're not trads, but I didn't know what opus day was They're not trads. Like I didn't know what any of this stuff was like at home You were catholic or baptist like that was it, you know um, and so um, you know, so but when I when I did encounter them Later on when I went to a small catholic college and they had you know, we used to joke that it was a conservative place And so, you know that the college used to advertise in two publications There were the crew there were the kids who came to the college because mom and dad read national review Or there were kids in that college who went to the college because mom and dad read the wanderer and the wanderer Paul is this sort of like old school rad trad og, you know, I think it's still in existence. I don't know, but it's very very Vatican too skeptic shall we say, you know and very much no salvation outside of the of the actual literal catholic church and And and that that whole bit right and so so that was my first uh, Encounter with them brett and so um, I was part I wanted to be part of the sort of the urbane sophisticated cosmopolitan You know conservative, uh, you know, uh john paul the second type of people I wasn't the dower and you know make the women dress in prairie skirts and and all of that, right? And so, um, anyway, that was sort of my framework for a long long time Um, but I I I have come to think that that the liturgical, you know, the vatican too as liturgy will say right has been Uh, and the church that birthed it and was birthed by it um Is deeply problematic and and and we we we lost things Like I remember when somebody finally explained to me why the priest has his back facing toward us Right because that's how it was always billed to me is like oh like back then, you know The priest had his back turned to us and and then when I realized well, no actually, you know That's the priest in front of the congregation offering all of our prayers up and to the lord to the east I was like, whoa. Yeah, i'm like, okay, so that's That's huge like that's not how it was characterized to me at all so, I mean my encounter was a little different because I only met a couple people who were trads that I didn't even I didn't know what a trad was when I met them And so they made these arguments, you know that they were aware of what I was supposed to think about them that I did I didn't know what I was supposed to think that they thought that the priest had his back to us Uh, but so I encountered their arguments for for ad oriantum sort of with fresh eyes and I was never really troubled by that Like I was like, yeah, I can see how that works. I mean Like the metaphor works either way if a priest is a media mediator Mediary between god and humanity. Well, then Whichever way he's facing you can make a case Right. Yeah, but but but again as a as a as a tradition as a traditionally minded sort of chestertonian conservative Like, you know, don't don't rip down the the wall you run into in the middle of the forest until you know why It's there Right. And so so my basic my basic standpoint on these things now even more so is like hey Like how about we not like, you know renovate all the churches until we understand why they are like the way they are and I think in a lot of ways i'm Sympathetic to like trad aesthetic concerns. I mean I would I would share to some degree what I don't share Uh to a large degree is the moral panic around certain questions, you know, so for so here's I mean A really simple example, right? So the vatican's nativity scene this year was kind of weird And and my inclination my inclination. I mean it was ugly brad. It was ugly Sure, it was so my inclination when I see that it's like, huh, that's weird and ugly Um, but the the trad inclination is like this is a symbol for everything that is wrong and it's sort of and Are they wrong? What? I mean, right? I mean, it's a symbol. So, I mean, you know, and i'm not a relativist to be fair, but so so this is It signals so what I saw it on rod drears blog. So keep going. Yeah But what i'm saying is my temperament sure maybe all it is is temperament is I mean I like I I could be down at the priest facing the other way and I could be down with all the males and I like but but I guess I maybe became inoculated from certain experiences of people who Overdrew certain lines that I did not find credible or helpful. And so my instinct is to like Oh, hold on here. What's going on? And and and to go to my experience of trads, right? So when I met them, I didn't know what they were supposed to be like and when they made their liturgical arguments I was like, well, okay, maybe that I could i'd be okay with that, you know, not a big deal. Um, but then I found and this might This is anecdotal so There will be exceptions to this but this is my my experience It happened over and over in my here's the weird in my experience There are almost no exceptions to this in my tiny subset. Yeah when I met These trads they were all well, okay I met one young woman basically all young men and one older man who was a convert uh to the catholic church and in every single instance They had broken or non-existent relationships with their own fathers every single time. That's interesting And And I was like what is going on here? And what it what it looked like to me? Was that um, these were people in in again in every case they've gone through this like searching phase Where maybe they were on the world, maybe they're atheist or agnostic Maybe they had rejected the catholicism of their youth or the mainline protestantism of their youth And then they found in the catholic church something from their perspective Really rigid that was willing to take a stand in the world and say The kinds of things that needed to be said that they weren't hearing anywhere else and And it what it looks like to me from a psychological point of view is people who found in the church a father Instead of a mother well, that's interesting because we always call our holy mother church, right? But anyway So this is what when I when when I encounter this like hyper rigidity And this moral panic around things that to me don't seem worthy of that kind of moral panic I wonder if the church is is not A home with a hearth and a mother but it's a military barracks and and if if one Hair is out of place Then then the sergeant needs to give you a dressing down, right? And it it just it doesn't feel like Even though I might be sympathetic with a lot of the I mean i'm i'm on board with the teaching on priesthood and marriage And i'm not that opposed to literally, you know, right i'm not opposed at all. Um But it just the the level of moral panic around certain things just seems to me out of all proportions Right because because I think it's you're ultimately messing with people not you We we are ultimately messing with people's symbols, right? And and symbols are visceral And and and and you know when you know, I always have to sort of catch myself, you know Am I am I reacting symbolically to something or am I reacting like to the person in front of me, right? And you know, we're all married men here. There've certainly been instances where you know, your wife says something that triggers Some some inner symbol and you just oh, you know, it unleashes the line and you sort of like where did that come from? Right paul, I think you've even made a couple of jokes about this earlier on but so so so but but when you're messing with people's Symbolic Imaginarium or whatever you ever want to call this, you know the imaginary is I guess what's his name would say taylor would say um, you know That's why I think the liturgical alterations are so consequential You know and this paul might be where you know It'd be really interesting to get your perspective just as as you know, you know In a non quote unquote non liturgical, you know, you know tradition you come out of but you know I think it really I Just think it's I think it's the grant I think it's the the Accelerant to so many things and i'm not a sentimentalist about this I'm not going to say that you know Pope france's tomorrow issues some sort of moto proprio about we're all going back to the latin mass and we're going back to the To the extraordinary forum and then everything's going to be fine. I mean that's that's You know, that's what they all go back Back That's a great question. Yeah. No, right is the cat out of the bag, right? Right, and and that's why paul I think i've said to you Offline a couple of times like I sort of think we're all protestants actually You know because again imagine that like that would be a radical move that would test Catholic ecclesiology to its core right and well you could mess with little fringe things here and there But if the pope said, you know tomorrow, all right, you know take out the little Mini altar in front of the main altars, you know Going back to the 1962 hymnal and you know, we're gonna do it in latin and everybody and and and the whole thing I mean what would happen brett? Seriously, what would happen? Yeah, totally like instantaneously and this is this is where joe biden comes back into the conversation Because You know not to not to go too far back to kennedy but of course the fear with kennedy was pope will be Pulling the strings. Well, he had a sex addict in the white house, right, but um, you know This is this is where we're getting into these structures and authority And okay, so the pope decides we're going back um and people are like I'm never going back. It's you know, it's birth control Um, you know and they often go down these lines I mean there's there's very little more powerful in our world than the you know than these sexual issues there But but i'll even go something much more mundane and I think actually as consequential if not more Brad at what point will the bishops, you know around the world, you know can in north america here At what point are they going to say? Okay as of this date, uh, you know this coming sunday in You know after easter, let's say, you know, all catholics must return to church at at at peril of Entering into mortal sin, right? If you don't show it's a huge it's a huge problem Yeah, I don't know I don't know I don't know what the answer is because Because for years we all know like, you know, it's probably maybe you don't know. I don't know this but like If I am not in a state of grace I can't receive communion on sunday right and One of those things that takes me out of communion or or puts me in a state of of schism from from god Is missing my sunday obligation now. I don't have to receive in order to make my sunday obligation but Again, it's always that that that's the implicit thing now. How what do you do with this now brad? I mean, how do you know? I mean, okay, so I have this tiny fantasy. I have no idea right. I remember, uh archbishop shapu Giving people a dispensation to drink and have meat on it when st. Patrick's day landed on a friday Yeah, of course and I was like I I know what he's doing here. At least I think I know what he's doing here They were gonna drink and he's saving sunday And so so what was he doing? He was reminding them that they shouldn't be normal, right? It was and and it was a news story. And so I don't I don't know how you pull this off but perfect world This this extended dispensation due to the pandemic Becomes a teaching moment About about our our sunday obligation, but how you pull that off. I don't know Well, and so and so we're we're this is you know, this is marty graud day, right ash wednesdays tomorrow um and so Watch the theater around this gentleman, right? Because we know that they're not going to you know, most places are not going to do the ashes on the forehead They're going to sprinkle on top right and this is sort of there's all this kind of theater that in this moment I'm using theater in a very sneering way, so I apologize for my for my my starkiness, but That because this is you know, this runs the risk We won't say what that risk is but with the sprinkle it's sort of it's it's covid friendly And this gets this gets into the question. Okay, what's most real? So yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, so brett Cale probably knows I mean i've been following with great interest the the the migration of tom holland through this and when the pandemic hit Hits tom holland basically looks around you know grew up in the anglican church at about the age of six Figured that hey, wait a minute dinosaurs aren't in the picture dinosaurs are cool. I'm out of here Uh eventually writes a book about islam and its origin story reads, you know Get that goes out and a lot of muslims are like we don't like you're in trouble And one of them says why don't why don't you look into the origin story of your own religion? and these What is my religion? And so then he writes this book dominion and becomes, you know, he says sort of i'm the you know He says sort of i'm the thrush. I'm just in the middle of making this video actually. I'm the i'm sort of the thrush You know, who's the who's the heir of dinosaurs and then the pandemic hits and he looks around at the church and like You know, we used to call you dinosaurs as sort of to dismiss you right, right But what we really what what I would really respect now Is someone who would stand up and say virus be damned The communion of the saints trumps, you know masks and social distancing and and these things now He nuances that because as and this gets into the conversations that you and I have had brett with respect to is there a god? And what does god mean in all of this and agency and all those issues, but this these issues come down to Does it the similar evolution happened in the christian reformed church at the same time as vatican too now? Obviously in the 1960s the christian reformed church is like, you know Papish and you know, they they're not going to go anywhere near a roman catholic church kael and I talked about that But the same evolution happens that you would get into serious trouble in the christian reformed church in the 50s If you miss two or three weeks in a row you would get a visit from the elders You know you were you were barking, you know, you were getting towards church discipline line today You know, yeah. Yeah, I was struck by that. You you mentioned that one of the marks is the is church discipline Yeah, right. And so and so a guy like tom holland who basically says You know if you ask me per se do I believe in god? No, not really do I believe in the right? He doesn't answer it I haven't nobody's asked him that question directly that jesus actually walk out of that tomb, right? You know you look at a guy like jordan peterson and but but these people are sort of coming back in via the story verse And will longing for it to be true and waiting for christians to stand up and say Hey, i'll take a bullet for this suddenly the trad they look around at the trads and they say At least these people Act like it's real and whatever you think of john mccarthur in southern california And all of the stuff going on with him people look around and say some people look around and say those those fool idiots You know, of course, they're getting covid in church But others are looking at him and say at least these people actually believe it and most of the rest of those people They're just playing games and they're trying to prop up the brand against a losing wave Thank you. I so that you know, and that has been so much a part of my own personal You know, I have I have I have assented to you know, brett You're a transubstantiation expert like I have ascended to that since I was 19 years old, right? I believe that you know, but as I as I get older and as my children are getting older, you know I want to be amongst a group of people who at least look like they believe that this is jesus on the altar and The group that I see who look like they believe it and again, I know it You know, and i'm a pretty skeptical guy like i'm watching right at least the trans actually believe in it And and that's just moving to me personally You know, so when I go to a latin mass and I don't I mean I go to a nova sorda mass and it's it's Reverent and all that nice stuff But when I go to a latin mass those rare occasions which I do like i'm looking around The kids and the parents and the whole and they they They approach that altar in fear and trembling like nobody's business Not like the local suburban parish where like, you know kids are checking their eye for literally checking their iphone on on on the way up And then they go like this and they take it and they they may or you know, they they so blase right? Trans aren't blase about the eucharist You know and I like I think in general this is right this trads Trad young people mystify people 10 years older than me and older Yeah, kind of think like what how is it because because they were they You and I kale had grew up with the narrative to john paul too and into benedict narrative But people 10 years 20 years older than I grew up where john paul and benedict were already, you know They were the ones who were reckoning. Right? That's right. That's right So they were sort of waiting that out Hoping for you know, whether frances is actually that or just you know I think they got their guy. I think they got the guy right? Whatever. However, you want to play that I don't want to put you on the spot the the well we we could have My point was When they see a young person addicted addicted attracted to something like that's a freudian slip. Yeah it is something like uh, like Traditional literary that's where the ad came from from traditional not anyways addicted traditional. Um, they're baffled They say what is this and I think largely? From a sociological point of view right forget theology or whatever else for now from a sociological point of view We have basically taken out all the roots that any young people That's right Humanity have have relied upon whether that's family Uh culture religion language we we've taught everyone how to deconstruct Everything without putting anything in its place, right? And that's the patrimony that I was bemoaning in my piece paul Like that was exactly the sadness that I was trying to give voice to and when when you teach people deconstruction and nothing Um, nothing constructive in its place. There's all kinds of uh, Things out there that will be attractive to them. I mean why why did so many vaguely muslim or non-muslim, um, you know north americans Who lived in their mom's basement think they wanted to go fight for isis? Because they had then nothing. Yeah, nothing. This is well back right this matter This is this is the well about the french novelist point, right? Right, you know, it's like it reminds me of that line, you know, uh, Walter sobchak says in um the movie, you know say what you will about the tenets of national socialism But at least it had an ethos, right and it's like, you know, uh, it was a joke in the movie after uh, What's the movie help me out? What's the movie? It's a cohen brothers movie. I've seen it a million times Um, but right. I mean the whole idea is that you know, say what you in and again darkly ice I repeat this darkly but say what you will about the tenets of ices at least it had an ethos Right, which is just Devastatingly frightening to somebody like me like that's so sad that actually these these kids have inherited such a meaningless universe That they would that they would revert to something as as as evil as isis Because at least it gives them spirit and meaning and and for me this goes back to you know Speaking as i'm not a bishop. We don't have bishops in the christian deformed church One of my friends calls me a bishop because i'm of a certain age and have a degree of influence but The world in many ways The patient root Cert the patient Root of wisdom certainly has its merit to your point brett and I think that's exactly right where We're watching things pop pop pop pop on social media and patient wisdom says we're going to see a lot of popping here That's part of the social media going on and and there certainly is a sense in which we have to weather such storms But on the other hand, I think in many ways the world is waiting for the church to stand and deliver And that is you know, I would brett I don't want to I want to really make this point gently When you were talking about the trads and you made the observation that many of these individuals, you know Didn't you know had broken or non-existent relationships with their own fathers. I mean that's a deconstruction move And you may be right But and so the the kind of worldview we need to inhabit needs to on, you know We have to in some ways handle deconstruction and this is part of what i've seen in some of these new movements of tom holland and jordan peterson where You can you can say that someone might say, you know I have had a broken and or non-existent relationship with my father and and certainly maybe that's what drew me to the trad and of course the those who those who took down the towers and joined isis were young men raised middle class men from europe and america who Who had western education and had everything was deconstructed and they had nothing And and maybe some who who jordan peterson caught their ear and they were ready to stand but you know that the world waits for the church for those moments where the church stands and delivers and And is ready to draw a line and say this is my line and um And I look I I think I think the operative movies remains. I mean all these years later, you know the the fight club You know that there's something attractive about the masculine spirit, you know And i'm not like some manosphere guy but you know that that i'm i'm i'm struck that brett makes the point about the broken relationship with fathers and and I would Just simply counter with it Right and so that they've now they're looking for a father who keeps his promises You know, i'm watching cobra kai with my kids right now Which is a little bit on the edge of appropriateness for my youngest But anyway, you know and and and it's so much about broken fatherhood and Yeah, oh, but it works i'm addicted to the dumb thing. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, why would I love this? But there it is But but getting to the you know, it's it's a father who I mean look that is that is the great promise of our faith It's it's a father who keeps his promises. It's the covenant, right? And and and we have so many Many uncovenanted folks, you know people who who are struggling so um I need to remember that that's that's what I mean friend, you know my my liberal Within within the overton window. Yeah, I mean, you know, I I I I am often asked about church teaching on reserving priesthood to ordination priesthood to men, yeah and I I Agree with and support the church's teaching but I also need to try to find a way to say it to people uh in contemporary society who can make some sense out of it and The one thing I i've found uh for for certain audiences, uh is that it like We we live in a society that's taken away all the fathers Yeah, and if if the catholic church were to like let's let's even I I think I think the catholic church can't change this teaching but let's imagine hypothetically that it could change the teaching I think this historical moment would be the worst possible time because it would be a capitulation to to the to the total absence of fathers in in in culture and society and like healthy relationships with dads has been has been shown to be so important for everything from Transferseration to teen pregnancy to drug use to depression to like everything, you know A healthy relationship with your dad and we we are systematically undermining it even to the point of changing our words so that people can't talk about males uh as correct And to add onto that, I mean, I think you know as you know when I talk to my friends who You know, uh, I have friends who have been through the seminary and have left in good terms I have friends who have gone through the whole process and have been ordained I have friends who have been through the process and gotten really quite hurt by the experience and One of the things that I underestimated as a layman Was the role of the bishop as the father to his priests? And you know, I have seen real damage done to young men now older men because i'm no longer a young man, you know of those people who Entered into what they thought was going to be You know a father-son relationship that would foster their vocation but in in essence it was a it was a mechanism for for abuse and Like that's one of those sort of profound moments where you recognize that the symbol of fatherhood Is not just it's it's not just like this thing. It's real to keep going back to your you know, you know I keep fixating on the same thing paul, but like what is real and and and we know that fatherhood is real And and and we we we step off of that at our own peril You know so that so that you can't say the word masculinity now in the public square without saying toxic first And like what what is that going to do? I'm curious to know a little more about what you mean by abuse. I mean i've heard of some stories Not just sexual not just sexual I don't mean yeah the stories I I would have some familiarity with if abuse could be used Accurately, it would be something like neglect Or or yeah. Yeah, right Or you know look we all know that that when when you know when a young man sign or a man signs up to be a priest In a diocese, you know that you are giving yourself over fully to to the discretion of of your bishop right, and so Your and your sovereignty is is in essence given over and so when that person takes that gift And and does right by it and fosters, you know the gifts of the young man. That's great But but when that's an abuser and i'm not meaning merely sexually here at all I mean, what if that man's an alcoholic what if that man's uh neglect? I mean, they're all manner of ways in which you know, you know, and look I live at a monastery So it's the same thing. What if the abbot is is an abusive abbot? It's it's when that thing gets captured You know, it's not that the thing itself is not real. It's that when it becomes captured and counterfeited that that is when Um, it has deep reverberations into the into the body of prized. That's the crisis of rabbi. Zacharias Yeah, I mean he's not a bishop but in the evangelical Marketplace where you don't have a structure celebrity mediates the church hierarchy And whether however poorly that celebrity is, you know is established But in rabbi zacharias's case, you know, he was above average in terms of that particular class of of individual and everybody knew it Yeah, so And and that is the you know when the when the fathers of the church fail to adequately represent and embody our father in heaven That the whole church is going to be in crisis mother church is going to be in crisis I wish we had mary cohen here in this conversation because she's another person in my channel, but at a roman catholic Here's a future. I don't know if it's a future conversation or not But it's something that we have to land the plane, but I sure want to talk to you two again. I'm game Yeah, what is gonna go? Well, yeah So here's here's a kind of closing thought for me because I think the fatherhood question is really interesting And and one of the things that strikes me, I mean hope frances just declared a year of st. Joseph and I I Real at first I was like, okay st. Joseph. That's cool I'll learn more about st. Joseph and then as I had my first couple of conversations with people About the year of st. Joseph including with someone who had a very serious relationship with st. Joseph Um, and that was part of his coming back into the church and all that kind of thing Are you talking joseph mary joseph? Yes. Yeah. Yeah, I just want to be sure which So in the catholic church, we do years, you know the jubilee year of this or that we do year of faith year You know year of the priest so pope frances declared a year of st. Joseph and and I At first it didn't you know land on me as like terribly significant But then as i've been thinking about the crisis of fatherhood in society and in the church I wondered if that was not exactly what we needed and I and I think it's probably worth Um, you know catholic thinkers exploring Joseph and fatherhood this year Uh, I love st. Joseph. I'm a huge fan, but remember that he also named he's also marking the anniversary of amoris He he he announced a couple of days later So which will bring its own which will bring all of the the the fights right back out. What does that mean? You have to translate that to protestant for me. Go ahead. Well Oh, well amoris latitia was the post apostolic exhortation after the the synod of bishops on the family and Otherwise known in trad circles as the nuclear bomb. Yeah, and it it was extremely controversial Largely though not exclusively around the question of whether uh divorced and remarried might ever approach Uh the the table for communion Um, so I mean that that's that's become a sort of flashpoint in francis's papacy, um, but yeah, well, I Sorry, I i'm being that i'm being that jerk guy. I'm sorry But you know and again as someone who even in you know the Living stones, I mean, I I understand responsibility and I understand, you know balance and trying to Having to do two things at once if you're responsible for almost anything of any size You've always got i'm gonna do this. I was gonna take these people. I'm gonna do this I was gonna take you these maybe if I tick them off equally we'll all be able to still live together But so paul the question is do you strategically tick people off or not? That's my question to you as a pastor At times yes There are times when certain groups need to be ticked off a little bit Maybe so maybe so but it's but but this again and we do have to land the plane but this does get back to this question of of authority and structures and And and you know keeping up the brand often means You know if you're if you're a youtuber Who does not hold clerical office or ecclesiastical office? You're just responsible to the algorithm But if you actually have a position in a group Where you know, there's a diversity of opinion on any subject and you have multiple diversity Diversities of opinions on multiple subjects you think strategically at a different level Because your motivation is let's try to keep the family together and that sort of lands someone into You know you brought up the mission where? Okay, do we and in a case like that do we do we threaten war between spain and portugal? There's a there's a there's something to think about and so words matter But again, we just had a presidency with someone for whom I let's say trump used words. I trump was brilliant in many respects He used words in different ways than any other president we ever had And I don't mean that flippantly. Yeah, no, it's true because You know for trump, I mean, I remember watching him come down the escalator thinking and roll my eyes with everyone else It wasn't too many primaries and no one was rolling eyes anymore And and trump of course was bred in that world and so Nobody could take him on and even given a pandemic He didn't lose by much So, you know again to circle back to what we talked about before We're dealing with forces and factors that in many ways are way beyond us And that we ought to have a sobriety And a seriousness about these issues that i'm sure your bishop has brett and I have as a pastor because we see What and we see the cost in people's lives of There's a there's a young woman in my church who has taken to Giving little things on social media quite regularly And I see the cost in her life of that and so That's what we're that's what we're living in and dealing with so yeah Anyway, I want to thank you both. This has been if you got a last word brett. You can go ahead I was just gonna say I I question myself This is gonna sound crazy I question if I trust the holy spirit almost too much I mean, I I have a kind of equanimity around things a lot of the time And I wonder like should I be more panicked your parents just didn't divorce Yeah, like Mine either as I have that same equanimity Francis said some things that I wouldn't say and i'm like well He'll be poked for a while. He says some other things. I really like And I I don't know people seem to be either really worked up one way or the other and I Don't seem to be I don't I don't know what's wrong with me. Maybe I I I maybe maybe nothing. So there's another there's another youtuber who actually doesn't live far from me He's the distributist. He's a conservative Roman Catholic And you know, so he and I had a conversation once and you know In some ways he's running around like his hair's on fire and i'm like, hey, I got no hair And so yeah, my parents had a wonderful relationship so And so we're all trying to calibrate this this world and we have to include That psychological layer and the family I grew up in and the people who are from broken homes and you know Do we know what everybody thinks and I mean we have touched so many things that are so We're so helpful in this conversation. I do want to thank you both My pleasure. I loved it. Thank you paul. It was great great to meet you kale. Yeah, same breath for having both of us Uh, yeah, I'd love to do it again. I'm gonna i'm gonna stop the recording and uh, so thank you both