https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7WwdHAFRB14

 Why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? We got a little bit of lag Cool yeah Connections unstable Are we good yeah, we're good well You know I record on this end, so it'll we'll have something so let's just see how it goes here Yeah, okay, so Big fan We only have like about a half hour, huh is that right? Oh we could take an hour I don't have anything after this so I got a little bit of flexibility sure So I want to say I apologize. I think I accidentally intruded on your meetings earlier I Would I forget to lock the room that happens and then poor people just come in and they're like what's going on? There's people here Yeah Okay, no, that's no well. I am Let's see so I was born raised in Hayward sure sure Born raised in Hayward, California just down the road from where you are yeah Huh you froze again, let's see yeah, there's the connections the answer so off yeah It's my wife I just cut it cutting in out here So where are you at now? Are you still in Hayward? No no okay, so born raised Hayward, California all the way through high school and Born raised in a Catholic family nominally Catholic family and hi and someone's at the door sure sure I About that I am I am here all by myself. I don't have a secretary or anyone so Units so a couple just came by to invite me to a prayer breakfast I have no idea Must be nice I Some of these things you go to that you get invited to I'm going to one tonight But it's public radio, so I kind of know what they're doing But you know random people see a church prayer brassicas prayer breakfast who knows what this is about Anyway, I'm sorry sorry for the address That's a little window into my life, so sure a word Yeah, born raised in Hayward Roman Catholic family Mother is first generation dad is second and So my mom's Mexican and dad is His family is actually from back East, but his but his my dad's my grandfather. He's from the Philippines came here from through the Navy so I grew up So I grew up a Catholic school from kindergarten to eighth grade and you know you're familiar with the Bay Area. It's very diverse and in any way you can imagine so I was probably one of Four five kids in my you know thirty kid Catholic school class growing up that was not full Filipino actually you know is my world and You know I Grew up with you know in Catholic faith and things like that. You know went through the whole process got confirmed in high school But I was actually a punk rock kid. You know I was a musician in high school and things like that so Although I surround myself with the rebellious Irreligious people I was you know I kind of had you know let's split lives and things like that And I was also an athlete in high school as well, so college I came out to Arizona State and You know totally different landscape I was really happy to be getting out of the Bay Area and kind of experiencing a different life and things like that and I actually I Became an evangelical Okay, because through Various ministry efforts and things like that got involved in the campus ministry and things like that and actually still a part of that church but I don't know so there you know I had a pretty dramatic conversion experience right off the bat and things like that and Everything in my life changed was very You know a lot of my life. I kind of look back to that and stuff like that so Anyways to save a lot of the details I went through college and things like that. I was a born-again believer and My sophomore year college I took like a introduction to philosophy class and things like that that's when I was kind of confronted with the university and things like that and with regard to You know some of this again. I'm not I'm a lay person Okay, I'm not a lay person, but I'm a normal guy a Lot of these topics and things like that that was you know just scratching the surface and that's from there. I was That kind of introduced the doubt into my life and things like that. You know ideas like atheism and stuff like that I mean, I'm from the Bay Area, but my family's pretty conservative things like that. It was never really a I Never really entertained ideas like that before You know so I Get What introduced me into like the triple apologetics and stuff like that so hang on a second? I think you oh, we're good. So we're good. It came back I Can't hear you now, or maybe it's a lag. It's probably lag sure Yeah, yeah, okay, so Okay, me being a new new newly born evangelical of course that I run to YouTube Consult the old YouTube and and I get like the William Lane Craig's and guys like that okay So those are kind of like my first resources and obviously I had heard of CS Lewis and things like that growing up I didn't know you know I I'm not I wasn't really What you would describe as an intellectual, but I was trying to figure all this out And that helped me for a little while that those that was fine but after college I Kind of started to struggle with Especially in the context that I was in I go to like a non-denominational church And you know has it you know I don't know you might be familiar with some of the you know You're probably familiar with a lot of that kind of stuff, but a Lot of The ministers And you know the prep the pastor and things like that not a ton of formal theological training and things like that, so Anyways, I think I'm gonna go ahead and just Anyways, that's you know that is what it is, but a lot of our content. It's you know evangelical so a lot of the context is about Reaching people converting people and things like that so When it comes to purpose and stuff like that you tie it so much to vocation And you know are you gonna go into ministry you go go? You know work in the marketplace, and you gotta convert people from your workplace and and whatnot so So I went to work as a claim adjuster and insurance for the first three years at a college and You know That's not the funnest job. You know people care about their cars a lot. It was an auto so People are yelling at you all day. You know as soon as you get there There's a lot of money I Was having existential crises crises ease when I was working as a claim adjuster so Like you know like I said earlier. I'm a musician so I'd always played you know worship and in church and things like that even when I was going to Catholic Church I played drums and things like that for the church band, so One of my best friends. He's actually a he actually lives with me. He's my roommate he you know I kind of looked at him for a lot of that stuff because he he works in politics and You know saving you his story. I decided one day. You know what? I'm going to Work in music okay, so that that's gonna be God's Missional call in my life and things like that and from there I started to kind of Instead of listening to you know I work at a desk job where I'd worked at a desk job at the time so That allows me to listen to you know podcasts and you know listen to YouTube videos like yourself and all these other guys and I started filling it with kind of you know my time with like the more music type influences and things like that and I found myself starting to think a little bit more liberally than I had kind of in my Tight conservative box and I would listen to you know Christian kind of musician podcasts and things like that and before long I started my you know entertaining doubts again in her doubts about my faith and things like that and I took and I remember that's when I really started to kind of go down its Hoopery slope I I had a good buddy at the time who's working out in Baton Rouge, Louisiana And I Remember going to Take a tour of one of the plantation houses and I remember just looking kind of reading some of the things in the in the museum kind of part of the Of the Plantation and it was talking about how some of the you know cultural context that that played part was a you know this family was very Baptist and things like that and And I just remember looking at some of this stuff, and I was like that is so bizarre like you know when I actually think about this and you know the doubts were really creeping really shadowing over me pretty heavily and And this is kind of This was kind of the toughest part for me. I remember My uber driver on the ride back You know from my my buddy's apartment at the time to the airport in Baton Rouge You know I try to talk to my uber drivers whenever I have a you know in one of those conversations and things like that and maybe an evangelical I'd always try to Offer to pray for them or something like that and I remember He was telling me he was a this I'll always remember this conversation, but he was basically a former pastor and He had and you know I asked him some of his story, and he basically was telling me how he Deconverted From his faith. He told me you know I asked him a little bit about a story and me being the evangelist Apologetics expert that I was at you know 22 years old or whatever I I was like you know pretty cocky about it I was like alright. Well. I'm gonna convert you back right here Let's talk about it, and you know on the ride and things like that He was beginning to tell me that you know you seventh-day Adventist pastor or something like that and I know I had learned a little bit about the seventh-day Adventist and things like that, but he was basically preparing for his uh His doctorate or something and along the way he just decided he didn't believe it anymore, and I think that really That really shook me pretty hard in my faith because I thought well how can this guy go anywhere near a Bible and Loses faith you know You know in our in my context it's you know faith comes from hearing and hearing by the word of God things like that and Anyways long story short I I Almost lost I almost deconverted from my faith a couple of times I remember you know I one of your videos. I think you were Talking to a Younger guy like from Idaho or something like that I can't remember the guy's name or entirely what the conversation was about I think he might have been an extra hova's witness or something, but he talks about like a Night you know like a dramatic night where he actually completely lost his faith, and I almost had that I remember that night pretty clearly in my you know in my story, and I Thankfully I'm very fortunate. I had you know I have pastors that really care about me at the church I go to and he I was able to call one of them and he was able to kind of talk you know talk me out of my panic and things like that, but During this time in my life. You know I had to kind of step out of some of the stuff I was serving in in church and What I thought would help is I started listening to some more of these like kind of the liberal liberal Christian folks and things like that and their podcasts and Rob Bell and company as I like to think about him, and I guess after a while I realized like This isn't helping things like that and I You know I we sell the meaning of marriage by Tim Keller at our church So you know all of us being in our young 20s kind of going to a college-age church Encouraged us to read that so I did and I looked back. I read that years before so I look back and I was like You know what? These traditional apologetic guys like the you know Billy Craig and Frank Turek's and all them and all the sorts They're not really helping me much anymore with where I'm at in my faith And these liberal Christian guys are not helping me much either like this just is not helping you know if I get rid of different doctrines, it's not Really help it's not You know I don't know it's not a whole thing Sure, yeah So I Looked up, you know Tim Keller on YouTube and things like that and started listening to some of his sermons Thinking okay, this guy's probably gonna. Give me some of the same cosmological argument you know this and that and And I remember listening to him, and I was like huh like that's different it's a It's not helping me a ton, but I'm gonna keep going from here because it you know it is getting me to think differently and that you know eventually I started listening to Jordan Peterson because he Although he didn't he wasn't gonna subscribe to kind of the same position that it's in Keller would Again he was getting me to think in different ways and and eventually I started listening to you Because some of your you know a lot of yourself is just so encouraging stuff like that the stories that people would share and things like that and the way that you were able to teach like The way you were able to incorporate some of these really important mine In the history of the faith and stuff like that and I Don't know I really appreciate it and things like that and a lot of you know a lot of your Videos have really kind of helped to bring me back out of that faith threat that I was in so No, no glad I finally get to talk to you But I with my sister's death and then the holidays by basically November and December got Side-tracked and so then I have family in town until the first couple of weeks of January So don't do too many conversations, and so we're back on track now. I really appreciate your story Thank you for sharing it, and I don't think your I don't think your story is unique I think the I Very much understand your story, and there's a lot of there's a lot of I Very much. I very much understand it. I think Peterson Peterson is helping to answer questions That I'm not sure even he is aware he's answering At least that's how it was for me he kind of pointed me in some new directions that helped me begin to put some things together again and And I had worked through Keller so Keller I I found Keller and I'd heard about Keller actually in seminary one of my professors Roger Greenway Who was who taught at he's a CRC guy? He was a missionary for the CRC his son is a CRC preacher currently Roger passed away a few years ago He taught missions at Calvin Seminary and he mentioned Tim Keller and shared a paper with us and I remember this was back in the 80s and Roger Greenway tells us 80s or very early 90s maybe 1990 Roger Greenway said you know This Tim Keller guy you're gonna hear about him. I remember that from like 1990 and then in 2006 I had an opportunity to go to New York and to spend some time with Tim Keller and some other pastors and And at that point I wasn't really into him and it was after It was a little while It was a few months after my trip there that some other things in my life some very hard things were coming to a head and I took a huge dive into Keller because I hit kind of my own existential wall and I I Needed I was I was I was kind of at the end of my rope in terms of ministry and emotionally and all kinds of things and I started listening to I Started listening to Tim Keller one two three four hours a day I mean I needed that much of it and I I Went through a good part of everything online I found of his and then I started buying I started buying because his sermons we had to pay for it's like I started buying his sermons spent a lot of money buying Tim Keller sermons for a while and I took a really deep dive into him for about four or five years and And really gained a lot from it and then after about four or five years that was you know, I was able to resolve some things for myself and and So and so then I wasn't as into Keller anymore I'd always keep an eye on him and listen to his stuff now and then but it wasn't as intense as it was and then in in May of in May of 2017 I found I found Peterson and And I wasn't in I wasn't in the same kind of needy place that I was in 2006 But then in 20 in 2017 Peterson caught my attention and I didn't quite know why and then so that was May so then I really hit the hit the videos Hard from May until November and then end of November. I made my first video and so every ever since then it's been recorded on YouTube But that but I think I think your story is and one of the things that caught my attention from about Peterson was that I Had seen people go off into atheism they'd seen people deconvert and just wander into atheism or sometimes into more New Age Eastern things and to me that had been a one-way street and I so I got fascinated by Peterson and I was even more fascinated by The people listening to Peterson so Peterson fascinated me But it was the connection between Peterson and the listeners that really fascinated me and Because I began to notice People had gone from Christianity to Sam Harris and they were starting to turn back the other way and I thought I Hadn't seen that before that was kind of like a burning bush That was like what is what is that and that's really caught my attention and that's where I I Really began to take a hold of it. And so that's still what I'm working on And so your story doesn't surprise me at all and I you know Every segment of the church has its strengths and its weaknesses and Evangelicalism can be really good at reaching people but there comes a point when a lot of people need to Deal with some other things often Some things of the mind some philosophical things some intellectual things and a lot of evangelical Apologists Settle questions, but they don't necessarily give a new place in which to live with those questions Productively that now the apologist may themselves have been able to but your experience with apologetic I don't think is uncommon and and I haven't found a lot of That apologetics really working well on you know, so you see guys debating guys like Matt de la hunt a and No, it just doesn't seem to go anywhere so So for me, yeah good. No, I think you characterize it so well and in in I don't know if it was a recent video But I was listening that trying to catch up on a lot of stuff over the winter holidays I went back to Oakland for the the weekend and And I think you said something along the lines of like well when it comes to like the iron box of Naturalism or the whatever you call it steel cage of naturalism I mean, you know you hear some of these traditional apologetic arguments and things like that and When you think within that box, it's kind of like I just don't buy it You know, like the arguments fine. I'll follow it but like ultimately I don't I don't want to follow it to the conclusion You want me to you want to lead me to I think you just characterized that so well because in my experience, that's I Mean I didn't find myself in that box sometimes. Yeah. Well, I you know, and part of the thing is I Mean maybe because I then I wonder you know, I sit here in front of my computer and I talk at it For an hour or two and I record it and I post it on YouTube and people watch it and I'm just surprised anybody watches and then people say well that was really helpful. Then I think well, why was it helpful? What's what's going on here? And I'm trying to figure that out Because but but part of it is I mean the things that you're wrestling with there the things that I'm wrestling with and all My videos are are me Trying to integrate all this stuff and to really understand Trying to integrate all this stuff and to wrestle with it. And so it's I guess it's kind of like real time Well here here's what I'm working on. So, you know, I hope it's helpful. Here it is It's not tied up in a bow for you, but it's messy, but that's what I got So I'm happy to share it if it's helpful But it's but it's you know, it's so then I look at the progressive evangelicals so I did a Just the conversation I posted yesterday with Jess I watched that just this morning that was that was so good I resonate with that guy so much because that's like for the first I don't know three quarters of that video. I was like this sounds really familiar In fact, I think I'm about to tell Paul the same things. Yeah. Yeah well, and and you two aren't the only ones and part of it is so I You know in terms of the CRC, which is conservative reform denomination Tim Keller is PCA. That's a little bit more conservative than the CRC and that they don't ordain women to office the CRC does but the CRC is not affirming of Same-sex marriage and some of those things so it's on the conservative spectrum and I was always kind of on the liberal end of the conservative spectrum and so in some ways I had some affinity to people like Peter Pete ends and A bunch of the progressive evangelicals, let's say but the more I listened to them the more I thought I don't know Okay, so you're helping some people who are living in an evangelical resort camp try to resolve some Dissonance issues of some issues that are in the culture gender issues LGBT issues you're trying to help them resolve them, but I don't know that you're actually adding anything to the conversation I think you're just basically saying okay. Well, we'll accommodate to this area and then we'll no longer have dissonance with the culture and And then people will come to our church, but people don't then come to their church You know a church starts waving a rainbow flag and says we're affirming it doesn't fill up You know folks will folks on the left. They'll clap. They'll say yeah good for you But they're not about to come to your church because what are you really offering them? Well, we're offering Jesus so then it's kind of yeah, but You know and so I watched the progressive evangelicals and I'm watching them. I'm thinking that's not really doing it either. So So we have to instead of just moving left what we have to do is dig deeper What is it so, you know and I did watch I watched the one you did about like I think it was the ironies of the unbelieving church where they It was the the woman from the Church of Canada who was in red of Oxford. Yeah. Yeah. So what is the deal with that? That's a really Interesting observation and I think about that often what why not, you know, if if you're if you are trying to Shane as it from, you know from the perspective of the church if you're trying to change to meet or to satisfy the objections of The culture why is that not yielding results that you intended to Do you have any thoughts on that well, I think at some point part of it is because of secularism because So so what's the difference between let's say? It's a green something or other rebel wisdom keeps talking with him. I forget his name, but he talks about blue church That's a great description So you have blue church, let's say Democrats in America So then the main line is kind of the Democrats or maybe at prayer because why pray? They Democrats at liturgy. That's what the main line church becomes But what are they actually adding and and see part of what I'm sure you experienced going from? Okay, so you had a you had a traditional Roman Catholic situation and then evangelicalism and probably part of what grabbed you of them with Evangelicalism was a taste of the living God and Jesus was at work and you had a personal relationship and and Jesus was alive in the world and you're right there in church and and the music is on and the preacher is preaching and People's lives are being changed and people are people are you know? people are giving up their drugs and people are giving up their alcohol and people are straightening out their lives and then this is you know, and Jesus is invading and it's powerful and That's the power of evangelicalism And and so it just kind of overwhelms. Okay, so so you have that period in your life, but then But then other things start to creep in well, what about? like you said then you go to college I said, ah, and you have some smart professors and they've got they got a lot of good arguments and and a lot of their stuff makes sense and Whereas you remember the power and the passion of of when you converted and all that was there but now you know this this this intellectual life and so then the Evangelical apologists rush in and say oh no, you know, don't worry. We can explain this but I Don't know see and then Jordan Peterson comes in and And I still haven't quite figured out how this is all working But Jordan Peterson comes in and kind of says so he's a he's coming in from he's using Darwin against Darwin in a sense Because the Darwinians are saying there is no God because Darwin and Peterson comes and says well there really is God because Darwin It's like no. Wait a minute. What did he say? How does that work? What is God again? so so he just kind of undermines the whole thing and and this is why Peterson is so disruptive and This is why Peterson is just Shaking up the playing field in such a dramatic way and and we don't Even Peterson, I don't think any of us know exactly what's going on But we know something's going on and we're talking a lot to try and figure it out That's that's my theory Sure Yeah, and I've heard you bring this up in a handful of your conversations, but what is it that's You know Peterson does seem to do a lot better with the atheists In terms of Getting them to open up the you know Materialist box or at least getting them to consider consider it. So why or do you have any thoughts on I know they've Kind of like mentioned it but like what do you think it is? Well he He goes back through full I mean, so if you look at his conversations with Sam Harris for rather Frustrating conversations because Peterson keeps trying to build the argument and say okay Sam. This is what we know Sam wants to say He's looking at it from a materialist perspective and what I call the a monarchical vision Sam imagines he is seeing stuff directly. So up. Here's here's a cell phone That's just direct. It's just me and the cell phone in an empty room and And Peterson looks at that says no No, there's way to that because if you took a cell phone like this, so here's a here's a funny thing Take If if I were in a room and I left my cell phone in the room and walked out of the room And I left my cell phone in the room and walked out and you and I knew each other and were paying attention to each other And I left my cell phone in there. You would see the cell phone and me to say hey wait Here's your cell phone you wallet even more why well, there's these a cell phone and a wallet have an existence beyond just what a cell phone in a wallet does and And whereas if I had left my empty water bottle, you wouldn't think a thing of it But if I leave my wallet or my cell phone you say hey Paul, wait a minute. Don't don't forget this There's value there and this value isn't material. And so Peterson comes to Sam Harris and he says you know what? It's it's we're not the world isn't just a world a put space for objects It's a forum for action and this is how he starts maps of meaning This is what Peterson was running through in the Cold War because he saw the Americans and the Russians. He says You know, we're we're putting all of humanity at risk with nuclear annihilation over what exactly? That's a really good question. And so that's why he digs deep into maps of meaning and so he comes to Sam Harris He says, you know Sam The way you're pretending the world is it isn't really like that and we all know it isn't really like that for the same reason If I leave a water bottle in a room or if I leave a wallet in the room Everybody knows the difference between a water bottle and a wallet. My dog doesn't My cat doesn't but every human in the room knows why is that? There's more going on here and you atheists over there. You're not owning up to it and And that argument is powerful and Peterson is making it persuasively and we don't here's the crazy thing we don't even know Exactly how he's convincing us but he is and He's not even He has a handle on something. He knows he keeps doing saying what what do you know is knows is working But he even he probably doesn't even know exactly why it's working and at that level we begin to realize We're life is a lot stranger than we suspected it was so So now also, okay So you became an evangelical because boom God invaded and God was very real Then you go to university and God seems kind of far off and the professors with all of their ideas and their skepticism They're like, ah, you know, that's just those are just psychological tricks So in comes a psychologist who sits down and says no, it's really weird and it's and it's really weird on a lot of levels And actually if we follow this materialist frame the way it's going it leads to this Identitarianism that it's destroying society That's that that's really weird on levels when somebody comes up and says I think I'm a girl and you say no Paul You're 55 years old. You have a penis. You've lost your hair You know, if you want to dress like a woman, you're gonna be pretty dang ugly And you're gonna be pretty frustrated if if you want to be a Victoria secrets model that that ain't nobody gonna play that game Paul you're you're you're on the edge of delusion and and so, you know, and so Peterson's just kind of come along and saying That's the wrong way and we all kind of know it but we don't know why and so This let's talk about this and it's happening And so, you know and someone's would say why and I'd say God I shouldn't say God but it's that big and it's that mysterious and See that Christians would say yeah But God and then Christians will tend to have a real nice little God Boop boop boop boop just kind of like four spiritual laws and I would say yeah, but you know what for spiritual laws? This is a lot longer and a lot more complicated and a lot harder to get our heads around than for spiritual laws nothing gets for spiritual laws and Nothing against you know, my heart was strangely warmed and nothing against you know My eyes I saw him and my heart was free. Oh, that's true But when it comes to dealing with the world We have this strange book that just somehow keeps working for reasons. We don't know why So here we are And here you are talking to me so it's it's patent-based weird Yeah, no definitely I mean And I'll be honest again, I'm not I'm not as smart as I think or as I tend to tell myself that I am But uh, none of us are smart as I want to be or think we are Sure. Sure, but you know, I Can I can nerd out with you all day? we can talk about so many things but Okay, so I mean I want to talk about Calvinism for a second because I know yeah, I'm I'm in an evangelical setting And it's Armenian at least Yeah for the most part and doctrinally, it's it's very Armenian And I've tried my best I mean I've had some you know reformed thinking friends or whatever and things like that I've kind of actually Kind of grown like a very strong distaste for a lot of that stuff but I think you kind of addressed in like a Your your video about John MacArthur and things like that you get into that but I don't know so I Guess the thing that that still kind of disturbs me a bit, you know, I'm very comfortable in my Christianity at this point, but like the deconversion thing you know when it comes to Calvinism that sort of leads me to think of Why you know like, you know God what's the deal with that? This deconversion thing, you know you pre-determine This man's salvation. What did you pre-determine his deconversion as well? You know, do you have thoughts on that? Yeah. Yeah Well deconversion is more of a problem for an Arminian than a Calvinist in some ways Well, maybe maybe it's the other way. Maybe it should be a bigger problem for Calvinist. I you know again There's a there's a video on the internet with Tim Keller talking about this that I've I've I've linked to a couple of times Which I think is good. I Here's one way to think about it you know again, I reached to the Tolkien Frodo illustration of You know, what's our relationship with God and agency? well is is Frodo free of Tolkien and If you were to ask Tolkien Tolkien would probably say Frodo is free but Frodo will do things that are in keeping with Frodo Ness and And this is a I mean this question about God's Agency and our agency is really hard and it's hard in some of the ways that agency is difficult in a materialist frame so Sam Harris will have difficulty talking about agency because Everything starts from the singularity at the Big Bang and it's just physics from there now I Here's what here's what the Bible seems to say the Bible seems to say that we are responsible for our choices and And our choices have lasting impacts that seems clear to us It's it's also seems clear to us that we are What we experience as choice is Is not that easy to understand for example, okay So I was raised by wonderful loving Christian Reformed Parents, is it a mystery that I'm Christian Reformed someone would say no I you have an easier time understanding the limitations of my agency than I do So so it's not just a question of agency It's a question of from what position do you look at the agency of another? so so now we talk about God and election and and the reason we have this doctrine of election is Because it's found in the Bible and and Paul says things like, you know he chose you from the foundations of the earth and and and the gospel say things about Judas which are you know absolutely breathtaking breathtaking in terms of you know Judas was destined for destruction and it's like No, does that mean does that mean Judas couldn't choose otherwise? But then there's Peter and and Peter on one hand in one breath Jesus says who do people say that I am and Jesus said and Peter says, you know, you're that you're the Christ you're the Son of God and Jesus says you couldn't have said that unless God had revealed it to you and a little while later in the conversation Jesus says oh by the way, we're going to Jerusalem I'm gonna be turned over to the hands of Gentiles and I'm gonna be killed and Peter says I'll never let that happen and And Jesus says get behind me Satan and it's like hey, wait a minute you know he was the rock a minute ago and now he's Satan and and so then you get to have Peter and Judas and you say well Well Peter denies Jesus and then Jesus restores him Judas betrays Jesus and goes out and hangs himself What's with that? So so here's a question could Sauron could Sauron and Lord of the Rings Could he be? Rehabilitated let's rehabilitate Sauron I don't know. Maybe it's not in keeping with what Sauron is. So then the question is well, what are we now? And and see I don't I'm not convinced our language finally can actually Illuminate all of this and there's a there's a tale about st. Augustine if you really want to look at where Election and these ideas come from they come from Augustine And so they're all within Roman Catholicism, too But they come from Augustine and there's a probably apocryphal Maybe it's a true story of some young man comes to Augustine once and he says to him I think I'm I think I'm I'm think I'm reprobate. I think I'm condemned for all each I don't think I'm an elect and Augustine says we'll go to a church and get elect And I think that's that's kind of the way we have to approach it with deconversion People deconvert and and when that happens, we're like I remember as a child I used to think because I'd see people who would leave the church and my child, you know, they'd leave the CRC They'd go be a Baptist like Baptist now That's kind of how the CRC was it's like being a Roman Catholic and they become a protestants like oh no They're a Protestant now. They've left and Okay But you know and then I said why Lord? Why do you let us change our minds and God didn't answer me at that point. But I think if I were to ask him he'd say do you not want to have agency? Isn't that what you want isn't that what makes being human human So I don't know we can answer these questions, but I do know that election is biblical. I I can't paint the whole picture, but I it does seem to me that This idea that I'm just sitting here choosing my destiny. I don't think it's quite that simple Well I've heard you say this in another video and this is just off the top of my head here But you know, I mean when we talk about Jordan Peterson, we talk about the you know his atheist conversations and things like that and you know a lot of the times you'll say well Well, not you but he will say well, okay You don't you clearly don't live like an atheist you live as if there's some metaphysical Principles governing your life. Okay, you clearly don't live that way Okay, you clearly don't live that way. So why are you calling yourself that so the same way? I mean, I've heard you say this and you know, it's like well We can't really live as if we don't have any freedom. Why are we? You know, well, I don't know. Are we calling ourselves Calvinist? Why are we calling ourselves reformed? I don't know. I know those are kind of there's a lot of conversations that go into these titles when we place on ourselves within the Christian Camp, but I don't know Tim Tim Keller has a really nice way of phrasing this and There's a couple of servants you can find where he talks about this But he says on one hand When you get out of bed in the morning if you actually believed that the tiniest decision you made Was going to be consequential for the rest of your life to the degree that we know it is You'd be paralyzed and you'd never get out of bed in the morning. So on one hand we need to know that Well, you know, I might be choosing my steps, but God is governing my path as a Christian We kind of know that at the same time if we thought that well, I don't actually have to exhibit any agency then we wouldn't get out of bed in the morning either because well I'm just waiting for God to get up and dress me and bathe me and feed me and you know Nobody lives like that either so And so it's it's this weird It's this weird in my opinion both and that that Augustine story illuminates that We can't really And but but here's the here's the thing Here's the thing for me that if I have to finally choose Between my ability to hold on to God or God's ability to hold on to me I'm gonna trust in God and not me because God's way stronger than me and that's finally why I continue on as a Calvinist because I think I What what happens? I so I knew a guy a guy in my church who? had a stroke and all He had a stroke and and so then all he could say he couldn't really talk after that about the only thing he could Do was cuss and so if he'd get excited he'd just say bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit And his wife's like I can't take him to church because if I wheel him into church, he's gonna go into church He's gonna say bullshit bullshit bullshit bullshit. I said Take him to church, you know Just cuz he says bullshit bullshit bullshit all day long doesn't mean we're gonna kick him out he had a stroke and and I've seen people have dementia and and Lose all kinds of things and and so well, what does that mean when they lose dementia? They start doing crazy Unchristian things does that mean they lost their faith faith? No It's God holds us we don't hold on to him and you know if if if I'm a little kid and I'm with my parent and let's say I'm going into the I grew up on the Jersey Coast if I'm going to the ocean with my father and I'm four years old and my father's my Father's my size six four over 200 pounds that were walking into the ocean together What's it more important the four-year-old's ability to grip on to daddy or daddy's grip on him? I Choose daddy. That's why I'm a Calvinist So I see it Sure Now I cut bits and pieces of the last 20 seconds the internet's really not No, no, but you know, I I understand that really well and I feel like I have a good idea of how to kind of balance the the thoughts and things like that there I I mean again, I wouldn't I wouldn't subscribe to Calvinism and things like that mostly it's just because I think you articulate this so well, but I've really just Become well, okay, so Help me again to understand. I know that you talked about this like the differences between okay, so Keller Reformed it Calvinist and things like that, but he's not the same denomination as you and again like MacArthur Piper all these guys all the popular YouTube theologians and things like that in America. So what's what is the difference? Is it mainly a denominational difference with CRC or is there actual theological different differences? Can you help me understand that? not a lot of theological differences in terms of the So really the differences between the Dutch and the English So I'm part of the Dutch Calvinist tradition and they're part of the English Presbyterian tradition So we have the Belgian Confession and the Heideberg Catechism. They have the Westminster Standard so Theologically, they're very close cousins Temperamentally the Dutch tend to be a little bit little bit looser a Little bit more tolerant the English tend to be a little bit tighter Also a number of those people not Keller like like John Piper and John MacArthur. They're reformed Baptists and so They kind of go off in a different strain. They're English nonconformists and So the PCA so so the PCA is a split off of the PC USA The PC USA was the large main Presbyterian Church in the modernist fundamentalist split They they split up and the PCA went a different way And so it's it's part of the PCA's tradition to oppose women in office The CRC opened the door to women in office So that's a difference between the PCA and the CRC but in terms of the in terms of the Calvinist doctrines That's pretty much the same But the so so here's a weird thing about the Dutch a lot of people say all that drugs are legal in the Netherlands And they kind of are but they They're also kind of not the Dutch have this tradition of of a little bit of weird Tolerance that the Presbyterians don't look at so the Presbyterians tend to be tighter The Dutch tend to be a little bit more flexible That's that's really kind of the difference but but but Keller uses a lot of a lot of Dutch CRC people like Alvin Plantinga and Nick Waltersdorf and and then some of the old Dutchman Abraham Kuyper and and and Herman Boving some of our neo neo Calvinists Neo Calvinist lights from the 19th century So so Keller has taken a lot from us and actually when I met Keller he said yeah, you CRC folks I use your stuff all the time and you know You guys don't seem to be using your stuff for to the great to the good effect that we are So thanks for the stuff, but you know, you should pick up your game. So but hey, there's not a lot of Tim Keller's around Sure Yeah, absolutely So, how'd you wind up in Sacramento? well, I was I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic and then we came back to the states and so Then at some point I started looking for a church and I had a in the CRC There's no bishops and so pastors are kind of free agents within the denomination of fold and I had a Job offer. I'll say drafted by the second What's that? You got drafted by Sacramento. I got drafted by Sacramento I had a job offer in Chicago and a job offer in Sacramento. And so I came to Sacramento. So that was about 21 years ago Yeah, well, I mean and then I'm asking because that's sort of in the neighborhood where I grew up and things like that And I still look back and I'm young but I still look back at the first 17 years of my life And I think man, that's like that was like another world out there. It was It keeps changing I mean Hayward's changed a lot in 17 years. Yeah Yeah, it was a it was a rough upbringing for sure Yeah, yeah I have I have a church we have a CRC church in Hayward and I have good friends that pastor there and minister there And it's an interesting place. So and and actually we had a Filipino Filipino congregation and Hayward that that merged in with the other congregations. So I know a little bit about Hayward I get out there now and then Really? Okay cool. Well, yeah, I know we don't have much more time but I think the last thing That I wanted to ask you about was It'd be NT, right? I know that you're friendly with with NT right and things like that and And That was a guy that for some reason that the kind of progressive that we're gonna ex evangelicals and things like that They seem to be friendly with him too And I I don't know why be honest because from my evangelical perspective What about this is attractive to you know what you're selling here, I don't know so Can you help me understand him in a spark notes kind of way like you know, like you tend to do well, right? Well, right is on one hand just an off-the-hook amazing historical New Testament scholar and so he I Mean gosh if you would go to Amazon and look at all the books he's written You wouldn't have enough time in your life to read them. I mean you wonder how on earth has this guy written all this stuff, so he's He's an amazing biblical scholar. He he kind of straddles the line between the progressive evangelicals and the conservative evangelicals partially because in terms of boundary marker things he's not affirming of same-sex marriage he is he is Open to women in office. So in that sense in terms of the CRC He fits the CRC right there and see now so progressive evangelicals The CRC is kind of on the fence if your PCA you don't like anti rights openness to women in office if you're Episcopalian you're uncomfortable with anti rights non openness to To affirming Same sex relationships. So empty right kind of fits exactly in the same space as the CRC and So he's open enough so that the progressive evangelicals can benefit from his scholarship, but he's conservative enough that most Conservatives will look at him and say yeah, he's soft on women in office But he's he's down for the bodily resurrection of Jesus and he makes powerful arguments there So that's kind of where he fits in the landscape Kind of see that's why he and I because I'm affirming of then I'm gonna get it in the comment section if we post this But I'm affirming of women in office and at least I'm not opposed to closing women office to women But and so I'm kind of right in that moderate space like empty right? But he's just he's just a terrific New Testament scholar and he's also He's not only see right is not only a scholar But he's also a good teacher and a churchman you go can go onto YouTube and find empty right with a guitar leading singing I mean he's He's that humble of a guy yet. He's a crazy brilliant New Testament scholar and he writes so much so he's If you get too far left they won't like him because he affirms the bodily resurrection of Jesus And so a lot of progressive evangelicals they'll affirm the bodily resurrection of Jesus But see so you kind of just kind of see it as a spectrum at least if you're using boundary markers like some of these culture culture issues It makes sense Yeah, I mean, you know I think That that's kind of one of the big projects that I've that you know for NT right that I thought was Interesting that you know I bothered to listen to was stuff on And I'm blanking on the term here, but you know having to do with yet body bodily resurrection I think it's so teary ology. Sorry I blanked on that You know so teary ology and things like that the idea of new heavens and new earth It's not an idea obviously it's a doctrine, but for us evangelicals. It's all about And and this is one of the things I still struggle with and I'm sure you The way you're shaking your head, I know that you know what I'm about to say, but it's about You know making sure someone you know life is about evangelism if you're already a Christian you know life is about evangelism and Ensuring that as many people as possible hear the gospel so that they don't Go to hell when they die and you know you've taught me a lot about That way of thinking and things like that, and it's got sort of this Gnostic kind of tendency NT right I want to read more NT right when it comes to that kind of stuff. Oh, let me recommend a book that will help Over here and Actually I've been ever since April last year I've been trying to get NT right and Jordan Peterson to talk to one another and NT right is is available and interesting and and Jordan Peterson is interested this book surprised by hope I'd say try this one from NT right because I think This is one of my favorite books of his his new biography of Paul is really good, too But this one lays out Heaven the resurrection and the mission of the church, and I think this one would probably help Because right you're right evangelicals are like okay get people to heaven and NT right's like yeah, but that's not That's what let me tinker that with that language the goal is actually reconciliation with God and Unification of heaven and earth that's the biblical frame now going to heaven that's that's That's that's kind of a that's kind of a code talk, and it's not wrong But unless you understand what heaven is so this this would be this would be the book I'd recommend of NT writes on that surprised by hoping and It's a it's a it's a delightful book and he walks through he walks through a bunch of the The issues and Church Fathers and so NT right kind of has two layers of books There's like his academic books, and then there's more of his I Used to call a middle brow books there. You don't have to know Greek to appreciate it. I'll say it that way Sure You do a lot of reading, huh Yeah, not as much as I used to now making videos, and it's cut into my reading time so That's just the way it goes Yeah, all right, so I'm Taking a note of that that book here. I'm trying to come up with a reading list and I have some stuff I probably shouldn't have on here like you know resurrection of the Son of God. I probably that's a big one But it's a big one that's the thing those are his I mean Depending on how fast you read so Tim Keller Tim Keller had He had cancer on his thyroid and he He you know he was reading that book when he was recuperating from it and talked a lot about it because he said it Wasn't until he read that book that he really you know for him that that really helped him understand the resurrection and And actually for me this whole this whole journey into Jordan Peterson as a Has been really helpful for me to understand the necessity of the physical resurrection in terms of The ultimate reality is all of the levels You know you can you can take a psychedelic and have this experience of you know But your body's what's it in there? That's not all the levels and if you if you prioritize some little mystical experience you have over the reality of your body Well your universe is still split and what the Bible is about is the the It's about the reconciliation of heaven and earth Another good book on me today's today's book recommendation day I just did a did a video with Job, and I was recommending books for him Sure another good book is a One I read a few years ago by a guy. I'll share the screen here so you can see the book sure Here it is a Guy named Joshua Ryan Butler skeletons in God's closet The mercy of hell the surprise of judgment and the hope of holy war and it's about these it's about hell and and Judgment and you know a bunch of difficult questions that people struggle with and he really shows how reframing the Bible as not so much the the a choice between heaven and hell to the reconciliation of heaven and earth really helps Make these issues not what they are for a secular audience and I read this book. Oh, I don't know four years ago. Maybe but it was it was really a good book I like Joshua Ryan Butler. He's a he's a pastor up in Portland. I think I've never met him or talked to him But but I really appreciated that book. So it's good stuff cool Yeah, I mean gosh. I wish I had hours. Maybe I'll have to bug you about this again I just have a two minute break. I'm gonna go to the end of the book I'll have to bug you about this again. I just have a ton of questions and you seem to have Worked through these at some point in my life because you were my age once I was Well, we can get some time so just keep your questions and hopefully my list won't get you know People are always like, you know Oh, you're gonna have a million subs and it's like careful what you wish for if I had a million subs I couldn't have conversations like these that's what's yeah, so rewarding about this so I feel I actually feel bad for Jordan Peterson because You get that mob following you and you can't do anything So if you just have a little mob, well, then you can still have fun conversations. That's cool, right? Yeah, and I really appreciate that you make yourself available to people in Tempe, Arizona like me so Are you're in Tempe, Arizona? appears on it. Yeah, so when I came out to Arizona State I stayed out here. I liked it better than the Bay Area and You know mainly because the kids could sort of upbringing had you know, my house was conservative the world outside of my house was not so Be honest, but yeah, it's definitely more comfortable to live here Culturally and it's damn expensive to live in the Bay Area too. I just oh, yeah not a mom and dad's house, but Yeah, well I'll tell you I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna point one more thing to you In Tucson, which isn't too far from you. I get out to Arizona I like to go to Arizona in the summers because I get hotels dirt cheap Nobody wants to be in Arizona in the summer No Good friend of mine. I'll let me pull up a picture of them Here's a picture so Let me share the screen my wife will kill me but so what? That's really dangerous. My wife will kill me but so what you said that as a married man So this guy right here his name is Rod Hugen and he's the pastor of a church called the Village Church And that's in Tucson. So if you ever in Tucson for a Sunday, look up it's the name of their website is villagers online comm and They're the Village Church and let's see where's a There's there's Rod they they they built the church to be like a big now if you think I'm big Rod's like I'm only six four rods like six seven six eight. So he's he is he is a giant and They built the church to be kind of like a a large house And so they have a big kitchen and they do a meal together and it's a it's just a wonderful church I write CCM so Rod makes me look small and you know, I were a tall dude, but I You know, I can only see the top The top half when I do the videos so yeah, it's all dude You're what are you six five or six four six five? So but Rod's even bigger and and this is Ross another guy from the village and and Mike and so if you're ever in if you're ever in Tucson look these guys up because they They're they're really cool and their church is really cool And it's I know it's not for everyone but so my friend Rod and his buddy Russ planted that church So it's not technically let's say I got a whole bunch of these pictures from when I was there But that was So if you're ever in if you're ever in Tucson Check them out and say hi and tell them I sent you because they'll they'll Yeah, what if they know I said I sent you though all they they'll welcome everybody So yeah anybody else if we do post this anybody else hears this, you know, go visit my friend Rodney You won't you won't regret it. So I want to do a video with Rod one of these days. We're in Tucson You're never in Tucson. Sure. Okay. Yeah I'm pretty much never in Tucson. I went down there once maybe five years ago, but that's a u of a territory and I tend to kind of stay at the top half of this date. I don't know Well, if you do get down to Tucson go down to the village I think they meet like on Sunday afternoon and say hi to my friend Rod because it's a it's a cool place It's a cool place Well, it was great talking Christian, you know, I I go ahead Now I'll send this Get the leg is really hurting our dialogue here I promise I'm not that interruptive But uh, I was gonna say, you know, I fly back to the Bay Area all the time So maybe you know, maybe one of these weekends if I yeah the football season's over My dad were you know big-time Oakland Raider fans so We go out there and I normally I don't really have a church that I go to back in the Bay Area So maybe maybe I'll make the drive to Sacramento and hang out with you You know, I heard that you buy free lunches for the first time. I do time discount I do and and we often we often do meetups one of their usual times for our meetups is Sunday afternoon So if you're here on a week Where we have the meetup then you get two for one then you can see Living Stones and then you can Come do a Sacramento meetup because some really cool guys there who are Jordan Peterson. So it's a lot of fun. Yeah Yeah, so we'll see have to make the drive up the park. All right I will I will send you this video and then we can decide what we want to do with it. Okay Sure, I appreciate the time Paul. Take care Christian. Good talking to you. Okay. Bye. Bye