https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YBnXjzly9Mw

 prop 8. How's everybody doing this morning? Sometimes that's the best you can do. Well, let's open with a word of prayer. Lord, we do thank you for this new day, and we thank you that those of us who could make it have made it this morning. And even if we're struggling with our health, or struggling with finances, or struggling with a relationship, we know you are with us. And we trust that you will see us through and that you will bless us even through the adversity. So we pray, Lord, that you would be with us now as we continue working through the book of Romans and give us wisdom and help us to see clearly with the eyes of our heart. And may we apply it to how we live our lives. So hear our prayer now in the name of Jesus. Amen. All right. So we're continuing on in the book of Romans, and there are more pages up there on the stand. They're new. I, as many of you know, Rick and I continue to try and get the technical side of this working. And it seems to be working this morning, which is good so far. At some point, we're going, we've got quite a few people who watch online. And sometimes I post this on my YouTube channel, and they watch during the week. And I get feedback from them, which is good too. At some point, we'll have some people joining us via Zoom, probably from all over the country or all over the world, but Rick and I have to get the whole tech thing stable before that happens and figure out how that can be. But that's what we're working towards. And one of the things that, one of the inputs that I got this week was someone asked, why didn't you use the, what he called, this was an Anglican from the UK, why didn't you use the authorized version? And so there's this line of translations that basically you have the King James version, and which is sometimes known as the authorized version. You have the revised standard version from the 1950s, and you have the new revised standard version from about the turn of the 21st century. And then you have the English standard version, which is another version. So those are all within a, those are all within a lineage. So I included that in the page, here, this one. I included that here. So we have that here. Now, last week we really stopped at verse 15. And if you look in a variety of Bibles, you'll notice that there are paragraph, well, here in English, in common English now, we use paragraphs. And those paragraphs sort of denote points. Some, if you look in your Bibles, some Bibles will have space between verse 15 and 16, and some Bibles will have it go straight through. And you can see that. So if you look at the three individual translations, let's see, I think they're, yeah, if you look at the three individual translations, David Bentley Hart's translation, so his translation is rather hyper literal. And I didn't delineate paragraphs for this. But if you look at N.T. Wright's translation, for example, he has verse 13 stop here, and then a new paragraph for 14 through 17. And then if you look at Eugene Peterson's paraphrase, for example, you have 13 through 15 as a paragraph, and 16 and 17 as a paragraph. Now, most of the time when we're reading the Bible, we're not paying any attention, this kind of detailed attention to this. But part of what happens now that we have paragraphs, capitalization, spacing, and then even in your English Bibles, all these paragraph headings, all of that is subtle implicit interpretation that is built into the text. And that comes into us when we're reading it. If we're reading it aloud, we pause at the end of the paragraph, and I mean, we're so accustomed, we do this so naturally. But the question when you're studying a passage like this is what's the meaning? What's the intent? Should, is N.T. Wright correct that 13 really belongs to the section that goes before, and 14 through 17 is one idea? Or is Eugene Peterson right that 13 through 15 is one idea, and 16 and 17 is a separate idea? Now, this gets into an issue that we're going to talk about as we go through this book. So, let's see. I'm going to hold up this book. I'm going to put a picture of this book onto the screen if it comes up. Come on, you can do it. Anyway, this book right here, Romans in Full Circle, A History of Interpretation by Mark Reasoner. And he made this chart, which I found quite helpful. And so, you have it. You have a paper copy, those of you who are in the room. The reason I bring this up at this point is what this author has decided to do is look at the book in terms of what's called the history of interpretation. And the history of interpretation is basically what I drew last week, that you have Paul writing the book then. You have an early church father named Origen reading it. You have Augustine reading it. You have Anselm or he didn't use Anselm, Abelard reading it. You have Aquinas reading it. You have Luther and Calvin reading it. You have Carl Barth in the middle of the 20th century after the second world or in the middle of the 20th century reading it. And we have authors and interpreters today reading it. One of the interesting things to study when you study a book of the Bible is how different Christians throughout the ages have understood the text. The reason that's helpful is we very much understand the text in the midst of our context. And it's really helpful to shake that up by going back and understanding how other people have read it. So now with this diagram right here, what you have is this author looking at the broad understanding of what the book was about. And the reason we get that to these verses 16 and 17 is in the modern period, really starting with the Reformation, authors have imagined that 16 and 17 are the thesis of the book. Okay. Now for some of you, I just triggered a bunch of memories from college when, or even maybe high school or junior high, when your teacher said, I want you to write a paper and your paper needs a thesis statement. What was she asking for? Okay. Okay. A thesis is in many ways a summary. It's a summary of what the paper is about. Now it's really telling that through most of the history of interpretation, most people didn't see verses 16 and 17 as the thesis statement of the book. Did Paul intend to have a thesis statement? Or is a thesis statement something that we pull out of the book and hopefully is actually found there in the book and not something we're just projecting onto the book? So what this author has done in this little book is basically look at a number of key places in the book and look at how these different authors understood the text in those different places in the book. What he also has managed to do, or has at least tried to do, is offer some summaries of what is this book for? So origin, early church father, brilliant man, lived in Alexandria. Anybody know where Alexandria is? Egypt. Anybody know who founded Alexandria? Alexander the Great. Alexander the Great. Named the city after himself. Alexandria was a critical, important world, at least western world centered city in that period. And origin was a church father who interpreted the scriptures. He left one of the first what we call commentaries on the book of Romans. Now that's our word for it. What do you understand if I say a commentary? It's an explanation of the text. Origin looked at the book of Romans and origin said basically the book of Romans is this. This is the apostle Paul arbitrating between the Jews and the ethne. Now the ethne are the non-Jews or the Gentiles or the nations. And what origin says, he says, well what Paul was really doing was trying to help us understand how the gospel leaps from Jew to the rest of the world. Now you might notice that when I introduced the book, I thinking origin really had something here in terms of the purpose of the book. Now there are a number of theological implications that origin found in the book. Imagining even though origin didn't say 16 and 17 are the thesis statements of the book, he said this is what the book is about. And if you look at 16 and 17 or if you look at the passage from 15 to 17, let's say as a whole, for that reason it kind of makes sense to keep 14 and 15 and 16 and 17 all together because we're talking about the wise and the foolish, the Greeks, the barbarians, and as I mentioned last week, the third category that was not mentioned at all were the Jews. And they are mentioned in verse 16. For I am not ashamed of the gospel for it is the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes to the Jew first and also to the Greek. All right. So, so origin looked at this and said, see here, this is all about the gospel going out from the Jews to the rest of the world. And then he had a number of other theological points that he found in the book. The fall of humanity and that here is listed as hard fall. Human responsibility, age of accountability, corporeal Israel will be saved and at some point we're going to have to wrestle with chapters 9 through 11 which have been an enormous area of debate in the book. Many scholars, especially since the Reformation, think they have a handle on the book and everyone is in disagreement as to 9 through 11. And when we get there, we'll get there. Now, as you can see here, different other people following origin had different ideas of the book. Pelagius, who you will probably, you might know in connection with Augustine, because they very much opposed each other. Pelagius basically said that, well, individuals earn salvation by keeping the law. And Augustine against Pelagian said divine grace conquers individual sinful nature. And so they had that battle about the book of Romans as they read it. And you can see the doctrine of original sin comes from Augustine and you have non-Nastic determination. Now we'll leave the Gnostic business away, but determinism. So Augustine has these very strong theologies of divine election. Now, some of you that might sound familiar because Luther and Calvin will very much follow Augustine. And Luther in the Reformation, two of the books that Luther found absolutely determinative of the transformation that he would find at that he would see to be the heart of the Protestant Reformation had everything to do with Galatians and Romans. And so what we see is that over the history of the church, Paul wrote a number of epistles and they're all valuable and they're all part of the New Testament and they're all canon. But the book of Romans holds a special place because how people read Romans and what people get from Romans went on to radically shape different leaders theologies at critical moments of the church. You'll notice two names that are probably less familiar to you, Abelard and Aquinas. Now Abelard, he is remembered as for Christ's example of divine love and human effort. And Abelard is a very interesting guy. If you want to check out his story, fascinating man. Aquinas became really the after Augustine, the most formative father of the Roman Catholic Church. And it was in many ways Luther reacting to Aquinas that led to a lot of what Luther decided. Now I've been in conversation with a Roman Catholic scholar in Canada whose assertion is that actually Luther and Aquinas weren't as far apart as we imagine. Luther was simply reading Aquinas wrong on a bunch of issues. That has to do with a whole bunch of history. And I won't get into that. But so Aquinas, healing grace, justification by faith. Luther of course comes along and you have Seymour Eustace at Pecator which means simultaneously just and sinner. And you have a passive righteousness or let's say especially with Calvin and imputed righteousness that Calvin finds in Romans. And you have Luther very much is able to sort of pull the Bible together with this single story about salvation by grace alone. So that's really the Reformation period. After Luther of course you have the modernist fights and you have all sorts of skepticism. And you have Karl Barth coming in in the early middle part of the 20th century attempting to reclaim something from the modernists. Now there's a lot of debate as to whether or not he succeeded or not. So Karl Barth was a local pastor who, local pastor in Switzerland who was wrestling very much in some ways like Kuyper and Bovingt was wrestling with the, when he went to school he imbibed all the modernist liberal theology and then he left the seminary and went into a local church. This is very much Abraham Kuyper's story. A little bit earlier than Barth and goes into the local church and finds all of this modernist theology is of absolutely no use and is impressed by the piety of the local people. And that forces Luther or Barth to basically relook at all of this theology that he inherited from the modernists and said no they're wrong. And so Barth comes out very much sounding like a Calvinist. That was a neo-Orthodox Calvinist. Christ is the elect one. And then on from there. Actually in many ways Karl Barth's story and Abraham Kuyper's story have a lot of parallels between them. But then Karl Barth working in this local church writes this commentary to the book of Romans which once that hits Europe in the early part of the 20th century sort of transforms the theological landscape again. So here's the book of Romans again transforming the theological landscape. Now get closer to our day the 1990s and 2000s you have what's called the New Testament. In the 2000s and 2000s you have what's coming into the conversation as the new perspective on Paul. And the author that was one of the authors of that movement was N.T. Wright. And we're reading his translation. And so the new perspective on Paul very much it's a Protestant movement to a great degree critiques Luther. And so back and back around and around. And then at the same time that the new perspective is gaining ground you also have a lot of narrative approaches to scripture where you have Israel story extended by Jesus life and death. And so N.T. Wright will very much take all of those story ideas and understand the New Testament and its connection to the Old Testament in that way. What you see here is something of a very short journey through the history of interpretation really of Christianity and again and again and again it centers on the book of Romans. And any questions about this? I know this is quite theological and a little bit abstract and historical but what do you take away from this? We come at it with all of our cultural filters and most of us sit down if we're reading the book of Romans for devotions let's say. We're usually reading it for inspiration. We're looking for power to help us deal with our struggles. We're looking for assurance to believe that God is with us on our side. We're looking for some reason to help us. Now that's a little different from a theologian or even a pastor versus a preacher or teacher. So all of those struggles come into this book and we're reading this book with all of those ideas in mind. Now let's take a look again now then at the book itself. So I'm my thesis is that I think origin was reading it roughly correctly. That isn't to undermine some of the other themes that come through the book. So when you sit down and have a conversation with someone the vast majority of the time you don't sit down and ask okay what's the thesis of my conversation I'm about to have with someone? Maybe now Edie probably does this more because let's say Edie is having a client come in and Edie is thinking about all of the issues in this client's life. Edie is thinking probably in a fairly direct way. I want to make progress with this client on these points. Most of us when we sit down let's say you come home from work and you sit down with your spouse or whoever you're sharing the home with and you say how was your day honey? So well there's kind of a summary to set the conversation. How was your day? Now the conversation is probably going to go in certain directions after that depending on the answer. And so this thesis idea I think is helpful because what we're trying to do is get a handle on a summary a very short summary of this book because our minds can only contain things in a rather in a rather simple way. So when you sit down you come home from work and you ask how was your day? And the per your spouse or your daughter or someone says well starts talking about work or starts talking about a relationship. Or starts talking about money. You wouldn't imagine how much of our life falls into those three issues. Now all of those do focus on the question how was your day but it's going to go into different parts. Now let's say you're talking to another person in the household and they ask how was mom? You're probably going to run through there out to these points and maybe if some relationship issue was the main issue that'll be what you talk about. Things tend to on one hand you can look at a situation in terms both of let's say a hierarchy of ideas or an outline with sub points like how was your day and all these things go in the day. Another way to look at it is a story linearly how was your day and most of the time we're sort of using both of those were sort of doing both of those two things at once. And so when we think about the thesis of Romans it's really helpful to sort of get an idea so someone could say oh how's Sunday school class we're learning about Romans. What's the book of Romans about? It'd be really nice to have a sentence that you can say this is what the book of Romans is about. You could talk to him for 15 minutes. All will probably remember from the 15 minutes is what any ideas? Maybe your summary what you repeat most or the last thing you said or the first thing you said or nothing or the part that was of interest to them for issues in their own life. You find this in any relationship you can talk to someone for an hour on the phone. What are they going to remember? What's most important to them? So and again we manage all this stuff without ever thinking about it. But if you're thinking about communication you want to keep all these things in mind because well again once I say relationship a little person in your brain because we really kind of have committees instead of just one person up here a little person in your brain just thought of either probably the most annoying or problematic relationship you are currently dealing with just by me saying that word. If I say money part of you is probably going to a bill you're struggling to pay or a goal you're struggling to meet. If I talk about work or some kind of project I mean our minds are that quick so we want to keep that in mind when we're going through the book. Okay. Let's start again. I am under obligation both to Greeks and to barbarians. I'm reading the leb both to the wise and the foolish thus I am eager to proclaim the gospel also also to you who are in Rome see and I think 14 and 15 are in fact quite closely tied together because he's talking about the obligation and that's connecting into Rome. Yeah. These transition words in Greek are what interpreters are always debating because they're not always very well specified. I gave you these diagrams. Let's see. That's not it. That's the second diagram. There's the first diagram because often in the text certain things are missing and we do that all the time when we talk and even sometimes when we write we skip words because in the context. Yeah, there's one on both sides in the context. It's clear. Now this is instead of diagramming this out for you. I have a book all full of the entire book of Romans diagrammed in Greek. Now even you might look at this and say, oh, well, that's the interpretive key. But if you've ever diagrammed a sentence, you know that what diagramming forces you to do is engage the ambiguities that are inherent in the text and so there are even decisions made in the diagramming but the diagrams to sort of help us pull things apart and slow us down as we read it. So right here on top I am indebted. And then you see right there to Greek and barbarian. And you know this in Greek. It's a little it's basically we would say in English. I am eager to evangelize. You those who are in Rome. So that's basically the idea. But again, you have the you have the Greek in parallel. You have the Greek and the barbarian. And you have the wise and the foolish and so that's then the structure. As we mentioned last week, the. The Jews are not mentioned and I think that is the reason that verse 14 is tied to verse 17 thematically. That's the flow of his thought. So I think that's basically correct. So I'm eager to proclaim the gospel also to you who are in Rome for I am not ashamed of the gospel for the power of God for salvation to everyone who believes to the Jew first and also to the Greek for the righteousness of God is revealed in all from faith to faith just as it is written. But the one who is righteous by faith will live. Okay, now let's look at the RSV. I am under obligation both to Greeks and two barbarians both to wise and to foolish. And you know, even with let's say almost all the translations say wise older translations will say sage. But if I say to both the sage and the fools, how does that color? The meaning of it for you. Okay. Okay. But if I say wise and I say sage doesn't sage sound I when I say sage, I almost picture. Some guy in robes ancient. Ancient. Wise that's a little bit more applicable, which is I think a lot of the modern translations. Go with the modern translations. Go with go with wise instead of sage. I am eager to preach the gospel to you also who are in Rome for I am not ashamed of the gospel. It is the power of God for salvation to everyone who has faith. Now notice between the leb to everyone who believes and the RSV to everyone who has faith. Now again, both of those are very legitimate. Translations of the Greek word pistis. Here, it's actually a dative. Saying, you know, sort of one having it. NIV for everyone who believes they go with believes. First to the Greek and also the Gentile and if you look over to the new living translation for I'm not ashamed of this good news because again, they're not afraid to use more ink about Christ. It is the power of God at work saving everyone who believes the Jew first and also the Gentile. For in it righteous the righteousness of God is revealed through faith for faith as it is written he through faith is righteous shall live. Shall live for in the gospel the righteousness of God is revealed a righteousness that is by faith from faith from first to last. Just as it is written the righteous will live by faith and you can begin to tell let's say between the RSV and the NIV this flexibility to add words to try to interpret and make it more clear that then is full-blown in the NLT. The good news tells us how God makes us right in his sight. Now a really astute interpreter who understands this diagram of the history of interpretation will say I smell a reformation in this text. And we all have our theological filters, but in the NLT it's written right into the paraphrase. This is accomplished from start to finish by faith as the scriptures say it is through faith that the righteous person has life. Now we're going to get into we're not going to get into it today, but this is a quotation. Obviously, and then we're going to have to get into the context of the quotation. Now if we look at our individual translators. This one, okay. Again, we sort of have a spanning of. Let's say it's difficult to talk about what how we want to do think about it. Let's say David Bentley. Heart's translation tries to go word by word. And T right and so in that way, it's much more like the leb. And T right is going to try to go sort of phrase. By phrase. And it's more like the NIV. And it's more like the NIV. And then Eugene Peterson is more like the NLT, but he's just going to try to render. The meaning. And we'll see that in these three individual translations. So start again at verse 14. With with David Bentley heart both two Greeks and do barbarians both two sages and two fools. Notice how he brings back the sages. I am a debtor. So as far as possible for me, I am eager to proclaim the good news to you who are in Rome too. Because I am not ashamed of the good tidings. Now you'll notice already that all of these translators have certain favorite phrases like they that they like to render the Greek into. Eugene Peterson will continue to say the message capital M. What's the name of the of the book that I've taken this out of? The message. And T right will like to say good news. David Bentley heart will like to say good tidings. Now, what's the difference between good news, good tidings and message? How do they feel differently? Okay, message seems very direct. It's very much from this world. Good news. That's pretty much from this world tidings. You might find on a Christmas card. And so again, what you see now David Bentley heart is orthodox large o orthodox and so orthodox. He loves to try to connect us with the past. What's interesting though that if you use a word like tidings, it seems to connect us with let's say Charles Dickens and a Christmas Carol in terms of how it feels. Old English. So, I mean language is so tricky this way. Yes. Yes. And there are strengths and weaknesses for that. I mean, that's the way language is. For it is the power of God for salvation to everyone having faith to the Judean. That's interesting. When we think Jew, we tend to think ethnicity or religion. Judean. Where does that put us? On the map. Exactly. Then also to the Greek. Now, what does that mean? It means that we are not going to be able to connect with the past. Then also to the Greek. Now, Greek doesn't work that way. Greek is much more culture. Language. For it is God's just for in it God's justice is revealed from faith to faith as has been written. The upright shall live by faithfulness. Now, all these words we're really going to have to wrestle with because when it comes down to what on earth is Paul saying, all of the working out of these different interpreters over time in many respect hinge on all how you understand any of these words. And for us reading it today, we want to understand how these words work in our lives. Okay. Okay. And T. right. For I am under obligation to barbarians as well as Greeks. You see, both to the wise and the foolish, sages are gone. That's why I'm eager to announce the good news to you in Rome. I'm not ashamed of the good news. Notice that's sort of how he's translating that Greek word. It's God's power bringing salvation. Notice and David Bentley Hart for it is the power of God for salvation. We have bringing salvation to everyone who believes to the Jew first and also equally. Obviously, empty right finds that to be important to keep in there to the Greek. This is because God's covenant justice. And T. right throws that word in there. Another important theological word for NT rights, theological agenda is unveiled. Revealed is often the word that's used. David Bentley Hart uses revealed unveiled from faithfulness to faithfulness. As it says in the Bible, the just shall live by faith. The just shall live by faith. Now, Eugene Peterson. Now notice again, he splits these up and has verse 14, much closer to 13 to 15 and separated from 16 and 17 by the paragraph. Everyone I meet, it matters little whether they're mannered or rude, smart or simple. Where has he gotten the mannered or rude, smart or simple? Right. He's taken those words and he's tried to say, okay, how would my audience today understand that? Barbarians, someone comes to the dinner table, you know, they came home from and say Roger was out all day fixing tractors. I mean, few of us come home as dirty from work as Roger. Roger comes home all day fixing tractors. His hands are black with grease, his clothes. He sits down at the dining room table, grabs food, starts shoving it in his mouth. Edie would say, you're a barbarian. You have no manners. A civilized person washes up, changes their clothes, takes a shower, sits down, has a prayer, asks, could you pass the bread? That's what a civilized person does. So rude or mannered, smart or simple, wise or foolish. See, simple and foolish aren't really exactly the same either because you can be simple and wise and simple and foolish. Deepens my sense of interdependence and obligation. See, here Eugene Peterson's connecting it up back with his message to the Romans, not his message about the message. And that's why I can't wait to get to you in Rome preaching this wonderful good news of God. See here, Eugene Peterson, what you get from Eugene Peterson is essentially a sequence of sermons. He's done all the interpreting for you. Now, 16 and 17, as in a sense the thesis for the book, as Peterson understands it, it's news that I'm most proud to proclaim. I'm not ashamed of the gospel. This extraordinary message of God's powerful plan to rescue everyone who trusts him. You've noticed he's located faith not from a set of ideas that we might have, but a heart connection. Starting with the Jews and then right on to every single Christian. A heart connection. Starting with the Jews and then right on to everyone else. You know, I'm not going to mention the Greeks. Where are the Greeks today? When you say Greeks to people today, they think of, you know, pita bread and heroes and, you know, Greek orthodoxy and, you know, islands and a beautiful Mediterranean coast. Peterson cuts through that and says, everyone. Now, again, that's not a bad thing that he's doing because most of you do that translating in your head, but he's doing it for you on the page. God's way of putting people right. Okay. What's he translating there? Putting people right. Righteousness. Salvation. Putting people right shows up in the acts of faith, confirming what the scriptures has said all along. The people and right standing before God by trusting him really lives. So that's you've got a whole little sermon in there. All right. Let's jump into the diagram of these two verses. Four. There's your transitional. I think holding 16 and 17 together with 14 and 15. For I am not ashamed of the gospel. Four. Another four. It is. It's the power of God. Into salvation. Ice. I should probably pull up at some point. These Greek prefixes are real. These Greek prepositions are really important for understanding. So is into salvation to those to all having faith in God. To those to all having faith. Those having faith. Jews first and Greeks. So that's 16 17 very much flows from the is with another four. The righteousness the kaiasune of God. Is revealed. Apocalypse. Okay. That's apocalypse. That's the book Revelation. Somebody empty right said unveiled. And there's some really good theological reasons why he liked that word unveiled because what's the difference between unveiled and revealed. Exactly. It's if I'm going to unveil something it's like I have a statue with a cloth over it and I'm unveiling it and empty right very much wants us to get that sense because what he's saying is that in the Old Testament in Israel in front of the world all along was the message. That puts real continuity between Old and New Testament. And it's unveiled now so you can see it clearly as to what it was this was always for you. This helps keep this work of God all as one thing. You know notice that revealed has that too but revealed can also be something brought into the room. That's new. So something you know there there's just slight nuance between all these words and again when we speak we do all this calculating and think what's exactly the right words to say especially if you're you know again I always use Edie because she sits in that room when talking to these poor people and people are struggling with something and and they're stuck on something and Edie is just sitting there and thinking. Or maybe you're having a fight with a daughter or a spouse and and you're trying to think of the right word that will help them understand exactly how you feel. So revealed in him. From faith. That's where we see a lot of fighting over this how to render this according to the scriptures or the writings. And this is the Old Testament quote the just or the righteous the decaeos net notice that the decaeos is the word that is used in the Old Testament. Or the writings. And this is the Old Testament quote the just or the righteous the decaeos net notice that the decaeos soon a was where we started here. Will live or do live it's in the present actually from faith. Faith. Now I could try and go through and render all of this and as wouldn't a translation of pot as possible that's sort of what the L.E.B. tries to do but it's. It's just difficult because all of these little word choices have all of these little subtleties and meaning. Okay so what on earth we're going to we're going to be back in this verse for two it we're going to be in this verse these two verses for two or three weeks because again all the little all the little elements of it are critical. So if we begin at verse fourteen. I am under obligation both to Greeks and barbarians wise and foolish he's mapping out the whole world. Yes. I have a question about. Why. Change. No they're not. No they're not. If let's say you immigrated to America from Nigeria. And you walked up to someone and you say all you Americans love to drive big cars. And someone says to you. I'm not American. I'm Russian. Why does the Nigerian think the Russian is American and why does the Russian who is living in America maybe for as long or longer than the Nigerian continue to identify as Russian. Yeah. So part of the reason they say he says Greek and this is an excellent question is because in the eastern part of the Roman Empire everyone spoke Greek. Yeah. So part of the reason they say he says Greek and this is an excellent question is because in the eastern part of the Roman Empire everyone spoke Greek. The western part of the empire up in Italy they're all speaking Latin. And so part of what divided the Roman Empire is this division between Greek and Latin. That goes all the way back to anybody want to remember who. Why was everybody from Greece. Eastward all the way into Egypt. Why were all of them speaking Greek. They weren't speaking Greek before this man. That's right. That's right. Alexander conquers that whole part of the world. And. They all start speaking Greek for hundreds of years. Now Alexander didn't conquer west of him. The Romans conquered the whole part of the world. Alexander didn't conquer west of him. The Romans were over there and historians love to imagine what if Alexander squared off against the Roman Empire. Who would have won. We don't know. They were at different times. Alexander conquered the Persian Empire kept going out towards India conquered Egypt all of that world spoke Greek. Now what language did Jesus or do we imagine Jesus spoke mostly. Aramaic. Anybody know what language what empire Aramaic was from. It was from the Persians. Aramaic was the language of the Persian Empire. So before they were conquered by the Persians. Hebrew spoke Hebrew when they got integrated into the Persian Empire. The language of the Empire was. Aramaic. But let's say if someone lives in El Paso. What language is our dominant in El Paso Texas. Spanish and English. If you're from Nigeria and you move into El Paso Texas. You'll probably be speaking English. If you're from Mexico and you move into El Paso Texas. You'll probably be speaking Spanish. Eventually the Nigerian might learn some Spanish. And eventually the Mexican might learn some English. They're called Greek. They're called Greek because most of where Paul had been working. He would go into these regions and speak Greek. And the New Testament and the the scriptures the Bible that the New Testament Church used was mostly. Greek the Greek grant the Greek translation. So that's why he calls them Greeks. And that's why Eugene Peterson calls them everyone. And that's why the Nigerian and the Russian living in Sacramento might talk about Americans. And the Russian considers the Nigerian an American. Sometimes and sometimes he calls them a Nigerian. And the Nigerian looks at the Russian and sometimes he calls them a Russian and sometimes he calls them an American. Because the Nigerian and the Russian are on one hand still Nigerian. And the Nigerian and the Russian are on one hand still Nigerian and still Russian. On the other hand they're both Americans because they're living here and they're speaking English. Although the Nigerian has been speaking English in Nigeria along with their tribal language. So most of us who have or those of us in this room have mostly been generationally living in America for a number of generations. We're just talking English. So we got to land the plane. So next week we're going to dive much more into 14 you can keep your papers 14 through 17 because all of these little word choices. I mean Carol's just started to pick up on it. Greek. Well what does he mean. He means everyone. But he also means a culture because the Nigerian talking about Americans is talking about American culture that the Russian may or may not participate in. So it's got all of these nuances in it. And again we're mostly looking at this as historians but you want to know how does this impact me. What is this salvation that he's talking about. What is this righteousness. Why would he be ashamed. All right. Let's pray. Lord we are connected to an entire world through Paul and through this book and this letter that most of us are no very little of. And the deeper we go into the letter the more we realize this and then we also begin to realize that this letter has in fact shaped the world and our assumptions of it all around us both through the church and through the culture. And so Lord as we read this book we on one hand want to hear Paul and we want to hear origin and Augustine and Luther and Bart and Wright and Hart and Peterson and each other. And Lord this is how your church grows and has continued to transform and save the world. So help us Lord as we read this and learn and grow to grow in our depth of understanding of wisdom. So not only may we know some other things about the world but may we know ourselves better and may we know you better and may we have a deeper appreciation for the saving power of the gospel. So hear our prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Amen.