https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wJZjAcACsks

 Hi, this is Paul and I've got a couple of special guests on my channel today, one of whom a number of you will recognize as John Van Donk who's been on a few times, and another friend Clay Leibolt who is a retired minister in the Christian Reformed Church, and we're going to talk well we'll see where the conversation goes, but I think you'll find it interesting. So because John has, I already did a while ago, John and I did a pretty much an hour long introduction into John's life and his story and I'll put the link for that below. If you want to see it any further but John why don't you at least give a little bit of introduction to yourself for people who don't know who you are. Well, I'm perhaps less a retired minister although I am retired, but I am a former minister in that I once was a pastor in the Christian Reformed Church, and it is in that capacity that I first met Clay we were both in Lansing at the same time. And since then our paths definitely have diverged, Clay having the unbroken tenure as a pastor and me having had several other careers since then, but my heart has always remained in the role of a pastor in one capacity or another. So this whole opportunity that you have Paul to talk to people on a very personal level about a wide range of topics that has always fascinated me and I am so glad that you invited me to participate in this conversation also. Well, before we go too far why don't you talk a little bit about this group that you started that we had a conversation about that and maybe just touch on that a little bit because it'll also contextualize you for this conversation. Okay, excellent. Yeah. Well, Paul of course has gone far in connecting with thousands of people on his YouTube channel, and eventually that morphed into his role as the pastor of a discord channel and as particular section of the discord server called bridges of meaning. And so that has become a group where all kinds of people from throughout the world meet to have conversations about a huge range of topics, many of them related to morals and values and scripture and church history and all those kinds of things. I myself have always preferred face to face contact for my efforts, and I initially introduced Paul to the concept of meetups for the Jordan Peterson meetup groups and I did that myself and Paul of course was incredibly successful with his meetup group in in Sacramento and then at one time we talked about, you know, doing a road trip and encourage all kinds of Jordan Peterson meetup groups all up and down the coast. That didn't happen on the kind of covert. But I think that eventually opportunities will arise for people in various locations to begin to meet face to face for meaningful and significant conversations about life, life's issues, perhaps spurred on by Jordan Peterson's first or second book, but if not for other in another conversation with other prompt things to be involved with one another in the kinds of conversations which you would think would normally happen in a church but don't always and so now they seem to be happening, kind of on the edge of the church. So I came up with this brilliant idea to call that estuary. And so he has an engineer estuary following and so Paul and I got to talking about this and I said well, maybe some of these people that are interested in estuary conversations might want to hone their leadership skills a little bit and be a little bit prepared for the life in the real time when you have to have a space and a time and some refreshments and you have to have chairs in a circle and and and actually invite people to come and participate there. And so, Paul says well that's all good and well but I have my hands full with all this stuff and I really don't want to, to extend myself any further in that kind of training. So I decided to do that. And so now I am the official host of what is called the estuary host support network. And, and we invited people in a conversation that we had we added a little Google questionnaire to it and we invited people to sign up for that. And we hold 20 people did. And so now, the majority of them have been divided into three groups that made in three different time slots because these are people from throughout the world so they're all in different time zones. And we do it in English. But there are people from Australia from Germany from England. And I think everybody signed up from South Africa but that person has never shown up at any meeting yet. But, but yeah and every time zone on the American continent. And so we meet two times a month for two hour blocks. So that's four times three groups, they're divided into three groups. That's, that's 12 hours of zoom time that I have with these guys. And we have, we have developed a lovely little format that makes it possible for us to share about things that we think about intellectually things that we, we might have come up against contextually in our environment related to stuff in the news or in our, in our own context. And we do allow some time to talk personally about, you know, did I have a baby or did somebody die in my family we we try to be real with each other. And then also we do have a slot or topic that we focus on and we call it as to where early as to where early what have you been thinking about in terms of actually getting your group off the ground, and, and actually begin to gather a few people in a specific time and start these conversations. And it is just remarkable how enthusiastic, many of these guys are and how skilled and how gifted, and how, how much they care, and I'm so proud to be part of that and. So yeah, this is called our estuary host support network. Not to be confused with the estuary support host network which is something entirely different. Thank you, John and hopefully, John and I have talked about that at some point, we'll want to spend a little bit more time talking about that network and and developing it but that's, that's, that's to come, that's to come. Let's let's turn our attention over to clay now I've asked clay to do an introduction and those of you who watch my channel religiously know that I spend, you know, up to an hour or so talking to people to sort of help them pull out their story because we have some other things we want to talk about today. I've asked clay to sort of truncate that a little bit maybe take 10 or 15 minutes to tell his story. He is now a retired minister in the Christian reform church, some of you within the Christian reform church will recognize his name, if not know his face in retirement he has been. He has been work as many retired pastors do he's been working in different churches throughout the denomination. He is quite a well known pastor in the denomination. He is a regular contributor to the banner. Even when I was in seminary stories of clay libel sort of bubbled up to for to us seminarians and so clay is I'm really happy to have clay on the channel clay and I both participate in a list serve that we call Calvin in common, which is where he had written I thought boy I'd really love to have him on my channel to talk about this and explain this a little more with some of the things that are going on within the Christian reform church but in my opinion clay libel is a is is one of the more significant leaders in the Christian reform church right now. And, and for that reason, I'm really pleased to have him on the channel so clay Why don't you begin by introducing yourself. I want to say, Paul that I was briefly famous about 40 years ago. I had my five minutes of fame. I was initially rejected for ordination by the denomination. Because of my views about Genesis, and it was a kind of dramatic thing. And one of the things that's true of me is I'm kind of intensely loyal, and so I hung in there. I was asked, actually several people suggested that I switched denominations you know why fight this fight. But I stuck it out and then I came back in five years later, 80. So that was 81 86. I came back and, and then the, the Christian reform church accepted me, and when they did the then editor of the banner sent me a note and he said, I got it, but he had gotten a letter from someone who had asked, did the Christian reform church lower its standards or did clay libel changes mine. Well, why don't you respond by saying that clay libel lowered his standards and the Christian reform church changed its mind. Fortunately, neither one was published. That'll get that'll give you all a little foretaste of what we're what we're what we're in store for today so so go ahead clay tell us some of your story. I grew up in a little town in Northwest Washington State. And, you know, I guess you know just to get a little glimpse of who I am I tend to be a bit of a contrarian that step happened already when I was growing up. But I went to Calvin College, and, you know, I remember being in a meeting it was a actually a get together of some pretty prominent people in the Christian reform church, including the, the, the most brilliant professor that I had his name was Henry stop. And we were in the basement of another pastor's house. And in those days everybody smoked and the place was filled with smoke. And, and there was an English professor, a man that I had a long relationship with, and he was saying that when he got first he came from When he got first to Calvin we started to read in the English in English literature that it just grabbed him he felt like he was in the presence of such riches. I had a bit of that same experience, but I had it even more. When I went to seminary. And, and I was in my first year of seminary and learning Hebrew from a professor whose name was john stack, and, and john said, Why don't you write to each one of the to the class, a small paper on Joshua, we were reading what are called what's called in the Hebrew canon, the, the former prophets. He said, right on the literary shape of Joshua and never occurred to me that the Bible could have a literary shape. So I read it with new eyes, and when I did I started to discover some things about the Bible and Joshua in particular in Joshua that my paper centered on the rocks there are rocks everywhere in Joshua big piles of rocks. And I realized that it was some kind of a literary theme going through the book, and I wrote that in my paper and it caught me that the Bible is this beautiful rich deep book. So, I wanted to study it further and when I graduated from seminary, I went to the University of Michigan. And the person that I knew I knew up there was a Bible scholar whose name was George Mendenhall and George Mendenhall was he wrote about what they wrote a lot but he wrote four or five papers which changed the whole shape of biblical studies. And so I studied there, read Hebrew read Akkadian, the language of Syria and Babylonia read Phoenician, and so forth. And, and I spent a lot of time there. And then I had to do my dissertation, I sort of cruise through the all the stuff up through the preliminaries, the preliminary exams. And then I had to, I had to produce a dissertation and it took me a long time because I tend to get distracted, and I don't deal well with long deadlines. I like short deadlines. So, as I was doing this. I taught for a good at Calvin College and then taught at Calvin seminary and then. But these were, you know, these temporary kind of positions and rather than pursue academia someplace. I moved with my wife, who had a job working eventually for Michigan Corrections. She studied, my wife studied Greek and Greek and Latin in Calvin and that prepared her for a long career as an administrator in corrections. So anyway, I went to Michigan, or I graduated from our left Michigan and started getting involved in pastoral work, eventually made my way to East Lansing, and to church there which is River Terrace Church in East Lansing. The then pastor called me up and said Clay, the associate pastor is leaving, will you fill in for three months part time. And I just never left. 31 years I was there, mostly as the senior pastor. And then, when I retired to move back to this little town or not to the little town but to Bellingham Washington close to this little town I grew up in. And, and since that time I have been interim pastor in in that town, I've been interim pastor in Southern California in Mill Creek, Washington, I had a little stint as a acting principal at the high school that I graduated from. Yeah, so it threw that off. I still love the Bible, and the Bible, especially as it speaks through its, its, its, the Bible is an interesting fascinating very book. And if anything drives my ministry, it is that piece of it. Well let's, let's talk a little bit about. So there are a lot of people today who are deconstructing I don't know how familiar you are with that word in terms of people and their church life and their faith. You were obviously raised in the church. You became you found some new insight into the Bible. But that, I mean you could have been an academician who studies the Bible the way. Let's say an English scholar studies a particular kind of literature. So before we sort of get into the Bible. Let me ask you why. Besides being intensely loyal, which is probably something I don't know two thirds of us have here we won't talk about john, but he is actually very loyal. Besides being intensely loyal. What do you think the Christian faith is, and why have you continued to identify as a Christian. Well, I have a very good friend, one of my best friends who grew up with me, and who eventually drifted out of the faith and became a unitarian pastor and in unitarian circles. And so for people who identify as Christians people who don't identify as Christians, he probably would not identify as Christian. And what we we've had a lifelong conversation, and we remain good friends so so why did he end up there and I ended up where I did in this pretty conservative Protestant church. It's not just loyalty. But for me, a while back I came up with a metaphor which helped me and the metaphor was of the cathedral, and I. So I thought about the, the faith as a cathedral and in this cathedral. There are beings. And those might be the articles of the Apostles Creed or better maybe the nice scene Creed, you know, and it so sort of the principal tenants of the church. And around the outside like in big cathedrals, there are probably lots of little chapels with people worshiping in I'm thinking they're the only people that that's, that's the whole cathedral but you know we all know it's not. So, for me that cathedral is a metaphor of the great tradition, a tradition which goes back to the Apostles but through people like your neus. I've been reading something by Rowan Williams which raised a theologian I didn't know before Maximus the confessor, and, and stuff. Thomas Calvin, so forth on all part of the big cathedral. It. The choice I think you have is between living in the cathedral or living in the house of your own ideas. If you live in the house of your own ideas, it's pretty small. Of course, it's comfortable because everything is the way you want it. It's pretty small and it never challenges you. For me, the epiphany moment was when I realized I could walk into the cathedral and I could look up at one of those beings. Some doctrine up there and I could say, you know what I don't like that one. I don't even agree with it. And it didn't change, because it belonged to this great tradition. And there was no reason why clay liable. Why my opinion about that particular doctrine changed anything at all, it's going to be there after I die, it was there before I, you know, and so, and once in a while. It happens that I look up there and suddenly the thing that didn't make any sense begins to make some sense to me. That would never happen in the house of my own ideas. So, I decided that the faith is such a big thing, and, and a spectacularly beautiful thing that I would rather live in the cathedral than live in the house of my own ideas. That for me was a moment of decision I can talk about other moments and there's lots of decisions that you make on the way to faith, but that was one of them. Well, John, I've been, you know, clean I've been talking and you've been sitting there very patiently I don't know if you have anything you want to say till we, you know, before we further go further on into this thing. I don't want to cut you out in any way. I mean your your story your, I mean your story is very interesting because of listening to clay's I've never heard clay story. Your story evolved quite a bit and your story has continued to evolve quite a bit. But, but what strikes me too is that, you know, even your relationship in some ways, you know clay listening to your story. John Vendonk story is sort of. This is the I mean, john Vendonk relationship to his church is in many ways. This is family. I don't know if that's fair john. I mean, I served in john's church and I would know that yes yes yeah. So that's that's part of what's interesting to me here is because it was john who said oh I'd really like to have a conversation between you and clay about some of these things and I thought well that should be interesting because I knew clay a little bit from this list serve that we have in common so I don't know john if you wanted to interrupt anything or we'll just continue. Yeah, I just, I just want to say that I personally have had, you know, two opportunities in my life to to interact with clay one was before he was accepted by the denomination because that's when him and I had a few times coffee back in Lansing. The other was that he was the interim pastor at Crosspoint Church and, and I think that his, his style and his posture that went a long ways toward creating a lot of healing and a lot of growth and a lot of renewal in our in our congregation, and he deserves the utmost respect for his interim skills. At that time, and so yeah, no. But the other thing too that I kind of want to insert here is this is line that those of us who are familiar with Jordan Peterson. The line that he expresses regularly or did that we ignore the Bible at our peril, no matter what kind of book it is no matter how you understand it no matter what the origins of it word no matter what, what, what value or significance or holiness you attribute to that book. We ignore the Bible at our peril, and I have great memories of clay preaching with his unique understandings and unique angles and unique appreciation for finer details in the Bible, and be able to to extract from it, you know, great life wisdom. So I'm really honored to be with you guys here right now so no I'm not gonna interrupt. All right, all right. I know you well enough to know that you will interrupt. And you should because what so I got to know john, maybe even just for clay's benefit, you know, another listserv that I part I participated in years of CRC voices. And, and that's where john I don't how on earth john got into CRC voices I'm not really quite sure, but john I got into CRC voices as you know I a friend of mine who is a professor at a local college who is is fairly new age in terms of orientation, did the Camino and john comes into CRC voices talking about how he did the Camino and I thought, well he's got a he's got a Dutch last name and he did the Camino and then he starts taking positions and voices and john is one of these thinkers that sort of all over the map when you expect he'll be a conservative he's sort of over here and you expect he'll be over there he'll kind of make noises so john's one of these very creative individual individuals who sort of marks their own trail and he's he's done that quite often so I and john has been a huge gift to me over the last three years when this video thing started and john right away was you got to do a meetup and so I don't know if I want to do a meetup and john just keeps john always has a scheme for my life and most of the time I go along with at least some of his ideas and usually when I do they turn out to have been a good idea so I've got a lot of trust in john and a lot of trust for his instincts and so we've we've been we've been partners together in this crazy ride I've been on. So, go ahead. I know by john and the Camino is that he just said some nice things about preaching but he left while I was there and went off to do the Camino. So I think he was leaving to avoid my preaching and we find his spiritual center someplace else. John, is that true. No. Okay. Well, before, let's, some of this came about because in the Christian Reformed Church. As with the Christian Reformed Church for those of you who don't know it is a rather unusual denomination and that it was ethnically sourced by a bunch of immigrants, mostly from Dutch separatists who came to the United States and so in many ways the Christian Reformed Church is sort of is right now in the midst of a process of assimilation and elements of the Christian Reformed Church are sort of tacking evangelical, some elements are sort of tacking mainline ish. So what that means for the Christian Reformed Church right now is that the, the variety, a variety of questions regarding the Bible and human sexuality are sort of front and center for the denomination and a number of ways. This came to a head in the denominations ruling body called the Synod of the Christian Reformed Church, it's by national US and Canada, and a report was commissioned by a synodical study committee, which is part of the way the Christian Reformed Church tries to sort of think together, we might say that's distributed cognition and Dutch and Dutch Calvinist immigrant church. But unlike usually when the Synod of the Christian Reformed Church puts together a study committee, it sort of looks around for seminary professors and, and other individuals in the denomination who can meet together over a couple of years and put together a report that sort of bears witness to the diversity within the denomination. This is a way of hopefully moving things forward. And that in 2016 was unusual in that synod commissioned a report only from persons in the denomination, with one exception, at least who had a traditional view of, of how the Christian Reformed Church has generally approached human sexuality. So when that report was commissioned in that way. Well, on some point they did so in order to get a, the sort of report that synod was looking for but it also in other ways set up the kind of conflict we're going to have pushed back two years in senate 2022 regarding these issues. And whatever one thinks about outcomes and it's very difficult to not think about outcomes politically in a situation like this. So just the setup of the report is going to have a fair amount to do with how things play out in the denomination afterwards and so some of this came up when the report came out in this listserv that Clay and I have in common. And, and Clay, I thought I thought wrote a rather very interesting little few paragraphs to this about biblical interpretation and the tradition of the Christian Reformed Church, which I thought was, I thought was quite, I thought it was quite accurate in terms of the way the The church has handled the Bible and seen itself with respect to the Bible and and clay obviously has done a lot of thought about the Bible in a variety of different ways and he's worked with it as a preacher. And I thought after we wrote that that boy I'd love to have clay on the channel to talk about this. And john of course in some ways was the hookup but john is also important because john's history with this is interesting in and of itself. And you know my rise on YouTube happened in many ways because of Jordan Peterson, and I was actually right before listening to this still on my screen over there. It's his conversation with Bishop Baron, where they get into some of these things and so it's, it's my belief that we are in a very interesting period of history right now where kind of the modernity, modernity Protestant The framework that we've been dealing with for the last almost 500 years is breaking down and new frameworks are emerging. And if you have a transition of this magnitude, it's going to be very messy. Apart from how things lay out with respect to rules in the Christian Reformed Church about who may or may not be an office bearer and what types of relationships the Christian Reformed Church regards as marriage, underlying issues are going to manifest themselves not just in an area of human sexuality, but in far more basic areas about how people basically conceive of themselves in the world, how the Bible in forms and how they relate to the Bible and and so this is, you know, whatever. This is a very big deal. And again, I found clay's posting to be quite thoughtful, and I thought insightful other there'll be aspects I disagree with but I really wanted to bring this to the channel. I'm also thinking at some point I might bring some maybe somebody from that committee to my channel and sort of give them time to present and defend the report at some point. I'm sort of grateful that we have another year's pause because I think in the Christian Reformed Church, part of what we really need to do is learn how to talk together and process things together in a less political framework, hopefully in a way that can help us not, you know, bludgeon each other, at least reputationally, and certainly not physically, and these same kinds of issues are obviously at play in the broader culture, too. So there's, there's my little setup of this. And so, Clay, why don't you share with us some of what you saw from that report and and what struck you about it in terms of the larger issues of the Christian Reformed Church and the Bible, let's say. Let me give you just a little tiny introduction to that. So, I was thinking about this and I was thinking about, not just the Christian Reformed Church here but as Paul was indicating, is there a future to Protestantism, or is it a kind of failed experiment I had a kid come to me, a high school kid, who I had had in class. And his opening line was, I think Protestantism is coming to an end. It's a failed experiment. This by the way is somebody who watches your YouTube channel, Paul so he heard it from me. And then, just one more little aside here, the month or two ago I was reading a book by John Banville. I don't know if you know Banville but Banville is a award winning author, a novelist, and he's Irish. And in addition to his quote literary fiction, he writes detective fiction and in this case. This is a detective fiction and the detective is a Protestant in Ireland. So, he goes to visit the bishop. And the bishop says to him so you're Protestant, and he says yeah. And he says, you know, isn't the time to end the protest. You know you've been protesting for 400 years I mean what's what's with this. So, you know, there's a sense in which the background the deep background of the Reformation is this a bunch of young, mostly men, not entirely, but mostly men who, who felt that the church had gone wrong, and they were being, to some extent informed by Renaissance themes, the whole. All of those, but also the fact that the Bible was now in print had been in print for about 100 years. And they said, if we're going to sort through what is right and what's wrong about the Bible, then what we need to do is to have some kind of a principle and the principle that they came up with. There's an argument about whether any of them ever actually said this but it was now known as sola scriptura, which is only by the Bible. So how do you sort out true churches from false churches you sort out false churches from the Bible. And this became kind of the Protestant principle, the Protestant principle is that when you come up against some new thing, some challenge, you go to the Bible you sorted out hence the study committees. And I want to give just one more little piece of personal history here. So, back in the late 80s and early 90s, you know, the Bible was the only thing that was ever sorted out. So, back in the late 80s and actually started in the middle 80s I guess and into the 90s in the Christian Reformed Church it was a big debate about whether women should serve as preachers and pastors and, and elders. And the Christian Reformed Church did this as Paul just indicated by doing study committees, so they would have pointed study committee the study committee would come back and they were, they were dueling sentence you know one said it was You know, one said it would say, women should be recognized in all the offices and then the next sentence would say, no, that's not true and and it took two, it's the way the church order is set up it takes two sentence to pass anything of that magnitude. And so, you know, you go one way and go the other. And in the middle of this I was in the middle of this I was writing over jurors and, and so forth and doing and arguing it from a biblical point of view that that's how you did it you know you said, okay, the Bible says this. And, and I, a friend of mine, classmate of mine actually very prominent pastor in the Christian Reformed Church was talking to another person who was a prominent leader in the Christian Reformed Church, and they were having this argument one was against the Bible proscribed women from being in office, the other one was in favor. And he said this, this friend of mine said to me, and finally we decided we could disagree because we couldn't decide on the meaning of one of the propositions in the Greek. And it just struck me with some force that there were young women who felt like they were called to be pastors. And then, and decisions were being made for them on the basis of Greek prepositions now I know it's not that simple, but that something, something has gone terribly wrong here. And that may be something which started out as a good idea you know these. The reformers Calvin and Luther and so forth, who were trying to think, now what did the early church really look like and what is that you know what's the apostolic witness to that so let's go back to the Bible and find that out that now as that spun out over the period And it's called, here's the title. The committee to articulate a foundation laying biblical theology of human section. Let me read that one more time, a committee to articulate a foundation laying theology biblical theology of human sexuality. My question was, can you get a foundation laying theology of biblical sexual or human sexuality out of the Bible, or are you doing something which in some sense violates with the very thing the Bible is that's kind of my overall question. So I approached it from sort of four points of view and and I'll be kind of brief. The first one was, I just asked the question if you assume everything the committee assumed about how you go about doing this how committee should decide this, by the way, this report If you go about doing that. Did they do a very good job of doing the biblical interpretation, and I was kind of distressed to see that I didn't think they did a very good job of that they they they missed a lot of points in the text that they were, they were big on. The second thing then it was, but what about the assumptions that they bring to their study. Are those valid. And so, what they bring to the major assumption that they bring to this is a certain kind of reading of the Bible and that reading of the Bible says that the whole Bible can be reduced. The whole Bible can be understood as having four movements creation fall redemption and consummation. The New World. And they focused on the first of those creation and in focusing on creation, they believe that God created a set of laws or principles which not only govern the natural world, they use law to talk about scientific, you know, laws, which science doesn't anymore. But they, but it also provides norms for for culture, so that there is a biblical idea of a family. There is a biblical idea of a government. Now, as everybody likes multiple webs, no less. Pardon, be quiet john let him let him keep going. No, no, no, no, no, John's just adding, adding multiple wives. Yes. We'll talk to it we'll talk to Ann about your, your, we'll see what exactly what you're, we think you're, you know, presenting here john will come back to that john I just playing out the outline here so that that that. So, culture approaches this very differently and I think we ought to that's a topic that we might want to discuss is, how are things like human sexuality normed. How are they normed in the church how are they normed in the in the society around us, and where do those two things meet or not me. And then my third sort of tact on this was to ask the question which is the one that I started with which is, is the Bible that kind of book. And I think we ought to do that with on the basis of the Bible and I think it's not, and I think it's not for some basic sort of big type theological reasons, but also for the sheer fact of the Bible the Bible isn't, in fact, written to do that kind of work. And then the fourth which is maybe the kind of political point here which is that what this ends up doing is authorizing a priestly class group of people who are the experts on Greek prepositions, and who can decide on the basis of that whether people are permitted to do one thing or permitted to do another. And, and so that's kind of where I laid that out Paul is that as really quick but I thought it was very good. I thought it was very helpful, even though john so rudely interrupted you which we knew he was going to do. Because for some reason I don't know why you want more than one wife john because I didn't say that I was. All I said was that the creation norm, as laid out in the earlier chapters of the Bible leaves room for multiple wives. I think and that that's very, that's very good clay I think you laid it out very well. I took I took notes on it and you know part of what I come to this which people about those about five six seven years ago I was trying to ask that the Christian reform church what it really needs to think about is doing what I call confessional conversations, and I think I was immediately misunderstood which is absolutely normal and something like that because the reason I said confessional conversations was the, the issues you are pointing to clay, as they were in some degree wrestled with in the reformation period resulted resulted in sort of this period of confession, you know confessionality where, as the church split up they all had to sort of well well who are you and the way that they tried to articulate themselves and explain themselves and we have this, you know the Belgian confession for within the Christian reform church. This is who we are, you know great Emperor, please stop killing us well we're not probably not going to stop killing you but. And so this confessional thing happened. And I said confessional conversations because I'm not saying, you know, I'm not I'm not trying to say, I'm not trying to propose a new confession I'm saying these very basic issues that were that the system of which in the Christian reform church we continue to maintain have been disrupted for many many reasons over the last 500 years, and it's at levels that are about this basic that we really need to pay attention. The problem in the Christian form church was when I said confessional conversations, when I say conversations everybody on the CRC right says, on the left is always asking for a conversation but it's not real conversation, because they just want to get their way. And the people on the left sort of heard confessions and they said, you're going to make this a confessional issue, which is exactly what the report does, which was their fear that suddenly all of the church disciplinary machinery will now be used to clamp down on certain the church in order to purify the church. And so I can understand why both sides are confessional conversation said, last that's the last thing we want to do. But, you know, the reason I wanted you here on this channel clay is because these points to me, point to that conversation that we've a lot has changed in 500 years, and I think it's helpful to to go down into the basement and take a look at the foundations and have some conversations about, does this still work. Is this who we want to be. Can we continue to establish a healthy community around this. And if so, what kinds of things do we ourselves need to sort of put on the table with respect to this so that's been my agenda. Well, let me throw something in here about so they, as soon as you say that there was a created order. There is a, there's a fundamental kind of family which is the kind of family which ought to be in all historical families are kind of fall off from that but that's the ideal. And that's called creation ethics or creation order. As soon as you get that idea that the question arises of course how do you know what that is. And as it turns out I mean nobody's going to surprise no one. It turns out that people often think that it is whatever they know that's what that's what God intended from the beginning so you know if you are in a monogamous relationship and with a guy, a man and then that's, that's God's order. And that I was thinking about this is a little bit of, I was thinking about the Jonathan Haidt book that the one about the righteous mind. Yes, and, and the elephant and the, the writer. So Jonathan Haidt psychologist makes this point that we think that we are leading with our rational ideas. But as a matter of fact, what we, the elephant is all of these prejudices and pre wired things and whatever. If the elephant slouches left, the writer tries to make up a reason why we're going left, and if the elephant sloshes right you know we make up a reason why we're going right, and that all the rationalization is secondary. And I think that's what's coming from that thing that that's what's going on in that report, what's going on in that report is that these are people who want to hold the ground here, they want not to change in on this issue. And they were instructed by said and not to change so they were all people of certain mind. And now they're making up reasons, and they use the Bible to do that. So they're not really getting this out of the Bible to really getting this out of their own culture. Wow, that's, that's, that's pretty that's pretty dismissive. That's pretty hard. I'm sorry, I'm sorry. It's okay I like I like honest so I'm just, I'm, I could be talked off this ledge but Well, I guess I can really understand why you had some of that drama early on with with with interviews with the Board of Trustees of Calvin seminary. This would not surprise my wife, no. And I can also see why john really likes you. Well, I, again, and I, I know. I mean some almost every video I put up some people hate and I know. I know what people are going to hate this but I think clay that the that what you bring to the fore here is is something that is something that in the Christian Reformed Church we really have to engage with and wrestle with, because these, I'm, you know, when you when you say, you know, I wouldn't want to say that, you know, the members of the committee are putting forth the family that they've I mean that's the reason that it has that shape because they're putting forth a family that they've known. I mean part of again I've just been someone had just sent me a note that said all the conversation with between Bishop Baron and Jordan Peterson was a disappointment. I didn't find it a disappointment because actually about 20 minutes into it they hit this very topic and Bishop Baron almost spouted what to me was near Protestantism in terms of his, his questions about how to read scripture and Jordan Peterson's retort was pretty much as I would expect Jordan Peterson to retort, which is Peterson has a much more Darwinian crowd And then you have the view of history which would say that, let's say, unlike our tradition which would say that well we can, we can find the, we can find God's designed for the family within scripture that very much be our tradition. And there are others out there who are saying that there is in fact, let's say a natural law perspective, there is in fact a natural order which can be discerned from creation structures which fundamentally over the long run, you know, lay themselves out in different ways so there's there's actually a lot going on here but I think. Let me back up a little bit. Go ahead. I wrote a letter to this committee. Before the two years before the report came up, or more. And, and what I said to them was this I said you're painting yourself into a corner. The reason, and the reason you're painting yourself into a corner is because as soon as you assume that God's rebel that the logos if I wanted to use the proper theological term here that the logos was only in the past, and that everything has been a falling off from that sense, you know that the structure of the family was set and then everything since that time has been falling off from that, you have no room to go. You have no room really to for human culture to understand and begin to articulate new ways of existing. You have to also have God, not just at the beginning but you have to have God at the end, and and here you know I'm feeding into a pretty long tradition in, in the faith, I mean I, I know that sometimes you know if I say something like I just said, you know I come off like, you know, I'm This flaming liberal person but but this is stuff that you can get in Gregory of Nisa, you know, who, who says that when God speaks creation. It's not where it starts that that is the creation, it's where it ends. And the way of doing it which is much less elegant than Gregory's is to talk about the God who pushes in the God who pulls. And so the God who pushes is the God at the beginning God's God. You know, you need the God, the creator God puts in place the structures. But God also is at the end of history drawing us into new reality. And so in discerning what it is that the Bible is leading us to in all of these issues. We need to pay attention, not only to whatever we think was the past that we fell off of, but where we're going with God is growing us towards. And of course that's him. You know the emblem of that in the Bible is that it starts in a garden and ends in a city. So that there's development. I think most Christian reform people have some sense of that. But you lose in a report like this, the emphasis is so much on creation fall that the whole idea of the kingdom of God is something new, something which you're drawn towards gets lost. Maybe God is showing us things about sexuality in culture, which we need to learn. Good job. If I may, I don't know if this is helpful at all but I have a very vivid memory of being in seminary and in prologue to theology being introduced to the concept of the hermeneutic circle. And the hermeneutic circle always included reading the text and applying the text and living the text. And then as the renewed community rereading the text and interpreting the text and applying the text. I mean I see the spiral before my eyes on the blackboard when Gordon Spikeman put that thing in front of us and said that there is no such thing as a static once for all understanding of the Bible. It is always evolving as the community of faith evolves with it. Now, I'm not trying to promote a fluid understanding of the Constitution or living Constitution, but in a way our understanding. We are never the same people when we come to this to this document called the Bible so it's going to always change. Well, actually, John and I had a bit of a conversation on Friday with a couple other people and in that conversation. The fact that this same kind of debate is being had in terms of the Constitution in the United States. The originalism versus the idea that the Constitution is shifts and changes is. So anyway, that was raised in the in the conversation. Well, and again I think, I mean, if, if, if the, I suspect I know which student came to you and talk to you, because he's been pretty active in the discord server and I know he lives in that small town in Washington. He's a very interesting guy. It's, you know, so again I very much do see Protestantism modernity the American experiment. I mean, those are all part of the same flow of history. And the question then we get to, which, you know, I would, my hope would be and the reason I do videos like this which probably are of little interest to my broader audience but might be of more interest to the people of the Christian Reformed Church that actually I have a channel of which I'm not sure how many there are. But the questions then revolve around. Okay, how do we, how do we as a community then process these, these issues. And, you know, in the in the case of women in church office, which the CRC did, you know, a generation ago I was coming up through seminary during a lot of that and, you know, they were in my household growing up my parents were very involved. The Reformed Church sort of grabbed on to a political solution, which I think now, a couple of decades later, has demonstrated to be unsatisfying in some ways for both sides. And those who are complimentary and in the denomination often continue themselves to feel like second class citizens because in some ways, the, the. It's difficult to get a position of high status in the denomination if you are not sufficiently verbally affirming of the use of women's gifts in the church. So complementarians feel like second class citizens. At the same time, many of the women that I talked to themselves feel like second class citizens, simply by the presence of the complementarians. And, and often they'll say things like, you know, whenever these higher status pulpits become available and start looking for looking for candidates for for senior pastor women, it's almost always men that take the position and men continue to be the vast majority of ministers in the Christian Reformed Church. And I look at that and I say this political solution to a fairly foundational question. And we discovered to be expedient, but over the long term not terribly satisfying. And as there are significant issues to discuss in the realm of human sexuality I mean it's an enormously complex subject that I think in the past the Christian Reformed Church did try, I mean, even in the 73 report, tried to, oh, we're going to use the best science we can. I mean at least the Christian Reformed Church hasn't taken more of a fundamentalist act by closing the door on science and saying just the Bible here. The Christian Church has been trying to do some things. And I, increasingly I hear calls for again another political solution to this, to this question, but I, I think in fact, with this question in particular, there will likely not be any political solution. And, you know, on CRC Voices we've been having this conversation basically about the end of the Christian Reformed Church, and, you know, I made a comment to Al Walters early on with this thing but I said, you know, I think in some ways these questions may be the end of Protestantism. And I don't know what comes after this because, you know, where if you're let's say of the mainline persuasion and the Church of North America, Roman Catholicism and orthodoxy don't really look like viable options if you've got the particular value matrix that you possess, and I think that people like them liturgically might hold out hope for some Episcopalian or Anglican option which seems to try to wed, you know, more of a sacramental reality with liturgy and then perhaps more modern values. You know the Episcopal Church of North America hardly seems to be like a thriving shoot at this point. So there's a lot going on in this and and again, whereas I hear a lot of desire in the Christian Reformed Church for a political solution which would, okay well let's just, you know, sort of like the RCA is doing, let's just part ways right now and, you know, you know, you can keep your property you can keep your property we won't say bad things about you don't say bad things about you at least not in public, and we'll have a, we'll have an amicable divorce. I think, I think when issues like this come around, we ought not to waste them on expediency but we ought in fact to say, well, what does this present conflict. What should enlighten us by this conflict right now, and how on earth can we proceed and make it maybe making use of the difficulties we currently possess. Yes, so that's a. I think that's right, Paul, I, you know, I know enough about the Christian Reformed Church to despair of that happening. But the. What what we would do if I had my brothers here is that we would go back to our theology of the Bible, and start looking at it, not just in terms of the 16th century but go back and look at it in terms of the whole 21 centuries of Christian tradition, and, and and realize that we kind of got on, you know, what happened is that in the 16th century, we not only adopted the solo scriptura slogan, but we adopted a set of assumptions which come out of the 16th century, which don't work for the Bible. And there are assumptions that come out of the Renaissance I mean these assumptions are no more biblical than than anything else and and we have to examine those again, so that you don't try to do a foundation laying biblical theology of human sexuality when And in fact there is no such thing. There's no such animal in the Bible. And what you do instead is you, you approach scripture, the way the church is always approach scripture as a matter of a conversation. And that conversation includes the tradition it includes a long history. You know all the centuries before us. And we really try to understand each other and understand it. I told a little story on Friday that I think in a very small way might be illustrative of what I have in mind, and I, when I was at the church that john goes to in Southern California. And I decided that we should have a conversation about women in office in the council with this was the elder board. And I don't know how many 910 elders, whatever. So, all guys. And I gave some parameters I said, we, we will do an hour for each meeting for three months. And so we got to the first meeting, and you know you could have cut the tension. You couldn't have cut the tension, you know, with a pretty sharp knife I think it was that that thick. And the first thing I said was, you know, I'm interim here so I'm not going to try to change your mind. And that I think lowered the temperature a little bit and then the second thing was, let's go around the room and have each person say where they're at on this issue, and how they got there. And we did. And then we went on to have the discussion we looked at all the biblical materials. We had the three hours of discussion that we had slated. And we had a pretty good time with it, you know, but a we weren't asked to being weren't being asked to make a hard and fast decision which kind of took the tension off but secondly, people could understand that somebody's position might be out of their biography out of what what had happened to them in life, and that's where they were because of that and that was helpful. And what it served actually later was that when we read some other kinds of, of difficult issues, the console was united, and we could address them. For a long time I've had a kind of church slogan, which I enunciated too often in River Terrace. It's strong at the core flexible at the edges. And it's a way you do identity if you do identity from the edges. Then you're constantly policing the edges, you got to police the boundaries, but if you do identity from the center, then you can allow some some difference. There was a committee you know before the committee. There was a committee from 2013 to 2016, which was entrusted with trying to find pastoral ways to deal with the issue of same sex marriage, but and not change the moral stance but to figure out ways to give people a little latitude in how they could approach it, you know so that if a pastor, for example, has a daughter who wants to get married to another woman. Could he attend could he could he assure I don't know could he read the scriptures and the Senate made a mash of that thing. They didn't do deal well with it and it's very difficult in sentence to deal well with those kinds of things. There was a moment in which the CRC could have said, you know, let's, let's not change our stance here, but let's figure out ways to deal pastorally with each other about it. And they. And that one that was left on the table and now we're going to have to decide whether or not this is an issue of the confessions or not, you know, can can ministers be brought up on charges. If they do the wrong thing. So I think we've taken a step back in that sense, and, and if I want to throw one more thing in here, what's happened to the CRC and this is not just a Christian form church that's why this is relevant to to prostitutes in general but also, especially to the evangelical piece of it is that the divisions have hardened. And that comes out of the political situation in the United States. But in the sense of for the last four years, those issues have hardened and. And now I went back to that church that I was like, I did an interim year and I was at that church for a year and a half, went back there. It's a different church, because now there are people on two sides I'm not sure that church is going to hold together. And, and, and, oh john you wanted to jump in here. Well, it's a while ago already so we may have passed the point here for that to be relevant but sorry, John. No, no, you get three ministers on it's gonna happen. Yeah. That's the risk of not interrupting, you know, so Yeah, so, so no but but but you did mention earlier that it is also an issue of the meaning of words, and that eventually we're going to, you know, have to look at historical understandings experience with all this, but also the change of language, and the And the anecdote that you mentioned earlier we have a, we have a friend in common, Clay and I do, who is an attorney, who is in a massive $1 billion labor dispute. And I think it is unions versus a company, I don't know exactly who the parties are, but the company is required to furnish in writing certain records related to paste up information. And we have to direct over the meaning of furnish and the meaning of in writing. The $1 lawsuit is now being decided on the basis of the meaning of furnish and in writing, and the way that we talked about that being relevant is that in the end. It is not out of the question that this whole thing with the churches I mean we talked about how to be amicable in our divorce and say you can have the building and we won't talk badly about you. And I think that's one of the interesting plans associated with this thing. There are, you know, pastors who, if they end up on the wrong side of the fence may find their careers in disarray. And, and the thing that I found fascinating is that our attorney friend mentioned that in the end, after everybody is, you know, offered their braves and arguments. The thing is going to get decided by 12 jurors. 12 jurors are going to decide the $1 billion award. 12 jurors. Now what is the equivalent of 12 jurors in this conflict that we have right now in the church, if we cannot go to, or even if we do go, let's say we do go to the Bible, and we end up arguing about the meaning of a Greek, you know, a Greek word or a Greek preposition. And so what I'm trying to say is that in the end we're still going to end up, you know, having the experts duke it out. And if not that, then who are going to be the 12 jurors. So, John, as a matter of fact, if you want to do, if you want to understand the Bible and you know this. The words are important. It is a matter of the word you've got that's, you know, it comes down to the words. But if you put the words in the context of, you know, if you make the Bible decide something which it does, which is, it's not intending to decide I mean which was. So I would give you one little example I hope I can do this quickly from that report. They make a big thing of Matthew 19 which is Jesus. Talking about divorce. Jesus is asked by a Pharisee. What he thinks about divorce, and he, he quotes from first from Genesis one. You know that they were created male and female, and then from may may have this in the wrong order but then from Genesis to. And then the man will leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife as I recall is the old translation, and the tool become one flesh. And what they what they absolutely miss in this whole thing is the fact that that the context here is john the Baptist and Herod. And john the Baptist criticize Herod's divorce. Herod and Herodias got married Herodias was the his brothers Herod's brothers This is the second here is here at here at antipas here at antipas his brother's wife. And so she stole him stole her or she decided that she liked him actually in Josephus, he blames her. And so she, she marries Herod and john the Baptist is asked about it. He gives a not very politically correct answer he says parents wrong about this, and Herod, and Herod has him arrested and eventually he ends up getting his head chopped. So Jesus is standing in the same place. And he's asked, basically the same question. And in Mark which is the earlier of the, the Gospels at least if scholars are right in Mark, Jesus answers it in a kind of in a very Torah scholar kind of way. So, what is the Torah teach you, and they cite Deuteronomy and, and he says well, God did that for your heart, so they have a they have a Torah discussion, never quite touching the issue, then Jesus removes himself and and gathers with his And then they ask him again about it. And then he says something which could be taken as being critical of Herod's marriage. So, all that all of that just means is that this whole very interesting passage in the Gospels is fraught with what was going on at the time. And then when you start to take that and try to abstract it and make it a ruling on marriage for all time or divorce for all time or ruling on whether or not you can have same sex marriage or not, you've taken a beautiful biblical passage, and you have used it inappropriately. I think that's my thought there. So, if you put the Bible in the context of saying that a preposition from Paul is going to decide whether or not this woman becomes a pastor or not, we've lost the thread. So, that's the question, then, if we cannot appeal to specific passages in the Bible, then how does the thing get this. Exactly. So the Bible. Actually I started to think about this from a new point of view, just the last few days because I've been reading this wrong Williams book called Christology the heart of creation. And Ron Williams is the past Archbishop of Canterbury from the Anglican tradition. Brilliant book in which he goes through he pieces his way through all of those early Christa Christa logical kinds of discussions. And the question he's asking is about the boundary between the infinite and the finite. In a way that the infinite remains the infinite so we're talking about the triune God in Rowan Williams theology here, or theology of the Christian Church. And that humans remain human so that Jesus is fully human, fully divine right. And what does that mean and how do we understand that. And, and what the people through the Byzantine period up in through to Thomas. Understood was that you can't compromise, either thing, the humanity of Jesus, or the divinity. And so trying now that comes back to the scriptures. If the scripture is, in fact, God's word is I believe it is. And how do we take the scriptures for what it is the, the actual finite. The word used in Christological controversies is who post office, the actuality of it. How do we take that and still understand that you cannot understand this book, except from the point of view that at least you can understand in Christian tradition, except from the point of view that this is a revelation of God. You need to do both things. And what the Protestants did is they started to think to themselves that, especially the 17th century not so much the 16th century but 17th century the next century, when this settled into a kind of orthodoxy is they tried to make the Bible, they tried to force the Bible into the kind of book which was able to decide the kinds of issues that we're talking about, instead of reading the Bible for what it is. And if I can preach anything in this tradition, it would be this, take the Bible for what the Bible is. God gave us this book, this book does, as a matter of fact, change people, it does as a matter of fact drive people towards Jesus and drives people towards God, towards God the Father. And, you know, we can talk about how that works and so forth but take the Bible as seriously as you possibly can, but don't try to make it into the book that you need for your theology because as soon as you do, you'll destroy the Bible. You'll destroy it, you'll just find the Bible not working the way you want it to work, because it isn't that kind of book. I mean, you got the Bible is a conversation you got. On the one hand, you got, you know, the prophets, and the prophets, so, so the, the whole testament coalesces around the fall of Jerusalem and the question is, why did Jerusalem fall, what went wrong. And the prophets say, well, what went wrong is that you weren't faithful to the covenant, you were unfaithful people, you know, you were idolaters, you were so forth. And then you get Job, probably written out of the same period, saying, maybe it's more complicated. And that's, you know, in, in, if the Bible is reduced to creation, fall, redemption, consummation, you lose Job, you lose that conversation between say, actually the conversations goes in three ways you got, you got, say Amos I'll just use Amos, Amos saying, you know you guys you guys Then you have Job saying, well, sometimes things happen when people don't mess up. And then you have Isaiah second Isaiah, saying, maybe it's our vocation to suffer, which then leads into Jesus. So, you lose the complexity of the conversation. Got john. So, when Paul suggested back then, and still occasionally refers to it as having confessional conversations. Maybe I should ask Paul, but in the light of what was just said just now. Is there an endpoint to those conversations should they should they. I mean, I'm looking at the Bible right now and we have a range of conversations with no clear endpoint on the basis of which we can make practical decisions about how to live together. So, when Paul suggests that we have more confessional conversations. From my point of view that would be a value in and of itself. But it's often thought of, especially by people on the left that having these conversations is just a way to postpone making decisions. What I'm thinking is, is there, is there any point to that charge. Is there ever an endpoint to the conversations, or can we make the case that we can continue the life of the scriptures and continue to be engaged with one another in conversations perhaps even heated debates in proper Jewish midrash fashion. About the nature of God the nature of our life on this earth, the nature of the end times the nature of all kinds of things and and perhaps. And perhaps the conversation will in its own unique way yield fruits that may not be the same as saying that they're going to give us the final conclusion of the thing that we're debating. You want to speak to that Paul. Sure. Let me, let me begin by kind of picking up where clay left off because the, the message he just gave here was, you know, another guy and our little listserv Raven Lue and he was my Old Testament professor at Calvin Seminary. David Howard, John stack I mean these were, these are the same guys, all of us know who these individuals were. They were formative in my life. You know the message clay gave there in terms of you've got to let the Bible be the Bible. Part of what tends to happen with that though is when you read the New Testament carefully it's it's it's very clear that let's use, for example, Peter preaching and Pentecost Pentecost is just around the corner so I'll be leaning towards there. Peter certainly believed, at least via Luke, that Joel was talking about him. And there's, there's a way. It's easy to say and I agree with it that to a certain degree you have to let the Bible be the Bible and it's very clear I think clay you laid it out very nicely that lately I've been preaching pretty hard. If you want to know how to navigate a culture war why don't you look at Jesus because if you read those Gospels Jesus is navigating an awfully ferocious culture war that many look at that and say, it's amazing he lived three years talking this way. And it's totally believable that on a various occasions they tried to get him either to, you know, King him or kill him all along the way because in that context. Wow, what he's doing. Yet, continually what you see with the people of God, especially in this Jewish tradition the people of the book is they keep re appropriating these texts. And so that is, I think, another process, we will continue to do and when we do that, many times as, as I think each of us could could give abundant examples of that we that we do violence to the text and we abuse the text and we basically turn the text into We have to have idols so that we can get our way that I think I think to have something as powerful within our tradition as the Bible is, we will almost certainly continue to to treat the Bible as an idol, and I think that is in fact a grievous sin that we We ourselves ought to be humble before it, treat it with great respect. And part of that respect is to look at a passage like clay laid out and say hey let's, let's back off a little bit this, this, you know this this bolt from the blue that gives us this direct application But at the same time I don't want to forestall that from happening. And so your question john is a good one. I think, I think we ought always to be in confessional conversation. Now, the way that intersects with our daily lives. There comes points when in communities decisions must be made, and they are difficult decisions and things, things fall out. My, you know, my unending cry to the church is Let's just do the best we can with this and I've been reading, I've been reading Carlos Eerie's reformations lately, and I know I know Ron over on CRC voices has been sort of, I've been quoting it a lot so he's a professional historian so he starts picking at us, usually what we do but that's that's That's academia. You know, Carlos Eerie makes the point of the Protestant Reformation that, you know, by the time Luther makes his move. And, you know, you look at Jan Hus, you look at all kinds of other pre reformational figures, all of this stuff was churning in Europe and it's also quite clear The Protestant Reformation only took the form it did in the particular places it did also informed by the politics, the local politics, you know you had the cantons in Switzerland, you had the, the very strange politics of the Holy Roman Empire by which you know Luther's Luther is not going to not going to let the Roman Catholic Church burn him at the stake. He's not going to, you're going to scroll you away in my castle for a while I'm not going to let them do that to you and go there suffer from your hemorrhoids in the castle for a few years, right out of right out of the New Testament. That's the way history unfolds. So, the. In some ways, the way the battle is playing out in the Christian reform church over same sex marriage and the way it played out with women in office, 2030 years ago. It's going to play out in many ways. A lot of things are set. But I think part of part of our calling is to. I've been blessed with a lot in the Christian reform church with respect to. We both have us have a serious desire to do justice to the Bible as the Word of God, and we have a serious desire to honor the realities of general revelation and what we can learn from science and what we know from psychology and sociology and now with this global world disrupted by the internet, how, you know, all of the different ways that we are disrupted. I really I really love your, your, your, your passion clay in terms of in 2016. I think we were, and continue to be by the broader culture asked to ask to come to decisions about things that in particular cases that we at this moment may not be in a in a position to make for people halfway across the country. And all of this is set in a context so john your answer is no this is there an endpoint to this, I doubt it. I don't, I agree with clay that part of what we find one aspect of understanding the Bible is in fact this ongoing conversation that we've seen that arises in the Christian Christianity with the conversations around Jesus and then later a few centuries later. How are we to regard this man, what does it mean for for us to regard Jesus as God and in fact in our own little estuary we have a biblical universalist that continues to dog me because he knows Church Fathers better than I do and so I now have to think about the Trinity and and and you know think about many of these issues. These issues are not going away. But all of the unitarian by the way. Yeah. All of this stuff though and I do believe that we have a hierarchy of values here, and at the top of the hierarchy for Christians is love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself. And that stands for those of us who embrace the Hutterburg catechism as a confession that stands right at the beginning of the catechism. This is how we are to treat each other. Okay. How shall we do that that doesn't necessarily make your answers simple and clear, but at least, let's begin there and also do the hard work of, you know, I really, I can, I haven't really have an extended conversation with clay but I can really see why, you know, why john you speak you spoke so highly of him and, and why this conversation was a good idea. So, so, you know I agree with you 100% here, Paul. You do the best you can, and I've, you know, I've been a pastor for a long long time, and realize that you make decisions and some of those decisions are going to have fall out and you do the best you can. What we've lost a bit is the, the factor we started here of loyalty but the factor of that we can we're loyal enough to each other we love each other enough that we can disagree. You know I remember being at a set at a Senate early on, and we were debating some issue I have no probably women in office but I don't remember and I remember a delegate yelling at me up the steps. And, but you know what, he didn't walk out and I didn't walk out. We were, we were in that together. I didn't want to say that the church. Now I'm talking, the big church has always had two ways to read the Bible. It has read it I'm going back to your Joel. Peter quoting Joel. And it's had the one way to read the Bible is to read it as they used to call it historically. And, and, you know, I have on my desk and I was going to read it for the length and I never got done. Gregory's life of Moses. So he does two readings of the life of Moses first one is historically, I mean as the best he could do at the time, and say okay, here's kind of what who the guy was and this is where the Bible goes and, and what you're trying to do is just get the kind of the facts down. And then you take a spiritual slant at it, and the Bible, and the, the churches have a lot of names for that it's sometimes called allegory sometimes called the Aria. It's called a lot of different things. And so, we need that second kind of reading, which is a reading that can only be done in community, and can only be done with a global sense of who God is and who Christ is, and so forth. You read it together for that in that second kind of meaning so I've always loved a paper that Walter Brueggeman did years ago, called something like I can't remember where that explode something like that. And he in that paper he talks about the fact that texts linger and one of the first ones he does is the one from Jeremiah about Rachel weeping for her children. And it doesn't have a very big role in Jeremiah, but then the course is picked up by Matthew, and it becomes a lament for the babies in Bethlehem that die. And then he takes it through a couple of other iterations and he ends up with Jonathan Kozl's book about the projects in New York some 20 or 30 years ago. And he, in Kozl's book, he singles out a woman who, for Kozl exemplifies the tragedy of living in those in those projects. And I remember Brueggeman talking about this book and saying, and you know what her name was. It could hardly be anything else. It was Rachel. And so, other people would say coincidence. We Brueggeman others would say, No, this is God rhyming through through through time, so that texts linger. But then they get new meaning in new context. So that's a little bit of, you know, I'd love to do, for example that Timothy passage about why women shouldn't speak, because I think that's one of those texts that explodes in with new meaning in a new context but I don't think we have time and I'm not really prepared to do it right now. But the whole idea that we need to read the Bible, we read it, not just as a, you know, whatever apparatus that makes a priesthood out of people like me. And I don't want to be a priest in that sense. But, but then we need that second reading, which the church has always been better at than that first one. You know we before we talked about this you're going to pick up th Lerman's second book. You know, I haven't read her second book yet I did read her, her, her first book, when God talks back, you know part of what strikes me and. And, you know, Clay, I guess I've been. Like I said I've been around more than you have be it because you've certainly been around plenty but there is a sense that second way of reading, despite the biblical ism of evangelicals Pentecostals and again I spent. I spent years as a missionary in the Dominican Republic. The, you know, the average educational level for a Haitian pastor of the people I worked with was a second grade education in Haiti. And, you know, would sit and listen to their sermons, which was a very interesting process, because you know sort of uncontaminated by stuff going on in our circles but lots of stuff going on in their circles. But that, that second way of reading and then the biblicism, which is often so poorly done in certain segments of the American church, those things come together too. And I mean how many sermons. You hear out there and you know that the biblical text is little more than the diving board for whatever it is the pastor really wanted to assault the congregation with that week, and I'm sure each of us have been guilty of that in our own ways to one way or another. You know it's a very. Let's do the Lurman. The first book just for a second because I think what you're what you're pointing out here is something I hadn't really thought of but I think it's accurate which is that the church always finds way to do that second reading. And it. So the what, just to give a little brief introduction here so what Tonya Lurman does in this book she's an anthropologist from Stanford. And she participates in and sits in Vineyard churches and studies them like an anthropologist she's also done some other religions but but that's kind of her prime field work. And what she noticed is that people were not very interested in the history of the text they were not interested in what I was taught in seminary that you needed to do you know, know the Greek and Hebrew and figure out what was going on in the culture at that time. What you do is you put yourself into the story so Jesus tells us this story or there's a story about Jesus, you put yourself in the story and you decide I'm going to be this character in the story or that character in the story. And there's a lot of sermons that do exactly that I preach a number of myself. And what, what Lurman says is that this is a way of escaping from the modernist kind of grip on which says, well the Bible doesn't mean that. Well, it's a way of spiritually participating in the reality of the Bible by immersing yourself in the story. That's an ancient way for the church to do this. Now the problem arises of course, and the reason why you need both readings is because that can kind of go all of flu flu you know and you can end up with people, concluding all kinds of crazy things on the basis of the Bible. That's why you need the community and you need the text itself. But at the same time, it recognizes that in this book is alive, the Spirit of God, and that how the Spirit of God addresses this word to us is not just something from the past, it's not just something from 2000 years ago and more, but something that's in the moment. And, and so maybe the theology of that doesn't always stand up, but it's something the church has done for ever. And can't help but do. Go ahead, john. Well, I want to go back to that, that court case of a billion dollars that will be decided by 12 peers. The conflict that we're talking about here and these two different ways of reading the Bible, and I think that either a community is able to unfold some people in that experiential way of reading the Bible and become a community in that fashion. Or, our church conflicts will be decided by ordinary people, not by big theologians but by ordinary people simply walking away. There's already. There's a lot of that happening but I think that I think that what what that really means is that, that, that I think there is almost a kind of a metaphor there that that the true meaning of the scriptures and its role in our lives are not to be decided by the theologians and the experts, but it will, in the end be decided by the way it invigorates communities of real people in real life in the real world. And I think that we don't spend quite enough time looking at that angle, I think. And I'll go a step further so my the conversation I had this morning I had with, which, because it's on race channel be later I had a conversation with rave Kelly, who does parkour in the Pacific Northwest. And he's sort of identifying now as a non theistic Christian and john verveke, who is a professor at University of Toronto, who has been, you know, a big part of the conversations in my little corner of the internet was raised a conservative Christian rejected He's been in and out of neoplatonism Buddhism, the whole variety of things. Now, trying promoting a religion that isn't a religion. He's a cognitive scientist by trade addressing the meaning crisis so on and so forth. And, you know, john was sort of asking rave Okay, you call yourself, you know, a, a, a non theistic Christian well Christian got the noun and not just to cut the adjective. There's a primacy there and and rave lays out something to the degree of, you know, Christianity is just so around us all over the place. Clayton I know you're a book reader. I don't know if you've read Tom Holland's dominion. You should very much put that on your list. Because what is happening now that I'm seeing with my work is that there are there are many people who are sort of discovering Christianity, they've got huge questions about the Bible, they've got huge questions about the about the church, but they're sort of discovering Christianity just because it's in the bones of our civilization. The story is so deeply penetrated our entire literary movie traditions that they are trying to come to grips with this and so john your point is right that you know the church sort of loses the church sort of loses Christians they sort of float out and I think this is part of what we're seeing politically on sort of the right and the left, or sort of the the main religion sort of continuing to be diluted just with more signal to noise questions and so I think the challenge really is as you know for those of us who are who are preachers and pastors is to is to help people connect the dots and help people say okay, here's where here's your where your source material is coming from. You might find it helpful to understand that all of this stuff going on out in the culture, whether it be a continual deconstruction of traditional sexuality, or whether it be questions of how to you know of what to do with let's say the colonial history of the church, or the whether it be a continual deconstruction of traditional sexuality, or whether it be questions of how to you know of what to do with let's say the colonial history of the West and its relationships with race and power so on and so forth. All of these things are coming out of a of a wrestling and conversations with a book. And, you know, the history of that is, is just enormous and far more complex than any of us have life enough to actually track down. Yeah, as you said, john, you know, quoting Jordan Peterson, you know we avoid this book at our peril, because how do we hear that how do we understand that and of course what Peterson was saying is this book is so utterly foundational to almost all of the conversations that we're having of course Peterson comes at it from his sort of his Jungian approach and on and on. But the conversation I had this morning wound up sort of winding up in the same place where here a guy who's was raised by people who are sort of on the On the fringe of, you know, people's movement hippie dumb. You know he was sort of raised wild in some way homeschooled but not in the Christian way and finds anthropology finds parkour becomes a new atheist with Sam Harris but then then sort of Buddhist but then Jordan P. I mean this is what people are making their way through. And I think that the Bible haunts at all because it's, you know, you scratch too far into it and there it is lurking beneath the West, and, and what churches have have been particularly poor at is is actually introducing people to the Bible in a way that John Vervecki said it I thought really well this morning is not see if I can find it is compelling but not compulsive. And I thought, yeah. And so, you know, for me, what my little journey into YouTube land has brought me is, you know, ways of trying to engage people and obviously I'm not their pastor they're completely free they can just turn me off in a minute if they want to. And I have to earn my way, you know I have to earn each additional minute they listen to, because it's more socially anxious to get up out of church and walk out. Usually you just kind of wait until the services open over and disappear. And never come back but you know the church has to in a sense. Now once again it no longer has the privilege of a of a position in society that earns it some supremacy, but the church has to find a way to engage and people one at a time or in clumps via social media to say, Here is a compelling story. It's a story that's who's rhyming you have probably always heard. And there's a lot of different versions out of there. Let me see if I can help clarify this for you up the revolution reduce the noise, improve the signal and say, you know, and then even offer a community to say, Okay, if you're interested in talking about this together hopefully people who know a little bit more than just foggy memories of grandma's interpretation. Maybe together we can make commitments to each other, build a few things, maybe even make the world a little better place, and we can do this journey together. Again, I, as you and I have been discovering john. There's an appetite for that. I think that's great. The, you know, I think the Bible is endlessly fascinating and generative of those kinds of things. If you don't try to put it in a box. So, that that yeah I'm, I'm. What I've been preaching lately is, if you want to do Christianity in this culture just start with Jesus. And, you know, I know there are some reasons why that some people think that that's not and it's probably not enough but but start with Jesus. And, and then, if you start with Jesus pretty soon you have to ask the question so who was this guy. And once you start to answer that question then you, you, you're really tracking with what the church did. So the church is asking that question and trying to figure it out. And, and I thought Rowan Williams said a brilliant thing he's in a section that I was reading just recently, which was that the reason why the church didn't throw out the humanity of Jesus, you know why The Gnostics of course tried to throw out the amount of Jesus is that it's just, it's really just God wrapped up in in what looks like human flesh. And he didn't really die on the cross. Actually, Simon died on the on the cross it was, you know, Jesus was was laughing by the side because he's got you know you can't die. And the reason why the church could never do that is because they believed fully in the suffering of Jesus and they could not be figure out how to deal with the suffering of Jesus without dealing with this humanity. And they realized that the suffering of Jesus wasn't just the suffering of Jesus, but was the suffering of all people. And as soon as you. As soon as you get to that you can you're no longer in a simple world, but you're in a world in which the infinite and the finite me in in that way so That's terrific. I think we I think we're at a good place to call this session I'd love to do it again with you sometimes clay. This has been tremendous. Yeah, yeah, let's let's figure it out. I'm always open to it. Good, good. And john of course john. John and I have another conversation plan to with. I don't know john's always got me in some scheme, but Happily so. Well, thank you, john. Well, this is wonderful and I'm glad it all worked out, and I think we covered some good territory. I think so too. So I will post this tomorrow morning on my channel, and I'll, you know, I again I really hope. I do know some CRC pastors, I have this both an audio form, you know, with a podcast and get that in the link below, because you don't really need the pictures for most of these conversations because it just does. So for some people just works easier on their smartphone to have audio, but I really do hope that My longing, you know, I'm so so happy clay that you opened by talking about being loyal because I am too. I'm the same way. You know I i don't, I'm going to stay with the Christian reform church, that's, that's what I want to do. It's my people now if the Christian from churches no longer there, and I got to make decisions but for now, these are my people and and I want us to do to do the best we can And within the tradition that we have which I think has been a really valuable tradition and it pains me to see it sort of diluted in the probably inescapable assimilation that is happening culturally, but it won't it won't go down without a fight. That's the way I look at it. So, thank you both. I'm going to stop the recording.