https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=phm46X_-mio

 All right, now I just read over your email this morning, I thought oh, this is gonna be fun. So I added a few things at the last minute. Okay, I think we've got enough for now, but a couple of things that maybe we can come up, you know, a couple of questions and ideas that I have. Yeah, I think we'll just have a few things to talk about this hour, so. I don't know if we'll be able to fill it, but we'll do our best. Well, why don't you first just tell us a little bit about yourself and we'll go from there. Sure, my name is Karam, I live in Toronto, Canada with my wife and three small children, all under the age of five. I'm a software developer and I have, you know, through obviously what happened with, you know, Dr. Peterson and sort of the second order, you know, like for example, you know, I've watched quite a few of your videos and Jonathan Peugeot's and a few others, you know, the supplemental, so I felt very interested in diving deeper into the religion that I was raised in, which is Catholic, Roman Catholic and Maronite Catholic, which is an Eastern rite, my background is Lebanese. And also from reading Nassim to live's work. And I think probably those things plus aging, plus having children has gotten me re-interested in religion and the implications of religion over generations, let's say. And tradition and culture and everything that goes with it. Does that make sense? Makes perfect sense. And one of the reasons why I jumped at the opportunity to speak with you, because I thought that you had a really good handle on not just the, and to be honest with you, I don't know the differences between the Catholic denomination versus others, Christians. Because my studying in school, I went to Catholic school and so I learned about Catholicism, which I'm rusty on, but I still have some of it. I learned about Judaism and then world religions. So I don't really have all those nuances. So I was interested in talking to you for those reasons, like what are the differences, but also because you have also a very strong grasp of sort of the intellectual side of what Peterson has been discussing and the, what would you call it, like the broader philosophical questions around the issues that he brought up. That makes sense, that makes sense. Keep going. So what exactly, I mean, what do you wanna do with this hour? Well, I have a lot of questions. And my first one that I didn't get a chance to write down. It's a pretty long list of stuff. So, and it was all great. Do you wanna lead? Like, do you wanna say like, what is your- No, I want you to lead. I get to lead all the time. Okay, so one of the things, there's a lot of things that I think about. And one of the things that I think about, especially around the time when, cause when Jordan Peterson was speaking with Sam Harris, I thought that was really demonstrating these two views. And I think Peterson for all of his, like I would go further than Peterson, to be honest with you, with a lot of things. And so one of the things that I thought about was how he would mention the importance of, you're an embodied individual, the importance of you to act in the world and not just have beliefs. That these beliefs need to manifest themselves in the world. And one of the gaps that I thought that he didn't really address was just a simple notion of going to church on Sunday. And through, because my son, this happened around the time my son was, my first son was born. And I was having some questions about whether I would baptize him or not. And my sister had already baptized my nephew. And we never really talked about religion and I was curious about that. I'm like, wait a minute, why did you baptize him? We hadn't talked about those things in a while. And she mentioned a few things that made sense to me and in hindsight make even more sense to me now. But one of the things is, and I've actually heard atheists say this, which is interesting because I know atheists who, in Toronto, or sorry, in Canada, we have a Catholic school board and a public school board. And they're both publicly funded. And so you can make the choice between sending your child to public school versus Catholic school. Really? And one of the implications is that, now I don't know exactly the rules, but I think it's at least one parent has to be baptized Catholic. So there's some requirements. And one of the things that you have to consider is that if the child is baptized as Catholic, then that just makes the whole process a lot easier. And it's the same situation with my wife and I. I'm baptized, she isn't. She isn't Catholic. So I thought about those implications as well, just from a practical point of view, that if I want him to attend a Catholic school. So sorry, so back to my point about the atheists. I know atheists who have enrolled their children in Catholic school because they say it's better to grow up with some values, even if some of the, what do you wanna say? Some of the supernatural beliefs, I don't know if that's the right way to, they don't believe in those things. And perhaps they don't even believe in God. Some of them are agnostic, some of them are atheists. And I find it fascinating that that doesn't work the other way around. Don't say, you don't have Christians or Catholics say, I would like my son or my children to be educated in a secular education. You don't have it go the other way around. And I think that's an important thing. And so while I was listening to Peterson and talking about how you need to act out in the world, I sort of came to this, my own conclusion, and then talking to my family and my father, I remember he said, well, it wouldn't hurt to baptize him. And I thought about like, that was all I needed to get going. And it's snowballed. So it snowballed. So it went from, okay, it's probably a good idea, just in case, just to baptize him, to leaving the, I remember leaving the baptism and thinking that was a very beautiful ceremony. I'm really glad we did that. And that priest especially, because I have comparisons to other baptisms, but that priest especially really believed what he was doing. He really did. And that made an impression on me. And then from that, I started to think, well, am I just the guy that shows up to get his baptized, his kids baptized, and then shows up at church once in a while? It's a tight knit community. It's an ethnic church. And so I started to think about that. And then as my children got older, I started to think about, and this is a lot of what the Seem to Live writes about. And this is something that I think needs to be, I think it'd be interesting to explore this more in some of these religious channels, is this idea of religion, and religion is many things, but religion as risk management. How do I ensure the survival of my offspring throughout time? And what did my ancestors use as risk management? And I think that embedded inside of religion are some risk management capabilities, let's say. And do we know, especially with, do we know what happens in the absence of beliefs? And I think today in our modern society, we get a glimpse of that. I think we get a glimpse of that in some places. The overemphasis on political discourse, trying to solve problems. Some people believe that they can solve all their problems through, through the state or through government. I don't know what your views are on that, but that seems to be what happens, especially on the radical left, let's say, socialists. And so as I was listening to Peterson and Sam Harris and your analysis of it, I felt that there was, the risk was not being properly addressed. I felt like they were very close to talking about risk, especially with, I recall the loaded, you know, the loaded gun analogy or metaphor? That's risk management. That's all risk management. And when Sam Harris said something to the effect that he couldn't, there's still a part of him that is superstitious. I remember he said superstitious, that he can't point a gun that he is 110% sure is unloaded at a child or at his child. And, you know, it's basic gun safety on one hand, but it's also risk management. It's not the risk of losing $10,000 in the stock market. It's the risk of losing your life. And so you need to act as though, and I think we're seeing this as well with the coronavirus at the moment, you need to act differently towards those types of risks that can ruin you. I'm just writing you down, I'm just writing what you're saying here down verbatim. Because bang, I mean, this is exactly why I do these conversations for what you just did right there. I mean, just, because it was just beautiful. Keep going. Sure, so I consider that there is something about the religion that my grandparents, by the way, my great grandfather was a priest. So there's something about the religion that maintains, maybe it maintains order, maybe it maintains community, maybe it does a bunch of stuff. And whether you understand what it's doing or not, it's doing something. And this idea that you're not smarter than tradition, you don't have time to figure everything out on your own, that there are certain milestones in life that if you miss them, you may not be able to recover from them. And for me, this explains a lot about tradition. It explains a lot about the conflicts I had when I was younger with the older generations of people in my family. And their insistence on getting a good job, getting a good education, finding the right person to marry, having children. I think all these things are built into tradition and religion for a purpose. And these are, perhaps they're even simple, simple solutions to problems that that you don't have to encounter in life, that you don't have to deal with them. So you can go on with your life to solve bigger problems. So I think a lot about that and how I'm passing something on because of my age and where I am in the generations. I am currently, I mean, unfortunately, I think we're all in this process, but at different stages, but I'm in the process of losing the older generation. I have, the people that are the generation above me are at this point where they're starting to pass away again. It kind of goes in waves. And I wanna make sure that I maintain whatever it is that they did to make sure that I'm in the position that I'm in now. I wanna ensure that that gets passed on to my children. And some of it is basic financial advice, but some of it may be not so apparent in the belief system. And I don't wanna risk removing anything when I don't know exactly how it works. It's something akin to Chesterton's fence, which Brett Weinstein actually pulls out every, he pulled that out in his conversation with Sam Harris. Chesterton's fence. Do you know Chesterton's fence? Not familiar with that. So if you're walking through a field and you see a fence, in the field, you might say, this is a stupid place for a fence. Why on earth is there a fence here? You might say, well, it's a fence. Why on earth is there a fence here? You as an individual in that moment in time, see absolutely no reason why there's a fence there. But the reality of the fence should indicate to the wise person, someone at some point in time decided to exert enough energy to put up a fence in this place for no reason that may be obvious to me. The unwise person says, this fence is stupid, destroy the fence. The wise person says, this fence may be inconvenient, this fence may be annoying, this fence may be troublesome, but before I take down the fence, I should perhaps investigate the reason behind it. The difficulty that I find with atheistic worldviews is that they're in a sense, all the way back to first causes, presume there is no first cause. And if there is no first cause, dominoes start to fall over. And therefore at that point, what you have is the annoyed individual walking through the field, encountering the fence, has in a sense of bias to say, I'm the master of my domain, I see no reason for this fence, let it be gone. Oh, okay. And then you discover that there's some, maybe the reason is no longer there for the fence, that could be. But the fact of the fence should lead the wise to say, maybe I should investigate the fence. And what that, basically what wisdom is in that sense is the understanding of our smallness, our temporality, our limitations, and that there are reasons and causes out there in the world that I may not have encountered, but it is, I love how you put this in the scope of risk management. And so the wise would say, it's prudent to, before I go knocking down the fence, to try to figure out why this fence is here. And maybe for some reason, I will discover this fence is no longer needed, and I can go and I'll remove the fence and there won't be a problem. Or maybe there is a reason for this fence and that reason persists, and I would be wise to leave the fence in place and maybe adjust myself and my preferences because of the fence. Yes, yes. And that goes also, so another thing that that causes me to think about is, again, that black swan idea, that's something that doesn't appear in the data with a negative or perhaps a positive consequence might appear. What if there's something in religion that only comes around every 500 years? You wouldn't experience that for a couple of generations, but maybe it comes back. And what was amazing to me was, so what Brett Weinstein was talking about this with Alastair McGrath, Brett Weinstein brings up this little group in Indonesia, this little religious sect that had these ideas, this story about basically the hungry tide, that when the tide goes out too far, well, you know, and they have this entire story that says, well, you'd better head for high ground even though you live on boats. And well, basically what their religion did was function in order to save that group of people and all of the secularists, some of them might've had a little bit of knowledge about tsunamis and the like, and would've said, oh, we should go up. But the vast majority of people who thought themselves smarter than these, the strange archaic little religious group, they didn't pay any attention and many of them died. So again, I remember that. Yeah, and I think that was, and I think you're right. That was definitely beneath a lot of what Peterson is sort of built into his position on religion, that here's wisdom of past ages. We don't, we ought to be very careful in just sort of setting things aside because, and I think you just articulated it very well, events come up once in 500 years, once in a thousand years, Brett Weinstein rather glibly in the conversation with Harris and Peterson, I think in other places have sort of walked some of that back, basically said, well, he hasn't really walked it back. He basically said, well, this stuff, these stories and encapsulate knowledge that is, he would say, I think mostly obsolete. Peterson would jump in and say, but can you really know what is and isn't obsolete? That's where risk management comes in. And risk management says, well, I can take risks, but I should, the wise understand what they are doing and are prepared to face the consequences. So I love how you just framed this out. And so I started reading, so Talib has come up in a number of conversations. And so he kind of his books, he's got four books and they kind of go in order. So I started on the first book, but I'm so ADHD. Then I jumped into Douthit's book and, I'm listening to a video right now by Menchus Moldbug. And I mean, I'm just, and the pandemic happened. So I'm just way too ADHD to often to get through stuff. And until it finally sort of reaches a crest for me of, I can't ignore this book anymore. I have to power through and learn this. But this is, but I think, what you laid out is also a very different take from the way a lot of modern apologetics have gone after things. And a lot of modern apologetics is modernist and basically couched in the enlightenment. And what someone like Nathan Jacobs points out with his work is that, so a lot of these people deconstructing Christianity and going off into what is basically a more contemporary form of paganism. They are basically have left the enlightenment behind. And so when contemporary Christian apologists come and want to argue about truth and justification of knowledge and all that, people just look at them and like, I don't care about those things. But risk management is a much deeper level that people, there are some real biological roots to us. And something like a pandemic as, was it Samuel Johnson said, something to the effect that, Gallows has a way of focusing the mind. A pandemic has a way of focusing the mind for a broad number of people. And that focus of the mind then, suddenly begins to reorient things. And if a lot of the atheists were right in the way they talk about religion, well then their prophecies would be correct and that religion would sort of go away. But their prophecies are incorrect, which might lead one to believe, well maybe they're not seeing it right. And risk management, even though it's not a terribly glorious thing that preachers necessarily like to pick up on, it's real and it's relevant. And you're right. And it's one of the reasons religion does not go away. And I think it's a passage from Isaiah that talks about locking yourself in your home until the wrath passes. I think it's, oh yeah, this has been going around. I believe. And I saw that and I said, yeah, of course this isn't the first time we've had to deal with a pandemic. And I wonder, I have a couple of other big themes, but the other thing I wonder about is, is modernity flattening everything out so much that we think we have a handle on it? You know, your day for your typical person in a modern, let's say, let's just say first world country just to make it simple. You know, get up, go to work, do this routine throughout your day, save a little bit for your retirement, pay down your mortgage, pay down, save for your kid's education. And the peaks and the variance of life maybe has been flattened out a little bit, or maybe we perceive it as being flattened out more than we think. I think maybe this pandemic is gonna change things, who knows? But is there a relationship there with, because I tie that in through risk management, maybe people don't believe that we need religion anymore. And this is a big question that I have that I don't know if anyone has a good answer for this, that why is it that, so for example, from my tradition, you know, I'm a Christian, but Christian from a part of the world where Christians are a persecuted minority. And that is like fiercely held onto it. I don't know if you saw on Twitter that Nassim Taleb and Brett Weinstein had a huge little blow up on Twitter about this, that I can't remember if Brett said something slightly disparaging about Christianity, and Nassim jumped on him. And Eric tried to, this is like a little family drama now, Eric Weinstein tried to jump in and say, well, you have to understand that, you know, Nassim is coming from this, from a completely different perspective where you have to guard this thing from a majority. And so what I find interesting though is, you know, immigrants, as they bring their religion with them to these like Western secular societies, over a generation or two, they also lose a bit of their faith through the generations. And I've noticed it, and some people have said, and I don't know what the exact arguments are, is that Christianity somehow, it has something built into it that just somehow it disintegrates. I don't believe that, but I also, because for a couple of reasons, one, that I see some of the secularism as Christianity without the God or without Jesus. And then I also see Sikhs, Hindus, even Muslims, that they also seem to go through this process of secularization as they integrate with Western society. And I don't know if you have a handle on this, but is it the flattening that we don't have these, you know, periods of good times and bad times outside of just very simple, narrow, boom and bust economic cycles? You know, like, I don't know what's happening there, but it seems to me that there's something bigger than just, well, you know, we don't need this anymore. This is amazing. You probably haven't had time to watch today's video. Not yet, no. Oh, you're gonna enjoy it. So on the video that I just released this morning, I read a bunch of GK Chesterton's, it's the last chapter before the conclusion in The Everlasting Man. And in it, he goes into exactly the point you just laid out. Chesterton says Christianity has this dynamic, and Peugeot has basically been saying a very similar thing. Chesterton says Christianity has this dynamic where it grows old and dies. And people don't quite know what to do with that. But Chesterton also says it grows old and dies and then resurrects. Sometimes it's killed in youth. Sometimes it grows old and dies, but it never dies. It resurrects, it keeps coming back. That's the end. So Chesterton, the title of Chesterton's chapter is The Five Deaths of Christianity, something like that, where Christianity keeps coming back. And I think he's right, and I think Peugeot is right. Because, well, okay, let's set that over there. And now let's talk about immigrants and let's talk about secularization. Because if Tom Holland is also correct, and I think he is, and this isn't original to Tom Holland, but he picked up on it, secularization is also a form of Christianity. It's in some ways late stage Protestantism, okay? And it's in many ways a viral religion that ironically atheists, oh, what a time, what a moment. Atheists are in some ways the asymptomatic carriers of this. And so Sam Harris, what Sam Harris is doing, sort of like all these asymptomatic COVID virus carriers, what Sam Harris is doing is basically infecting immigrants and many in the world to this shadowy form of Christianity this sort of deadly version, which is late stage secularism. And this version, sort of like the COVID virus, has spread all over the world. It's in India, it's in Africa, not so much in Africa, but Christianity and Islam are coming through there, but it's in Asia, it's in Japan, it's in China. China has a big case of it, of course, because of communism. And what this sets up is, I think, perhaps, Chesterton's dynamic where Christianity just keeps coming back up. And I think you're exactly right in this, in that, so why don't people go to church? Why doesn't Jordan Peterson go to church? Jordan Peterson doesn't go to church because he doesn't see any reason for it. He doesn't see any reason for it. Why would I go to church? And he says, you know, one of his videos, it's like, well, you know, yeah, I could just listen to some kind of moral exhortation. There's value in that. You know, when I was talking to, I don't know if you saw my conversation with this YouTube atheist named Voush. You wanna watch that. So, you know, cause Voush is like, well, people should want to be together and have community. And I said to him, I said, well, when you travel, do you stay in a hostel or a hotel? Because the difference between a hostel and a hotel is other people. And he said, well, I stay in a hotel. And at that point, he knew exactly where I was going. I said, why? Well, because people are messy. Yeah, and you want a nice clean room. And in some ways, the hotel is risk management because other people are not only messy, they're also risky, but you stay in a hotel. Well, it gets to a point in my conversation with him when it becomes abundantly clear what he's asking for is, you know, what if, well, we should teach people that they should like have community and get together and be tolerant of one another and be, you know, wrestle with each other's problems and bear each other's burdens. I said, yeah, you know, maybe like if there would be weekly meetings that people would go to and someone would give a little talk about, you know, the values of the community, something like that. Who would design such a thing and what would it look like? And there'd probably be rituals that develop. I mean, you just. But then you have to ask the question, atheists have tried to, in a sense, copy the church. But as I think is fairly obvious, people respond much more directly and passionately to risk than they do to aspiration. You know, I would go every week to a place that would give moral exhortation and where I could have community. Well, why don't people do it? Well, because moral exhortation isn't really the nicest thing to listen to all the time, especially if we don't feel we need it. And people are messy and dangerous. So it's much easier to not go to church and to just live within my own little bubble until there's a pandemic or something. And then very quickly, well, boy, someone should be looking out for the neighborhood. I wonder who should do that. Well, what has happened, there's also been a very interesting dynamic over the years, which is that, so you have the Roman Empire, and when the Roman Empire sort of collapsed, what sort of took its place? Well, it was the bishops in the town that would, you know, provide some leadership and care for hungry people and begin to provide the infrastructure. And so then the church in the West sort of sets the template and the framework for what the state will grow into. And in time, the state takes over a lot of the things that the church used to do. And, you know, then the state takes on things like religious toleration and things like that. So the state just grows and grows and becomes more and more effective. And the church just hangs around on the fringes as this sleepy society. Now you have a pandemic come through and you have people like Eric Weinstein and Brett. And then I was listening to Mention Smallbug and they're saying things like, well, you know what? Just look how poorly the state is functioning. The state isn't functioning so well. Well, you know where there are networks of people who will reach into their own pocket and share with one another? Well, there's families. Yeah, but families are their own kind of weird microcosm that are tricky. Then there's these things called churches, where in my church, we have a phone tree, so everybody in the church gets a phone call every week. How are you doing? How's everything going? Have enough food? Everything going okay? Okay, sounds great. Talk to you next week. That's what we're doing. Why are we doing that? Well, we're doing that because, well, we're brothers and sisters. Oh. And you're exactly right in terms of immigrants coming in a sense, and this is Tom Holland's point is that, well, you go into the West and it's just Christianity everywhere but it's the David Foster Wallace, what is water? Well, it's just Christianity everywhere and right now the state, where we're going to put the economy at risk, so we're going to try to preserve the life of old and poor people and homeless people. It's like, yeah, gosh, kind of sounds like Jesus, doesn't it? Jesus isn't gonna get mentioned, but suddenly everybody's Christianity comes out and that's what the state should do. Oh, but we don't want to get religion involved. Oh, okay. But I think you just laid out all of the pieces here. I think you're right. So, Nassim Tlaib hears the dismissive things that Brett Weinstein says on Twitter about religion and he's been geared by generations to react and lots of Christians have. And again, those reactions and responses, it's not unlike if you're, my grandmother on my father's side, the Christian Informed Church is not a key totaling denomination, but she had real issues with alcohol. Well, why? Because one of her brothers was an alcoholic and so she had those reactions her whole life. And in a lot of cases, those reactions aren't necessarily helpful, but they're built in for a reason and I think you really laid it out nicely that risk management in terms of a very long view, very communal is deeply embedded in religious beliefs. And just like all sorts of practices that were common in the generation, really my grandparents' generation, save a lot of money, have a garden. Pump money into the church and build that institution because your life depends on it. Well, if you look at the world they lived in, their behaviors we would call rational. And if you look at the video I just released today, I think actually, and it dawned on me reading Douthat and then Chesterton, rationality, if you understand it in the way that John Verbecky talks about it, rationality is downstream of religion because religion is the far broader category. And I think you're exactly right that Peterson was, he was sort of feeling that out and describing it, but he couldn't quite nail it within the ways that he liked to nail down truth and knowledge because that's a big thing for him. But that was very much the door he was knocking on. Yes, I think that's also, that could be potentially the academic in him, the psychologist, and especially what he's going through right now, which I feel horrible about what he's, I don't know if you've seen what's happening with him now. And that is again a risk, that he was taking a drug that for some people has the opposite effect of what it's supposed to do for you. And so that's something that unfortunately has played out for him that not recognizing that. And then the other big theme that, and I think it ties into this, that not only risk, but also aesthetics. I go to church and I go to a particular church because I enjoy the aesthetics and I sacrifice meaning in the sense of I am not a fluent speaker of Arabic and I don't always know what's being said, although we do have screens that have translations. And there's also some Syriac parts of the mass, like in Aramaic. And so I am very much attracted to the sounds of those chanting and look, part of it could be because that was what I was raised with. So for example, my father was raised in a Latin, for Vatican II. And so he prefers the Latin chanting. And I think that's, how could you prefer that? That's not as good, right? So there could be a nostalgia element or an imprinting in there from my youth, but I go there for aesthetic reasons. And I don't think that atheists have addressed that correctly, the aesthetics, whether you're talking about the architecture in Europe or other parts of the world, the works of art, the music, any of these things that have lasted, we could call the test of time, that these things are so good that they end up being preserved over, let's say, maybe thousands of years and generations. And when I, I told you that in my notes there that I was reading Leviticus, and then when I went to church, I have these like tiny little, they're not even revel, I don't wanna call them revelations because they're not that great, but they're just these tiny little things I noticed that the priest approaching the altar and asking to be cleansed of his sins so that he could do his duty, that's way older than Christianity. I think it's older than Judaism. We don't know how old it is because we don't have, I think it goes back before we have history, before we have things written, that there's something to that. There's something about having a burnt offering. There's something about all these things. And I don't think we can just get rid of it. So there's an aesthetic issue that I don't think is being addressed. We see it, we see it in architecture, we see it when we look in the music. Music doesn't have any staying power right now. None of these things seem to have any staying power because it seems like they've just been disconnected from tradition, even more than religion, I would say. And sometimes they bubble up once in a while and you'll get, like right now, I think we have a lot of electronic music that sounds like 80s music. So it's going back to a certain period. But when I tell people I listen to old music and they're like, oh, like the 80s, like the 70s? What are you talking about? And then I pull out my phone and show them something on YouTube that I found. And they're like, oh. And I was telling somebody that I only read old books and she was trying to tell me, well, this book is 30 years old that I'm recommending to you. Because I told her I wasn't interested in it. And I'm like, 30 years? No, no, I'm trying to get through all the classics like Aristotle and Marcus Aurelius, all these things that I haven't read yet on my own, but I hear about. So I keep coming up against this in conversations with people. And I don't know if you have a take on this, but I really like, part of it's intellectual, part of it's risk management, part of it's forming a community. Like I was saying, supplementing some of the people that I'm losing in my family with people around me that share those things. Like I don't have to say certain things with them when I'm talking to them. And slowly forming friendships over time with people who have children the same age as me and coming across these similarities. I don't know how you, it seems like all this stuff is taken care of for you. But yeah, but sorry, back to what I was saying earlier that I noticed these rituals that they're very old. They're extremely old. And I think it's very foolish to just say that fence doesn't need to be there, like as you put it earlier. I think that makes a lot of sense. No, I think you're dead on right with this too. And I don't know if you remember, but again in that first Vancouver talk, they really didn't need the other three. But in that first talk in Vancouver with Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson and Brett Weinstein, Sam Harris again said, well, I don't care about the music and the architecture and the art and all that stuff that religion was producing. And Jordan Peterson jumped in and said, basically, well, you have no understanding of why and how all of that came to be. You said, well, that's not religion. And it's like, you just have this colossal category misunderstanding, Sam, and you're revealing just how little you actually know to the world with a statement like that. Peterson was a little bit more gracious than that. But that, and again, you just nailed it. There was a guy, do you know who Rob Bell is? No. God bless you. Rob Bell grew up evangelical. He's one of these early guys to deconstruct. He planted a mega church in Grand Rapids, Michigan took over a mall and then eventually, sort of kept deconstructing out towards Oprah and all of that. His first sermon series he ever did was on Leviticus. And I, a few years ago, I decided I was gonna go through the whole Bible and try real hard not to skip stuff. And so of course, Genesis is great fun. First half of Exodus is a lot of fun. Second half of Exodus gets tough, but then you hit Leviticus and it's like, oh boy. But a couple of things you begin to recognize very quickly. Number one, hardly anybody has a really good handle on that book. There's like just a few commentaries out there that seem to really be getting at things. Number two, that book is really important and we have no idea what to do with it. And for a lot of the reasons that you just laid out. Oh, sorry to interrupt you. The reason why I like Leviticus is because, or why I went to Leviticus is because that is one of the books that the atheists always bring up as why the Bible has problems in it. And so I'm actually using the atheists to guide me through the Bible. That's really fun. But I didn't have the reaction that I think that they, maybe they're not actually. Yeah, I know there's a line in there about men who lie with men, right? Being put to death in that. Leviticus 18. Yeah, people, but there's also lines in there about being gracious to people who are, like people who, what are they? The sojourners. Sojourners, that's it. They're homeless people, not in a sense that they don't have a house or a tent, but in the sense that they're dislocated or maybe their tribe has been destroyed or their tribe has been destroyed by famine. And so now they're refugees essentially. That's what they are. Yeah, and I don't have experience with, so I've been to Lebanon once, and I can tell you that people are very hospitable. I mean, I know that already, but there's a hospitality, and we can call the Middle East, that we don't have necessarily in the West. And as long as you're not threatening and whatever that means, you will be invited to dinner, you will be invited in for coffee, you will be expected to stay for dinner, and everything is laid out for you. Even if you just met this individual, it's built into the culture. So when I read that in Leviticus, I wasn't surprised by it. I was like, yeah, that makes sense. People in that part of the world are still like that. And I think you're exactly right in noticing it from a risk management aspect, because built into that says, things fall apart. Things fall apart regularly. Things fall apart that humanity has no control over. And this scales in sort of a fractal way. Things fall apart on a big level, not very often. Things fall apart on a small level, usually within everybody's lifetime, at least once, sometimes multiple times. Some people every week, I can name names. Some people make them fall apart every week. They just do it themselves. So, and if you understand these things about humanity and you read the Bible, you begin to say, yeah, this is of a whole. They fit together. And so, you know, gosh, these things. So when you understand the story of Sodom and Gomorrah, and you understand the story at the end of the book of Judges, where Gibeah is basically acting like Sodom, something's going on there. Now, people, of course, point to Sodom and Gomorrah because of the whole same-sex issue. But there are far deeper conversations. In fact, the video I plan to make today, I have two conversations today, and then I wanna make a video, then I have to work on my sermon. But part of the reason the West, part of the reason the atheists are doing what the celebrity atheists are doing what they're doing, because not all atheists are doing what the celebrity atheists are doing by any means, but is because they really don't understand what the Bible is talking about, and why and how the Bible intends to function in a community. Because the Bible, and again, part of this is the fault of the church. Christians want to have their daily devotion time, their personal quiet time, and read the Bible, and all that's good stuff. But the Bible was written to communities that were primarily had oral tradition, where you've got, once it gets dark, and you're sitting around the fire, what are you gonna do? Well, that's when you're going to instruct the youth on the kinds of things that they can't learn, or that they're not learning when the sun is up, and when they're out there working, and hunting, and doing what they need, or dealing with the village. And so the Bible is from that world, at least especially the Old Testament. But then there are more epics, so then the Bible is from the world where empires are expanding and gobbling up the little kingdoms, and the tribes, and the peoples, and the cities. The Bible is from that world. And there's wisdom from that world for us to benefit from. Because the patterns, and this is where Peugeot was such a genius. I mean, the patterns don't go away. They get instantiated in different times and places, but when you see the fence, the wise say, hmm, there's a fence. Wonder why that's there. Better leave it there. Maybe I'll leave it there my whole life long, and maybe my grandchildren will suddenly discover that's why the fence is here. And they'll be blessed by it. Maybe we should maintain it and fortify it even, rather than rid of it. And it's an end, so we'll make a little bridge over it, or we'll have a little work around as need be. And of course, that can get silly too, that Tim Keller has this great story where he was planting this church, he's pouring all kinds of hours into this church. He was a church planter in New York City, and he's feeling really guilty about all the time he's spending away from his wife, and he comes home one day and he finds his wife, they're living in this apartment building on the patio, she's got a hammer, and she's got these dishes that were given as a wedding gift, and she's smashing them. And he thinks, oh no, her smashing the wedding dishes are a statement about how she's feeling about the marriage. He goes out there ready to utterly apologize to his wife, and she says, I got a whole bunch of these saucers that I don't have the cups for, so I'm getting rid of them. So life is full of that kind of thing too. Yes. But I love how you laid all this out in terms of understanding this as risk management, and seeing that as, well, and actually it's a way of, in Christian terms, why would God give us a religion and tools for risk management? Well, because he loves people. Yeah, and actually if I could just add one more thing to that risk management is that hero's journey, I think that was a call to action. I think Peterson is dead on about that. Those stories that, the story that Osiris and Seth and Horace, I don't think those stories were just said purely for entertainment. Those I think were, and I think his analysis of them is right, putting your father back together, or putting tradition or culture back together, but it's also that you may be the father and you may have to go out there to be destroyed for the benefit of the younger. That's right, that's right. And I don't think that we fully understand, and that's why I like listening to Peugeot as well, is he really gets it that these symbols, they're not just symbols, they're not just stories, they're not just the underlying hierarchy of movie, creating heroes in movies. This is what you're supposed to do with your life. Yeah. And the other side of risk is sometimes you need to go out there and to say, to hell with risk, I'm gonna go out there and be destroyed. That's right, that's right. And again, this is also what I think Peugeot is really good at and better than the modernists, because Peugeot understands that the ancient world understood that there's center and periphery, and when order, when there's proper order, there's center and periphery. And so, I think that's what Peugeot is really good at. And when order, there's center and periphery. Leviathan still plays in the deep. Now, when it comes to new heavens and new earth, and there's no longer any sea, well, what's that mean? Well, we don't really know, but it also gives hope, but Peugeot nicely lays this stuff out and translates it to a contemporary audience, but it's still true, so people start to get it, at least some people, those who have ears to hear, begin to get it. It's a good and beautiful thing, but this is why, again, it's the impoverished community that doesn't understand religion and church, and blessed are the obsolete and the archaic and the people who do things that don't make sense to other people, because probably if they inherited it, there was probably a reason for that fence, and they will someday be blessed because of it. And even though things do change and technology has disrupted, we talk about technology as if we've only had it for 200 years. Well, when people start, when anybody makes fire with flint and steel or rubbing sticks together, guess what? It's technology. Yeah, and especially so is metal. When metal can become a shield or a sword, that was a huge technological advancement, and it caused a lot of damage. Yep, yep, a lot of disruption. Well, I am afraid we are out of time, but I would love to speak with you again sometime, because this was absolutely amazing, and one of these days, I wanna get myself up to Toronto, and I would be honored to shake your hand, because what you just laid out here, I think it certainly made my day. I don't wanna speak to whoever I talk to next, but this was, and let me just say this now, please tell me the truth, and any answer you give me is okay with me, but I would love to share this conversation on the channel, because I think you just opened up a whole new vein that I think many, many people will find tremendously helpful. Sure, go ahead, yeah. Okay. It was a pleasure speaking with you. I've gotten a lot out of it, and I hope we can speak again when I have some more ideas to share with you. Yeah, shoot me a note, and we'll definitely talk again. Okay, thank you, Paul. Thank you, have a good day. You too. Bye-bye.