https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OSUkbIj41yY

 Like scholastic metaphysics? No. You know what? I tune out on ethereal stuff Because almost always I Interpret it as a smoke screen for other shit I'm really sorry that I say that but I believe that a smoke screen for other shit. Yeah If I don't get it, it's not real Or no, that's not my point. My point is that there are so many people that hide behind the academic secondary reflection because they are unable to cope with or focus on or deal with the primary experience. What is the primary experience? Much more relational much more existential I understand you want the agricultural communal utopia to be brought into being That's usually done by academics, so I should be reading that book Are we live by the way? Oh, yes, we are. Oh, I knew it was much Just just giving y'all a little taste see here you here you are on the phone. This is what you look like Oh, that's just lovely. That's that's what you look like my life one recording at a time Well folks we're not killing each other yet just for the record and this is how we roll And there's just a little fork just a little just a little inside view of what the conversations are like Which you may or may not see because it may get edited out. I don't know. This was fairly No, and terrible to yesterday's meetup. I think friendly disagreements where I'm right and And People People sharing their opinions jokes aside yesterday was Was very very nice So we had a meetup in that bethany and bellflower bethany christian from church and bellflower We had about 15 people in attendance the contrast with Tucson almost palpable in that 35 people can talk at each other, but usually not with each other and This was really intimate and Lend itself very well to really really cool deep conversation. So I I was I was Jazz that was great We had Nicole who was in the comment section. She was able to be there. She looked quite close to the church Joseph who I had a conversation with oh a number of months ago From Los Angeles some of you might remember him works in aerospace He brought a friend who really made wonderful He is he is on the journey as he said himself a soft agnostic. That's a term you don't hear too often. Yeah We had another older gentleman who shared some of his experiences and he brought his he came with his wife and and I think many of us were quite fascinated by his story. He had Grown up as a Christian and a number of years ago Given it all up became a atheist Marxist had a militant atheist militant atheist Marxist had a had a How should we describe the experience the call experience mystical experience that was his choice of words in his backyard and seen himself getting increasingly cynical and Tried to pray and his attempt at prayer Triggered a mystical experience that happened for an extended period of time which completely transformed his life and What a joy to you have summer come out to a meet-up and share a story like that Along ways to get there. Yeah. Yeah, so Excited to have him there a couple of wonderful people from the church were there around. He was there There's the young man who right screenplays. Yeah, we're gonna try and not say names You just said Nicole I did but she's in the comment section. Oh, yeah, Ryan doesn't want to be out it. That's right John So no it was a it was a terrific meetup one of the things that job expressed was Now two meetups in a row people have had a lot of interest in question about his status and his story Yeah, we we also did a podcast What's the name of the podcast faith over breakfast faith over breakfast? I put a link to it in the in my feed on YouTube and I posted a link in Twitter We could we recorded two podcasts one with myself and John and the other with myself and job and that second one with job Job goes through in quite a bit of detail his story I thought that was a really nice summary of your journey and your story so far. I Recorded some video of recording of both of those podcasts, which will come out on the channel In the next little while I don't particularly have good upload speeds from a lot of these places So some of that might wait till next week. So that's coming forward What what in your opinion? separated the two What were the value of both of the the meetups that we had in their differences Tucson and here and in? bellflower Well, I think that Tucson had its own value in that it definitely exposed a lot of people to the concept Within the church within the philosophy group and then people from the channel, you know They all got to meet each other and there's some there's something important about that but this but the large numbers also kind of made it more difficult to Get kind of below the surface a little bit and that went a lot better at the at the Bethany Meetup, so I thought that was probably the more significant difference Yeah in Tucson you definitely felt you like you were part of this big group and he was just close way more face to face and That that really at some point instead of so we what you didn't do something Okay, let's have somebody ask a question of another then the question gun it gets passed along and here eventually became a conversation people weighed in gave each other space and You could tell that some people really had been waiting to come here and talk about things. They've been working on Yeah, that's they were so great. I Was kind of writing my own recollection of the event and I did so great to see That that this thing fulfilled a need that would have otherwise just kind of set with I think Set with the person who well would have had to find another outlet to share with with others and to get feedback Yeah, because yeah, you know the feedback is the most important what other people think about my ideas. I Think part of especially with some of these Initial meetups, we don't know if we don't have any plans right now for Bellflower We've done two introductory meetups in Bellflower over the last couple of years at some point If we find the right place and the right leaders and enough critical mass for people would be nice to get something more regular But I think for a lot of people the opportunity To share and do a little bit of external processing with others. I was I was profoundly impressed by the Transparency and openness of the participants last night They they really they shared of themselves they shared well Engaged with each other. Well, that was that was That was lovely to see one of the things that I did notice was that I have a Jordan Peterson appreciation society Meetup group which I inherited from someone in Long Beach. I took over the Organizer role for that group and So I advertised this event specifically to that group and There are a hundred members in that group None of them showed up so the meetup Platform as such and I I was very intentional about sending messages to each of those hundred people So either they have their messages turned off or else they simply ignored the fact that they were specifically invited to a specific event related to a conversation about Jordan Peterson and in the broader sense of the word That Either that ship has sailed or you know, there were other reasons why why none of them showed up Of course, it was a weekday that is always an obstacle to get from link from Me to get yeah, but to get from Long Beach to get from Long Beach to Bellflower would have been a you know Hop skip and a jump so I don't I don't see any really good reason why traffic would have been an obstacle but Yeah, so did you inquire why? Why did none of that happen? I just got up. I Barely had my breakfast You tend to be sort of on the ball when it comes to getting things Skipping I had to fill the Humminbird feeders and stir the peanut butter I haven't been able to clean my room because I had to feed the hummingbirds. I take responsibility for their suffering They were neglected as long as I was on the road, yeah, you're just enabling these hummingbirds by giving them sugar water Well, you know, I think the I mean it's a The we use meetup.com to publicize the meetings But it is an imperfect tool. I think we're all used to that I don't know and obviously we're doing it through the videos and that is Is drawing some people I know that the the nuance forum in in Nashville limits their meetings to 20 people we haven't we haven't done that especially with initial meetings What do you think is gonna happen at tonight's meeting? Because tonight's meeting a little bit is a little different because you have a you have an established group My regular guys will for the most part be there and I've heard from several other people That do not normally attend that they will also be there And you have some followers that That from the channel who said that they would come and I made a couple of inquiries From some individuals to see if they would be here and they will be here So, I don't know. I wouldn't be surprised if we have between 15 and 20 people into them. Okay, okay Okay, I hope to see some folks. I met last year. That would be nice Do what do you think in terms of? So the first meeting I came at it was a new meeting we kind of did the first meeting around Second meeting that I was here. We kind of did some question and answer I spoke a little bit more at that meeting. What do you think about for tonight's meeting given that it's a it's an established group and They already have I would imagine Established conversations with each other. They know each other quite a bit more deeply How do you think that's going to impact the conversation tonight? I Don't think there would be a whole lot wrong with sticking to the predictable Introductory format to continue to do that. I think there will be enough new people there that That will that will be valuable and not only that but it's sort of it's something that is sufficiently Familiar so that it will create a level of comfort for the majority of people there to say We have this ritual this is what we do and so I think that that would be helpful Beyond that I liked the thing that you did with asking each other questions and I'm thinking that actually worked very well last night What you did to say hey, you know, we're all here together and you can ask me questions if you want But that opportunity exists all the time anyway online Here you see people face to face you may not know much about them There may be things you want to ask them based on their introductory remarks So sure or what's an idea that you're struggling with what something you'd like to get feedback on Yes, that tends to be what I'd like to hear way more about scholasticism and so I might ask you about that tonight Oh that works. Yeah, I'll explain it to you. We'll create the you know, the Marxist utopia here here in Chino Overlooking this beautiful lake with that guy pulling out nice-sized bass Yeah, that lake is in my way plus that guy's not sharing the bass with other people He is seizing the means of production only for himself So So I don't know if our viewers can imagine this happening for six hours in a row on the road This is sort of the story of my life this week Yeah, and the hummingbirds have discovered the sugar water now we are we are watching the news on the coronavirus and we the second Segment of the trip which is Fresno Sacramento Salem Seattle British Vancouver British Columbia Burnaby and Portland Bay Area then back to Sacramento That's that's a little ways away. We are following the news We're going to continue to follow the news and see what happens and develops in that we don't have any plans to not do it At this point, but we are we are monitoring that and we we should let our viewers know that we had lunch with 94 year old retired psychiatrist who basically explained to us the facts of life about fear and I think he asked you job. Did he not what is actually more dangerous to you? the coronavirus or your fear right and The if I recall correctly the quote from dune came to mind fear is the mind-killer. I shall not fear fears the might kill I Was kind of thrown by the question like what's what what's more risky your fear or coronavirus? It depends on what they're preventing me from doing To a degree you gotta sort of take a stoic approach with well what what you can I influence and why can't I influence? well, I mean I could just stay here in this house much of your internet and And you risk and I'm pretty sure that you also filtered at all through your experience as a fireman where there are some serious You told us that story afterward. There are some seriously good reason to be afraid of certain situations And act accordingly and model it modulate your behavior based on certain fears you may have. Yeah, there's always hierarchy involved Yeah, I mean same with I'd love to do this travel up north Yeah, there's gonna be coronavirus, but there could also be random fire extinguishers on the highway that fell off a truck Is way higher than some virus It's true. That's true. Another another one of the things we talked about is participation of women at Our meetups many of our meetups have been Predominantly men easily majority men sometimes 75 to 80 percent men. We've had women at all of our meetups We've had conversations about You know, is it is it a conversation? Style question. Is it a subject? Job you mentioned something that you saw on Goodreads in terms of a in terms of a survey that was done. Okay. Yeah It's it's was interesting Goodreads ran Statistical analysis on Analysis subject type analysis and male female interest and so you get these these Z-letter form axis graph bar graph where males had The top of the hierarchy basically was philosophy and for females that was I think romance novels and Then that that those extremes don't meet so is that because they don't have porn on Goodreads is that why? Philosophical romance novels We should be able to sort of merge the two into a super category that everybody will like really turned on by scholasticism Oh Scholastic metaphysics yes All that changes everything that is even more of a turn-on. Mmm. Yeah, it's the whole The whole Aristotelianism yeah, that's that's something we should really write write some some feisty novels about that I'm sure I can get that would face her to to change his career path But we also did notice though that a lot of and I've noticed this in the Sacramento meetups as well that we've been Mostly men, but the women who show up highly articulate are not Fading into the background serving us Dutch cookies and coffee Statistically they would statistically though at the Tucson meetup quiet John There are more women talk more than men as far as I can recall it That that's just yeah, that's fine as far as I'm concerned and there were good questions so I Don't know thinking in percentages and I don't even like that It's like I'm just glad people show up in large numbers and that there's a conversation to begin with Any any thoughts anything we've learned about starting meetups or what makes a good meeting From at least the two and some of the other experiences we've had Okay. Well, let's let's make this observation The room was an afterthought There was a piano in the middle of it. Mm-hmm There were tears in the room that made it impossible to make a decent circle. It was a choir room and it were a choir room it was For for all objective evaluations of a venue The door access the access door was hard to find there were two access doors both of them were there were three access doors Neither one of them were findable. They were all kind of a weird maze This room was an acquired taste Yeah, right that too. Oh, that's corny But but my point is that that apparently it didn't matter Apparently we don't have to worry too much about the quality of the room and the quality of the chairs and the quality of the access And the quality of the findability there were minimal signs. They spelled your name wrong Somebody you know was was standing by another exit Telling people where to go but the majority of traffic if people going through there had never even heard of us They didn't even know we were there people were playing piano in the room people were playing piano in the room above us I mean, you know from a from a from a venue Planning point of view it was subpar and none of it mattered. I think that's kind of a Important thing. Well, yeah, as soon as the stocking started you could have just you know, something could have exploded Yeah, yeah, it was very engaging we It was it was it was amazing. It really was very very good now in in Tucson on the other hand that venue was just phenomenal and lend itself extremely well to To what we were trying to do there and I think that that from that point of view, I think The church score points to make a space like that available to us for that purpose And I think that in some ways there's a little bit of the reciprocity is happening there that the churches can You know practice generous hospitality put their best foot forward this and say hey, you know, we want to encourage this kind of Conversation here's some coffee. Here's some Dutch cookies. Here's here's a nice room Here's you know, we we we provide proper signage We would like you to to be here for this purpose And I think in the end the church is gonna look good and as a community that's going to make them more attractive for other reasons also I think it's true Those are some of the things on my list anything on your list any topics you want to throw out there? We're well on our way and things are starting to happen so I will try to post this Immediately and depending on the speed of John's What's operated by duck feathers one thing I thought we might do is for the Current meetups that we've had and for the ones who will be having try to see if we can get some Audience feedback on meetup.com like hey for those of you over there. What did you think? Oh, please let us know that is shows on the meetup.com pages that the community is active and maybe we'll learn something Yeah, okay so if you did come to the Tucson Bellflower or After any of the meetups that we will have in the future if you want to leave some feedback on meetup.com That would be helpful. Yeah. Yeah good good very much appreciate that anything else is that so tonight? We have a meetup here at the usual place for at the East Clubhouse at the Lake Los Rinos Park and here in Chino Hills and then we have a big pause while Job does not do his conference and While we let the virus do its thing we let the virus do its thing and we sort of watchfully wait that I don't think There's any way that the virus is going to deter the Fresno meetup or the Sacramento meetup I think you know things could change of course, but at this point I suspect we will I'm most concerned you said you know you've got living stones if things would start to close in Sacramento Because we have an elderly population that does attend the church That might keep people home or that might prompt churches not to meet but our demographic at the meetup. I think I think is okay and No one would likely have themselves in a life-threatening situation if they catch the virus So I think Fresno and Sacramento will for sure have it won most at risk actually John We've really enjoyed your presence here, and we'll wave me off in this great Goodbye, we'll raise a glass to you. Thank you in memory But other than that I'm hoping that the whole thing will go as planned, but we'll have to see yeah all right so One love