https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Smk17uElNTA

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to, I usually like to start the week with a little update. Last week I did four interviews and they're all up now so you can see those. I've never done any interviews before. This week I've got a wedding and a special training on Saturday plus my all my usual Sunday stuff so I don't know how many videos I'll be able to get out this week. I put a whole bunch up a couple of weeks ago and I warned you. I said, yeah, I had a light week so I can do a lot and when I get a heavy week like this it ebbs and flows. But last week, Saturday night, I went to a Jordan Peterson event where Peterson himself showed up and it was at this thing called Simulation and the emcee was an Alan Sakian who describes himself as a polymath, an empath, a science communicator propelling unconventional concepts like world peace and sustainable colonization of planets and stars. Okay, I knew we were going to be in trouble when one of the first things out of his mouth is for me, he describes Jordan Peterson this way, for me someone you remind me of is Tony Robbins. Someone that knows how to inspire people to self-actualization. The biggest disappointment of the entire evening was this guy. No easy way to say it. He obviously tried to get a little bit up to speed with Peterson, but clearly had almost zero understanding of who Peterson is, what his project is and what he does. And many of the people in the room, I don't know, there may be three, four hundred people in the room. Many of the people in the room knew exactly a lot about Peterson, were big fans and the guy was just walking into things. Like at one point, Peterson is talking about IQ and the guy says, yeah, but can't we just educate people into more creativity? And Peterson just says, no, but Peterson was gracious. And he gave most of the stuff that you've heard before in the videos, the rats and the lobsters and so on and so forth. So with an event like this, it's always hard to know what as a speaker, what you should do, because a lot of the people in the audience probably have heard everything, just given the dynamics of this movement. While some people in the audience probably didn't know much of anything, but Peterson was lively. He was engaging. He was his usual self. And the moderator really got in the way at some moments, which was very frustrating. I was sitting up towards the front. If you were at the event and you saw the big red lobster, that was my friend sitting next to me with the big red lobster. So it was, you know, I was glad I went and I'll have a few more things to say about it. But the emcee was a real pain in the neck. But Peterson was fine. The emcee made me think of this Matrix video that David Fuller put out that he had on his own Rebel Wisdom channel. And now Peterson has it on his channel. And there's some significant time with an interview with a guy named Jordan Greenhall, who's done some writing about Blue Church Red Religion and his article on thinking and simulated thinking, I think was germane here because the interviewer, if a word to anyone who's going to interview Jordan Peterson, you'd better do your homework because if you don't do your homework and you approach the guy with all kinds of set ideas about what should be and you don't listen and actually engage in real time, you're it's going to be ugly and you're going to look bad. And that's that's exactly what happened to it. In other words, the guy just had all this all these ideas that were set about just the just the common things you're going to pick up in the common things you're going to pick up. If you're of a certain class and of a certain sociological group and these are your assumptions and you just keep throwing them at Jordan Peterson, assuming that oh, yeah, he and I are on the same page and Peterson's going to have all of his Peterson ideas. And if you present them to him, he's just going to say no. And so there are a number of places in the evening that the guy would say, well, how about this? No, how about this? No, but he had it and Peterson didn't say it in a mean way. It's just these just Peterson. One of the things if you'd ask me, well, what did I learn by being in a live audience as opposed to watching his videos? I think I had more of a sense of. As a pastor, you get used to reading people. And so Peterson very much is a guy who's passionate about his ideas. And even when the the emcee would say something, say something mindless and Peterson would correct him and the audience would laugh because everybody in the room except the interviewer knew exactly what was happening and could see it happen again and again and again. Peterson, when he would make his explanation and everyone would laugh, would would keep saying, no, but wait a minute. And he'd keep wanting to make his point with his intensity. And that's that's classic Peterson. But you could see just live the the subtle interactions that you don't really see via video tape. So it was, you know, it was it was fun. And and I didn't necessarily learn a lot more from Peterson than I've heard in other videos. I really didn't expect to. The the main reason I went was I really wanted to meet other people there, which is which is exactly what happened. And I'll talk about that a little bit later. One of the things that that that did strike me was Peterson brought up this book that he hadn't that I hadn't heard him brought bring up before by Walter Scheidel, the great leveler, and talked about inequality. And Peterson had a pretty significant section at the time talking about inequality and instability. And and he talked about, you know, he talks about that quite a bit with the Pareto and the Pareto distribution and and all of those issues. And again, the guy was like, no, but can't we? And Peterson's like, no. But this this book, I think Peterson has read recently, which again shows that I don't I've never seen Tony Robbins. I don't have I don't I don't have any expectations about who Tony Robbins is. He's a motivational speaker. And as a pastor, motivational speakers are not really high up on our list of people that we get really excited about. But but this shows that Peterson is continuing to read. He's continuing to learn. He's continuing to do all the things he does. And so I put this on my book list and I'll I'll probably take a look at it because he's he's making the point as as many have made that that equality is is very, very difficult to eradicate. And I thought Peterson made the point well during the talk that that equality seems to not just be an aspect of. You know, say capitalism or and Peterson made that point well in the Russell Brand interview. But but inequality is something that seems pretty much set into the universe. And this gets into Peterson's ideas of where the Bible comes from in terms of a more evolutionary approach to it. And so the things that the things that really seem to flatten out inequality throughout human history are calamities and violence and often calamities get violent. And so this is a book on my list. What that actually did spark after after the event was a nice conversation in the hall. They were they were the VIP purchasers and the the regular purchasers and I had a regular ticket not a VIP ticket. I'm going to talk about that in a few minutes too. But but afterwards what was really fun for me was getting together with a bunch of the other people who are really following Jordan Peterson and the the the the initiative to talk about this. And for me that was the the best part of the evening. Some of you are watching my videos. Others hadn't seen my videos. But to just meet in person and have these conversations and and be able to do it face to face. And that for me is there we are. And I think we're about four rows from the front. And then my friend I won't name him here but he had that he brought he had the wherewithal to think ahead to go to eBay to buy an eight dollar inflatable lobster. And so we had fun and that's my that's one of my son sitting next to me and we just we just we just had a terrific time. And I think some somebody tweeted at me and asked well are you going to are you going to ask a question. Well apparently only the VIPs got to ask questions not the not the 70 dot not the seventy five dollar ticket holders. I don't know what how much the VIP ticket holders were but it was it was more money than that. So so if you only paid seventy five dollars to get in you didn't get it you didn't get to ask a question. But you know when I thought about well what question would I want to ask. You know the the enduring question for me is is I do think as I've said in a number of my videos this Oz Guinness quote that you know without individuals nothing changes without institutions nothing lasts. And Peterson is on this status rocket ride right now. But but the real question for me is will his work have enduring bring about enduring change. And I wrote out there with my son and and and three others new friends that I've made since since watching Jordan Peterson videos and making my own videos. And that was two brothers and their father all of us all of us grown. But you know I had a lot of good conversations in the car and that was really good and had a lot of good conversations after the event and bumping into people in the event. Shout out to a to a guy who went to Dork College and if you're Christian Reformed you know what Dork College is. But again these these kinds of these kinds of meeting people and every time I meet someone every time I meet someone who has seen my videos you know I want to I want to hear your story. I want to I want to find out what this means to you how how this has changed you where you're at now I'm a pastor some I'm naturally interested in these kinds of things. And so that was that was the real fun of the evening and actually we we just had a terrific time. You know one of the one of the things that I thought a lot about was so far seventy five dollars we got a this is a total surprise we didn't know we're going to get a hard copy of Peterson's 12 rules for life. That was that was really awesome. I didn't have a hard copy only have the Kindle copy and the audible copy but to get a hard copy is is really cool. And then you got this kind of weird t-shirt from the from the simulation people that that the interviewer was from. But you know I've been doing a lot of thinking about status and Jordan Peterson and because he's been on this very unusual status like all the status rocket ride. And you know this is part of the reason I like being a small church pastor because there isn't a lot of separation from people. And part of what happens if you have more and more people around you is that there has to be a natural filtering of things. And so what happens you know the hierarchy is older than the trees. So what happens is that now you know there's there people people who know you have status and you only interact with people of a certain status. And this is all actually if you're if you're caught in this dynamic this is you know there's pluses and minuses to this thing. And I think there's there's a lot of minuses to it. And so one way one way to try to handle the rush and you know when people send me Facebook messages or send me emails which which I very much do enjoy. You know one way to handle it is to is to kind of put up a paywall and say well you know if you're if you're motivated enough that's like putting that little spring on one of the rats that Pengsap talks about you know how motivated are you if you're willing to if you're willing to be a Patreon subscriber then you can get in through this and if you're a subscriber at $15 a month you can have this level of access to me and $50 a month you can have this level of access to me and $1,000 a month you can have this level of access to me. And you know on one hand that's an effective way to sort people out. But you know many of us also know that well that's there are other things going on with something like that. And I'm not you know my point isn't to criticize Peterson or others for doing it because I think it's legitimate. But I think it I think it emphasizes to me some of the beauty of of Christianity in terms of who Jesus was because Jesus very much had these kinds of issues in the Galilee. He had he had crushing crowds and he would always have to kind of escape from them so we could go up into a mountain to pray. He would he would try to run away with his disciples so he could have time to do some discipling and training. But but one of the things that Jesus does is kind of turn the whole thing on its head. Then Jesus does a bunch of things that basically drive the crowd away from them. And if you can look that up in the Gospel of John chapter 6 and to the point that when Jesus is being crucified all of his disciples are hiding except the women and young John who was probably at that point only a teenager. So he's he's not seen as being a threat so he can witness the crucifixion firsthand while Peter and the older disciples are are you know cringing in fear sobbing and hiding. But you know and this gets into the question of of hierarchies and and how to manage them and how to manage the crush of of people. And this also gets for gets to me the ideas I have about the age to come. Sometimes Christians say heaven. I think heaven is a is not the greatest technical term for what awaits us after what Christians call the consummation. Jesus returned the world set to rights as NT NT Wright calls it. But you know the great hymn Amazing Grace says when we've been there 10,000 years bright shining as the sun we've no less days to sing God's praise than when we first begun. And when I think about the age to come I think about being able to have long conversations with with other people and and because the crush around if you if you're of higher status and everybody knows how status works. If you're of higher status you know these these kinds these kinds of things happen. And so you no longer associate with people of low status. You no longer associate with people who are poor. You no longer associate with people who have mental illness issues. You no longer associate with people who are annoying. Maybe that's a blessing. You you only associate with people of of a similar economic status. And so up and up and up you go. And you know I had an experience of this in a sense when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic because by virtue of your North American. Your North American passport the greater wealth that you have you know very quickly you begin to kind of distrust people because you know how is this is this poor Haitian or Dominican. You know just interesting in being my friend because I have money and I might be an opportunity to for a visa to the United States. And many of us who live here in the United States don't have these issues very much at least we don't see them. I think these issues are there when it comes to you know the homeless and and the poor. But you know so when you go to an event like this and you have you know you have the regular people and then you have the VIPs and you know even if you have everyone being able to ask questions well only a few people are going to get a chance to ask questions and they'll probably give more of a speech and so. You know it's it's part of the it's part of the difficulty and I want to keep reflecting on that and I might do a video on status because actually I think Christianity and the New Testament has a tremendous amount to say about that including Jesus and the Gospels and the book of First Peter. And that brings me up to that brings me to the question of what to do this tomorrow night actually taping this on Tuesday I'll post it tonight Wednesday at Living Stones in Sacramento we're going to have a meetup and and last time we met up we had one two three four five six seven eight nine of us that that that got together in the church and we. I knew I had I knew a couple of I knew two three four of these guys a little bit I knew one one quite a bit longer but. This is. You know what do what do I wish for the buckos and by buckos I mean Jordan Peterson fans out there what do I wish for them I what do I wish for you I want you to have face to face relationships where where you can talk about things that matter where. Where you can have meaningful meaningful conversations with other individuals and so that's part of the reason that I'm you know I got this this meetup going and in Sacramento and I met some we accidentally bumped into a meetup group in San Francisco and I. I told I told Benjamin I said yeah maybe I'll have to get out there and I actually been I talked to a couple pastor friends of mine one in Alameda and one in Palo Alto and said you know. If you're if you get into this stuff you should do a meetup group and you should get together now someone might say well pastor you've got status and to a certain degree I do and right now culturally pastors don't have a lot of status but. To a certain degree we do and you know as Peterson articulates nicely there's lots of hierarchies and so you might have status in one hierarchy and zero status and another and that's and that's kind of nice pity the people that are on top of all the hierarchies. Because they lose a lot of their freedom but you know get together face to face and bring people together and have real conversations and try to be helpful to one another. Because I think in that way if you're if you're interested in a lot of Peterson's ideas. That's really that's really important to me because I think. If you're interested in a lot of Peterson's ideas. That's really that's really the best way to to apply them and work them out and test them and you know and for me this is ideally a big part of the mission of the church because the New Testament says the Apostle Paul admonishes. I forget which of his letters this it is in but don't you know you know don't don't despise people of low status the first Corinthians. You know because you know this is this is what we ought to do and so Jesus comes around and he says you know the greatest among you is the servant of all. And this is why Jesus when little children are coming to him the disciples stop the little children well in that in that hierarchy children had no status. And so Jesus says let the little children come to me for to such as them belongs the kingdom of heaven. Well what does that mean is it about children yeah it's about children but it's also about status because Jesus Jesus is very quickly saying you know I am here for people of every race. Every status the difficulty obviously is if you're a human being in flesh and blood living in a you know limited time and space status things emerge hierarchies naturally develop. But you know this is the this is the thing to think about that. And I tell people this in the context of my ministry often you know you might think well it'd be great to you know it'd be great to be Jordan Peterson's friend or it'd be great to be. Donald Trump's friend or be great to be Barack Obama's friend or it'd be great to be Oprah's friend or would be great to be I mean think of someone Bill O'Reilly's friend or whoever you're you know whoever your fandom is. And and what what I think what I think we believe as Christians is that you know it is it is it is more special to be a friend of Jesus and if you're a friend of Jesus. Then part of your Christian discipleship should be to be the friend of the lowliest and so then you ask yourself who are the lowliest in my community who are the lowliest in my office. You know who are the lowliest in my neighbor neighborhood. Are you a friend of the of the of the janitor who comes and you know cleans the toilets and empties the wastebasket. Are you the friend of the of the homeless person who was at the side of the street and everybody ignores them because they're schizophrenic or they're mumbling to their stuff and be safe with this because you know there's. You've got to figure that out you've got to know all the other things you know if you're a woman you know be a little careful around men and if you're a man be a little careful around women or whatever. However the the attraction all thing goes with you mean be wise with all of this stuff but. But but but try and break you know I'm not I'm not denying status or or trying to reinforce some kind of egalitarianism but what I think the gospel does is inverts a lot of this and you know it's one of the things actually I've appreciated about Peterson again he's a clinical psychologist. He's he's he's spent most of his life as a regular person and that's really important and I really hope that this status rocket that he's been on doesn't spoil him because you know you might think well he's he's well put together so on and so forth and he seems to be. But but these kinds of things spoil all of us and you know I probably wouldn't know this as much if I if I hadn't lived for a number of years in another country where just by virtue of my white skin and my American accent in some places gave me very high status and in some situations give me a very low status if I walk into a store all the prices would go up. At the same time as a missionary trying to to help Haitians in the situation where there was illegal if I would go into a military fort to advocate on behalf of the Haitian that had been abused at a military checkpoint because I came in with with white skin and an American accent the you know the commandant would treat me a little bit differently. And so you know all of the status is around and so again my admonition do meetups meet with people face to face and do not you know make make friends make friends across the hierarchies associate associate with people of low status and and to the best that you can you know be their friend and to the best that you can be their friend. And I appreciate the fact that if you do this you will begin to understand the way that you know money and status separates us. And I appreciate the fact that if you do this you will begin to understand the way that you know money and status separates us. So I guess I tied a little sermon at the end of my report but I'm a preacher so pull my string and sometimes I preach. Well there's there's my report on the event and my kind of update at the beginning of the week and again today is February 20 if you're in Sacramento and want to meet up meetup.com we're having a meeting tomorrow night we're going to you know for as long as people want to meet we'll probably go like once a month. And and if you're in town let me know also someone came up into Sacramento it seems some of my videos I won't name you but I came to my church on Sunday and again it's it's wonderful hearing your stories and I very much enjoy them and if you've sent me an email and I haven't gotten back to you yet they get piled up sometimes but I'm trying to work I'm trying to work through them and I'm trying to read them all and again this is some you know for Jordan Peterson he's gotten to a point that he can't read your email and he can't read our emails and that's that's sad to him my my sense is that he'd probably like to but he but he simply can't so there it is I ramble hopefully I'll stop.