https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tj7ojTCm9bY

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to do a video on the concept of Revelation. This came up in one of Rafe Kelly's tweets. He had a couple of tweets that have... I've had so many versions of this video that I haven't done. I don't know if I've mentioned it before in other videos. On the tweet list that was part of the last video, the last monologue video I did, which I'll put this out on next Monday, so it will be last week for this video. Put another way, despite the fact that I'm convinced the bones of the West derive from Christianity, I do not believe in the Christian myth, nor not in the way I believe in the theory of evolution. I'd like to have a conversation about how you believe in the theory of evolution, because this believing thing... I mean, we're getting some propositional belief in there. And the funny thing I find with a lot of people... I'm not saying Rafe is this way, but the way a lot of people are about... they get real skeptical about propositional beliefs. They get skeptical about propositional beliefs in a very propositional way. So I do not believe in the Christian myth in the way I believe in the theory of evolution. I think Jordan Peterson and John Ravecki offer a potential means past this. A little bit later or a little bit earlier. I don't remember when the tweet was or the order. Worse, I don't think it fully articulates what the Enlightenment was or how it interrelates with religion. My hesitation in seeing the answer as simply a return to Christendom... There is no simple return to Christendom. There's no simple return anywhere. There's maybe a reappropriation of the past, but that past will be different in the present. It can't help but be. So anybody who understands my continued offering of Christianity as a response to the meaning crisis should understand that you're not going to have the Christianity of your father or your grandfather. You're going to have to do your own work. You may derive great blessings and borrow heavily from them, but this is a complicated thing to talk about. So my hesitation in seeing the answer as simply as a return to Christendom is so far that I do not see the claims of Revelation can be made congruent with scientific materialism. Now, the claims of Revelation. So Rafe might have some specific issues with that, which I don't know, and so I won't address them here. But we need to deal with this word Revelation. And I just recently saw, unbelievable, had another worship leader loses his faith. What's going on? When I listen to these conversations and the Christian Sean McDowell is the son of Josh McDowell, who was to a certain degree a pioneer in a certain kind of Christian apologetics. I find these conversations quite modernistic and a lot of the issues involved in them will map onto this question of Revelation. Now, I want to play a clip again that I have played a number of times. Now, in some ways, when I get a little bit later into this about what we're kind of thing we're talking about when we're talking about Revelation actually illustrates my relationship with this part of this video. I've listened to this part of this video numerous times, and when I keep coming back to it, I see more. Now, has the video changed? No. Have the eyes through which I am encountering and engaging and the mind through which I'm engaging the video changed? Yes. And this is where, and I'm showing my hand a little bit, this is where I think John Verbeke's transjective ideas are helpful. Because the thing that happens, and someone might say, well, there's more and more Heidegger coming in. Okay, fair enough. Why is this video different to me than it was before? Well, I am different. Well, is the video different? No, the video is still on YouTube. Play it back again and again and again and again and again and again. It will play back the same way every single time. Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? Why am I different? personality 2017-12 we see meaning before we see objects and now he's this is this is kind of a re-articulation of that we don't actually see the world directly we see low representation cartoons as you were of the world so fit what you're doing simplest manner that you possibly can that works for what you're doing and so you don't actually see the world you see sufficiently useful low represent low resolution representations of the world and if they work then that's fine there's no need to adjust them and they're relatively easy to remember and to manipulate but now and then you have a misapprehension about someone let's say and you have a con now someone because people are they might look simple on the outside but if you've ever known a human being they're enormously complex on the inside and the more you get to know them i made a comment was it on my video i don't remember i made the comment the other day that so my wife and i've been married for 32 years we have both been married longer than we were single before ah we regularly bump into things we don't know about each other and we regularly surprise each other and you would think after 32 years there would be no more surprises far from it conversation with them and the conversation goes sideways and what that means is that the the thing that you thought you were conversing with is not the thing that you're conversing with and that manifests itself in error right so error is the place where the transcendent reveals itself and what is actually revealing itself is the reality that now what's interesting there is that not only did he sort of sleight of hand make the transcendent a fact he also noted that the transcendent is not like being high on cocaine in fact most drug trips are the opposite of at least recreational drug trips are the opposite of the transcendent in that you are actually not you're avoiding the kinds of friction you're looking for in life you're avoiding all of this which is exactly why you're doing the recreational drugs the transcendent is this thing that's stopping you and go back to jacob wrestling you and go back to jacob wrestling with god there at the the jaybook river god was the thing in front of him it's outside and underneath your perceptions and so what you see in the world in some sense is a set of animated cartoons and a lot of that is actually a consequence of you seeing nothing but your memory because your brain is organized so that instead of going through all of the difficult now think about that maybe in internet language back when our internet connections were slower you and even still your browsers will cache images on your hard drive well what does that mean web pages that you go to regularly instead of pulling all of that back when internet connections were slow instead of pulling all of those those large graphics through the pipeline the slow pipeline of your internet they would cache it on your hard drive so that when you click down the site boop there would be the page and the only thing that the browser browser would look at would be the differences so in that sense the differences were the transcendent elements but all the other images were cached cached locally because you could pull it up from your hard drive far faster than you could pull it through the internet connection and what peterson is noting is that in some senses that's an image of the way our brains work our brains remember these things and again i used to have this i've told this story before i had this friend at church who had very low eyesight he was periodically blind and then his eyesight would return just a little bit and i would sometimes just quite not on purpose just if he was someplace i would quietly move next to him to be with him but he was also hard of hearing and he had low eyesight so then it was i just appear in your mind his his field of vision would look as mine did but that's actually the cached version of the world on his mental hard drive and then suddenly when i'd pop into the picture and he wasn't expecting it it was like i dream of genie popping into the scene and he would take a step back and and then he'd excoriate me for startling him again and i gotta make more noise when i shuffle up to him so he can have some time for his brain to adjust and upload all of those things into his memory but the thing is we don't realize we're working like that just like in those old days the images would just show up right away on your browser now if you were savvy and you notice that wait a minute this is a story from a few days ago i have to hit refresh and pull new images up because i'm sort of being fooled by the image before me you have having to look at the thing in it in itself you look at what you assume to be there and if you can get away with that so much the better but the thing in itself is always much richer richer than your apprehension of it which is partly why you make mistakes but also partly why you can continue to garner wisdom in the world there's always more there than meets the eye okay so i've watched this video a number of times every time that i'd seen it okay at certain amount of things that i could apprehend it would you know the the things that were relevant to the moment i would apprehend at a certain resolution with increasing viewers of the viewings of the video increasing listening to his stream this now is triggering more things and each time i watch it i see it at a higher and higher resolution and i'm actually able to take in more and more of what he's saying not just because of repeated viewings of the video but all of the reading and conversation and things that i have done in between so am i watching the same video again the video is the same but my experience of the video that sort of the transjective relationship between me and the video continues to change and god only knows how much more there's there than meets the eye and you can and again this is part of you know if you hear peterson's argument about the resurrection he he positions himself in a humble place and says don't imagine that what you see is all there is that in fact is the position of pride imagine that there's more than meets the eye but that is going to have to be changed by you have to work with what's in front of you and those both of those things are true show this even in the religious sense to some degree because you can say that there's an element to the transcendent that instills people with a sense of religious significance you can do that by immediately scientifically by feeding people chemicals for example that disrupt the inhibition of perception by memory and then that puts them in a place where the transcendent tends to reveal itself sometimes an overwhelming force so this is not some fiction that this exists it's the what's transcendent is more real than the reality that you perceive well let's pick let's pick up on that because the the the ancients and the medieval's had a clear sense that it wasn't the world that was changing it was we ourselves as we make an ascent towards deeper truths and and again this this difference what he's sort of talking about is the modern the spirit of the modern is to say how can i shape the world to fit my picture of it or my preferred picture of it and the ancients said how can i change my perception to fit the world and if you understand what peterson just said the difference between those two postures is really quite vital and it ironically makes the modern look tremendously hubristic and really full of folly higher forms of the beautiful as we ourselves become more self-conscious so it's not the world that's changing but but us i wonder if you could say how you understand the nature of that ascent that that movement and and what brings it about i would be a bit wary of the metaphor of ascent you know i i think in playto it's quite clear what he meant that he wanted us to actually to transcend our earthly perceptions and our earthly way of seeing things and look on the world from from a god's eye perspective and this could be done if we enter the world of the pure forms and so on leave empirical reality behind i think actually in so far as the experience of the transcendent that i as i understand it is available to us modern people it's not that way that we get it perhaps perhaps jordan might be right that there are these drug induced experiences where things open up to us because old barriers are suddenly swept away but in my own case it is the concentration on the empirical reality which at a certain point flips from mere sensory understanding to a vision in that of its communicating something to me and i think this is what the literature and art and music do at their best they they redescribe reality so that it is actually communicating something to you it's not just there as an inert object before you and that now he's speaking about something that people might talk about use this word revelation sense of the transcendence is like discovering yourself in a mirror seeing in the world as a whole that thing in you that you could never identify in words you know the subject which is looking at it and it's not a mystery but it's something that you can't then explain and that's the difference between a good writer and a bad writer of course is that a good writer will describe something in such a way that the thing described has the soul of the reader in it so and again there's a there's an element of the transjective there you're finding yourself outside of yourself and what do i do with that so that might be the distinction in part between the thing and the meaningful thing right and that's a that's a very mysterious phenomenon in fact in some sense the essence of phenomenon because that means to shine forth you know as we're surrounded by empirical facts they're everywhere there's more of them than we can possibly count but some of them do emerge and manifest themselves as that as that conjunction between the factual and the meaningful and then that's what's gripping and if you're fortunate and we get this relevance realization to me that's also partly what what leads us onward maybe in in something approximating the ascent that you described is that the set of facts manifests itself as implicitly meaningful and that means in some sense that there is a call to you that isn't from within you i mean i don't know how else to put it exactly and and now we're getting into this this this sense of revelation that that something is being revealed to me but now now now exactly what that something is you don't know and you can't know and you may not know now but and that's why we're using the word call call is something that happens at the other end of the path come this way follow me you know it's and journey metaphors of journey very much come into the come into the mix because you walk into a bookstore and a book will will will reveal itself to you you know or or you have a conversation and part of the conversation will trigger something in you or you're reading a scientific paper and much of it's dull and then all of a sudden there's something that sparks outward that's like a port that's a portal into the transcendent and that is a place where the fact and the meaning converge and that's a phenomenon we don't understand very well has something to do with its convergence with the narrative that drives us okay so remember in my last video i talked a lot about narrative so so there's this narrative that's driving us and here's this element here and you can use verveckis term the relevance realization something something clicks something calls and and where is that thing is that you know the mute the cell phone stand calls to me let's call it well what what what about this and where is that calling is it is it in me well yes is it in the stand well yes and obviously it takes the the conjunction of both of these to have that happen and now we're we're getting into the idea of the phenomenology of revelation whatever that happens to be yeah i think that's a good way of putting it actually it connects with um the general problem of what the humanities are in the university i've i've always assumed that in some way or another if you're teaching literature or musicology or history of art or anything you are opening young people to those moments when the world ceases to be a mere accumulation of facts and as it were addresses you and that requires literary criticism it requires opening yourself to experience in a way that it requires a serious education of a special kind and i think that if we thought of the humanities as directed towards that we can see why they might be one way to fill the the moral void now it's interesting that he turns here to moral because this calling you notice is this is this is leaning towards action this is and and meaning you know this is leaning towards action so this is to fill the moral void well what is the moral word what is the moral about the moral is about what you should do and what you should not do it's about choice it's about action it's about going forward in the world that grows so easily in people's lives so young had this idea which i really love it's a very sophisticated idea um it's it's his idea of how the self first of all so the self for young this christ was a symbol of the self so the logos was a symbol of the self so that's sort of what would you say it's the divine essence of humanity and the image of that is a symbol of the self and for you the self was the totality of the individual across time and space so it's whatever you are as as a transcendent object that's a good way of thinking about it and then as a transcendent object as an object which which is real enough to to be obstacle you can imagine that that transcendent object also has to interact with you and the world moment by moment and his belief was that those times when that space of meaning opened up so there was that convergence between the fact and and the gripping of the fact was the manifestation of the self which is this transcendent object in the specific moment of time and space and therefore a call forward to move towards revealing that totality as much as it could be revealed and so it would be partly and that would be partly revealed by then following a meaningful pathway and it would be the case that if you're engaged in the teaching of humanities and and literature that you are trying to engage exactly that part of the person is to pull them into the story and to and have that open up to them and then that's a portal now notice where that person is are they sitting in a room are they sitting in time and space or is is their person somehow where is that person is it there between their skin or is it now journeying between time and space in a way that that all of us have the sense of from time to time we're watching a movie and then at the end of the movie the flights come back on in the theater and oh here we are where where where was i when i was watching the movie well your body was certainly sitting there in the theater but but but this i where was i it's not it's not words on paper it's a it's a portal to their to their further development towards this this the manifestation of this higher and more transcendent mode of being that's like the hindu idea okay again you can watch the whole video very interesting conversation about competence later on in the video so our narratives are cartoonish and dream like in a way now they they sift as this is what i talked about in my my last video why it feels like the world is coming unglued and what i can what i think i can um and what i think can help uh these these narratives that we simply must have in order to manage the world they're like the the cached versions of images or videos on the internet they're like these cartoonish things in our head and and we simply must have that because that that helps us tremendously interact with this world they sift and filter and shape the data for us this is both how we maintain the narrative thread that personhood requires in fact i was i made the point to my wife that you know after 32 years she continues to be a transcendent being in my life um not always happily and i certainly am not always happily a transcendent being in her life because we bump into each other and after 32 years we would think we would have enough of enough of each other cached on our local hard drives in our head that that everything would just just be smooth but no there we are well well and i mentioned to her i said you know it's probably a pretty good thing that why do i have this experience with someone that i know with so much resolution after 32 years of marriage but i don't have it with people i meet on the street well because you know all these psychological things transference projection all of these things that are going on these are these are not only difficulties in seeing each other that but they are probably relational lubricant so that i project onto someone that i'm talking to a whole bunch of goodwill that they might in fact not marry it until something transcendent happens and then i have to readjust but but we're doing this all the time so that we can actually function in the world and and this is in fact why these global communal narratives in the culture that we have and are simply essential so that so so that there are predictable pro forma non-player character ness scripts that we play out between each other so we don't have to spend all of our time bumping into too much transcendence with each other so there's there's good things and bad things about about these these cartoons that we're walking around with especially the shared ones that we're working from and it's also why we stick to our tribes in our narratives because in our tribes we don't have to do all of that work keeping bumping into other transcendent beings from other tribes and and so all of this all of this um fudgy ness between us so at some point i'm going to have to distinguish between fudgy and sloshy which is my new favorite word about words and it's and it's why we don't like being poked in the axioms it's like why we don't like hitting no it's like why we don't like encountering that person that we can't understand and can't mind read and it's why we get frustrated and so often why violence breaks out because we get frustrated and then we want to instill our version on the world onto the other and so that the words aren't using so now we resort to violence now let's talk up a little bit about christianity now skeptics often get their lampoonish cartoons of christians from christians the population is large enough that maybe with some fairness or unfairness in a straw manish sort of way you get these ideas about what christians are and we see this fairly regularly but but modernity's categories hold for both groups often okay modernity has this common sense epistemology that is creasing increasingly getting unseated science and technology increases to decrease some of the the low resolution cartoons that we have collectively embraced that we might call modernity and and this common sense epistemology is that we see objects and we know things directly and we walk around with natural information and experience and supernatural information and experiences of a different class of things all right and that's sort of you take modernity and you take this medieval category of supernatural and natural that aquinas used for specific things but sort of again as has happened with these languages these words contain they're sloshy they slosh around amongst us and and we pick up different elements of the word and before you know it the word means a a different thing than it used to mean an analogy of this might be the common sense newtonian physics that even though when you were taking physics in high school and college there are all these sort of unreal assumptions that you would have made well let's pretend that there's there's um there's no friction here so we can figure out there's no wind resistance and so in this ideal monarchical vision state these will be the interactions between the billiard balls and that world obviously has been breaking down for a while now the the world of all this common sense epistemology and common sense newtonian physics even though it's tremendously handy and when you learn physics in in high school or college you learn that common sense kind because it works well enough it's a good enough cartoon cartoon for what you're working with now now for many skeptics once you get to the supernatural things get problematic quickly because it seems to violate their common sense epistemology their their very newtonian world if your religious cartoons rely um if your religious cartoon that let's say you're a celebrity apologist talking to a celebrity atheist and and you're reliant on supernatural well the battlefield sort of lays itself out and your whole conversation is going to be yes or no on the supernatural and you can go to youtube and find dozens and dozens and dozens of videos about natural versus supernatural why it's a function of modernity it's how it lays out there are lots of debates about evidence for miracles in the resurrection so on and so on and so forth now miracles were considered proofs of christian validity until modernity and then they all became suspect thank you david hume and a number of others and this says well these things seem highly improbable therefore they didn't happen c.s lewis comes along in miracles and says um all of history is a one-off so all of history is a sample of one and what c.s lewis pointed out in that observation is your estimation of the probability of this depends on where you're standing and the scope of your sample saying cars have accidents assumes a world of cars of multiple cars ensued you know your sample assumes an entire world in which the car is seen and the essence of car and the identity of car are all elements of the picture and so you isolate this and say aha and well what about the rest of the picture what about this and what about this same goes with laws of physics what are the laws of physics they are repeated observations that have shown a degree and this is where statistics comes in a degree of variability and of course rupert send rupert sheldrake wades in and says well then why do you have an academy of standards if big g gravity is a constant why do you have to track it you don't track the number one why do you track the speed of light why is it changing well modernity can't handle that it's low resolution physics and its assumed monarchical vision world says here's the constant and why are you tracking it that's a really good question so san harris wades in and says this book written by god and of course many theologians would say it's not exactly what we're saying when we say word of god that's a fairly powerful low resolution downloaded image on the hard drive that we use so we can manipulate the conversation with other people about the values within the ecology of christian values that's how the word functions but many people hear it and there's good many people these are the words of god god says and again christians will say yeah these are this is the language we use these are the low resolution images on our hard drive and this language is enormously valuable and enormously useful for our conversations but very quickly you would say well wait a minute if god would write a book what would that book work look like now immediately you're not examining what your assumptions about what you mean by this word god and usually it sort of goes like this wouldn't it be wouldn't a perfect being write a best seller well the bible is the world's best-selling book not just by a little bit but by a long way but we'll we'll leave that alone for now because that's not really that that argument really isn't going to get much traction let's look at the second one wouldn't a perfect being write an irresistible book that just dazzles our eyes and we all fall down in worship i think that's what he's really saying and well you know pull that bible off the shelf and you know you can fall asleep reading this thing and everybody gets excited going through genesis and exodus up to about chapter 20 and once you hit the the the table settings of the tabernacle and then you get to numbers and leviticus and deuteronomy and well yeah a perfect being would write something like this well how many other books on my shelf don't seem superior to the bible in terms of readability even though of course far more bibles sold than really a wonderful book the warmth of other sons so so let's examine your expectations let's examine what you think you know why you think the world would be like this and we could use that a term expectations or preconceived resentments so it's sort of like god writing in the stars i exist god a great frederick beekner illustration or spelling his name in our dna and frederick beekner says you know one day people looked up and let's use english because it's commonly known in the world the stars start moving around and they say i exist god that first month everybody goes to church oh oh years later well that's just that's just an incredible coincidence how unlikely the sky would say such a thing would we all suddenly bow down well maybe all of a sudden but would we keep doing it so i'll even make your argument stronger i'll steel man your argument sam how about a god man what would a god man be like would he be like hercules and have super strength would he shine with brilliance would everything he say just whoosh you know you know what well i've why have i thought about this because i preach about this stuff and i think about this stuff a lot if a god man showed up wouldn't everyone just love him and worship and obey him what about that transcendent argument the transcendent is the thing that we bump into that shows us the truth and we're walking around with these low resolution cartoon cached downloads in our mind it's much more likely that the more transcendent someone is the more of an obstacle they are to all sorts of things and that same would obviously hold for a book tim keller makes this argument about the bible being crunchy that you know the bible is amazing because it speaks to so many cultures and seems to offend everyone at one point or another that we read it and say no this this this this this and peterson makes the point well that's actually not a sign of what it's lacking it's potentially a sign of something transcendent so we would expect jesus to you know everyone would just hit the ground and worship him forever like a a vision from dante of the of the of the beatific vision that's what that's what we imagine and and that vision holds a place in the imaginary in the representation of what dante is trying to make a point to but when jesus comes into the world well he's you know it's complicated the way he's welcomed and received and so what we tend to do is shoot the weight resolution way down and jesus is nice in our projected low resolution but not good enough to become god well again what are our expectations because here's the strange thing about people where we have these ideas of the good and but it's funny that they sort of defy our wielding we all look around and can say you're not as good as you think you are and your ideas are substandard and and you're not acting the way you're supposed to act okay well why don't you be the perfect person and if you were the perfect person how would the world receive you wouldn't they keep bumping into you go back to chesterton's point from from his book heretics that we sort of do this dead reckoning and opposite of the bad and and so we have a tremendously difficult time imagining the good and and you find this in literature often because people struggle to to to to represent the good but we're really good at doing the bad because we know it and we revolt and so so the good is always sort of this opposite of the bad and we're dead reckoning and it's it's it's not very high resolution and it's sort of out there so so you know i have a great deal of compassion for my skeptical friends and our sensibilities by our sensibilities shouldn't a world made by a purportedly benevolent all-powerful god perform better than the one we're presently occupying shouldn't there be less suffering more happiness no death or loss but then if you look at the good place or upload or how many other attempts by us to imagine the world we say we should be living in if the world were created by a completely all-powerful benevolent god we kind of aren't very good at sketching that thing out celebrity atheists philosophers and Hollywood writers are skeptical that this world could happen too so if you sit down with Richard Dawkins and talk about that picture he says no i wouldn't want it okay so in other words the world you want is you're a little younger a little better looking a little more powerful a little smarter a little richer or maybe a lot of those few categories and you get everything you want and so basically you have you would have a world without the transcendent well read C.S. Lewis's great divorce there's a world there where you get anything you want what's the one thing that nobody can tolerate from each other is each other and so in the world in which the great divorce opens it's this massive city full of these big impressive houses and it's hard to find the people it's just houses just keep going out and out and out and out because there's an element of transcendence in the people but the people are degrading quickly in that world and Lewis notes that grumblers eventually grumble so much all that's left of them is the grumble ideas have people and these bad ideas hold sway long enough that soon they consume the people and there's nothing left of the people at all the non-player characters eventually are incidental and all that's left is the idea so performance for the holders of revelation we would imagine would be superior to those who don't possess the revelation shouldn't revelation work something like a technology if Jesus had offered people the germ theory or lessons on modern sanitation or medicine wouldn't that have done more to to to healing the people rather than going to a village and here comes a blind man bang you're healed and and just kind of doing little one-off certainly a systemic approach if Jesus goal was to heal a lot more people a systemic approach would have been better and they would have been less suffering so why wouldn't Jesus do that seems awfully dim of him if God knows all the answers why not just offer some helpful ones to us well it all depends on what our problem is we imagine that divine revelation would have the phenomenology of heroin or cocaine that suddenly all of my problems would go away but for a moment if you recognize that you realize well when you do heroin or cocaine all your problems go away not because you see the world more clearly not because you're you have there's higher resolution of the world not because you're actually seeing more of the real world out there you're just seeing less of it that's why you drink why you drink the problems away but you don't really drink them away because when your drink is gone the problems are still there and you just have a hangover afford it's wielding recipients the power of technology that's what that's what divine revelation should do like an infections flee before antibiotics for a while like like trauma flees before emdr now i have a again a member of my church who is a marriage and family therapist and she's sort of specialized in this and she tells me stories it's amazing what this thing will do with patients i'd have to talk to them for hours and hours and hours and just you know working through that crazy little bar their trauma goes away they get unstuck and that's a wonderful thing but now are they now super people do we now watch them walking down the street and their their marriages they they both they stay married forever and they sleep with everyone they want they you know when you start you start spinning out this perfect world well you keep bumping into these these transcendent elements that we keep stumbling against what what what did they call jesus a scandal on a stumbling stone a rock that makes men stumble and a rock that makes them fall we think that divine revelation would be indistinguishable from magic revelation would be indistinguishable from magic but maybe instead of doing all this dead reckoning in one direction i think in in john verbeckis episode 13 well there's kind of a revelatory moment there in that video reciprocal narrowing so here's your agent and here's the arena and what happens is the drug use is is is is is associated with a particular agent arena relationship and what happens is and we talked about this before remember this is always co-identification we're always assuming an identity and assigning identity in a co-defining interdependent manner what happens is you start to lose a little bit of your cognitive flexibility perhaps due to something like this as you lose your cognitive flexibility the number of options in the world starts to decline right as the number of options start to decline you lose the variability for your agency as you get a tighter narrower less flexible cognitive agency the number of options in the world goes and what happens is these two things reciprocally narrow to where you have no options as to who you could be or how the world can be and that's addiction it is and it is a learned not propositionally learned perspectively participatory learning of a loss of agency i pointed out to mark that if this is the case there must be an opposite if there's a spiral down there must be a spiral up and in personal communication just recently he said yes yes totally and you know what that spiraling up would be what would be the agent arena relationship in which the agency and the world are expanding that's anagoga that's the move towards enlightenment wouldn't revelation be involved in that what i want you to understand is duca is these two things because they're interpenetrating this loss of agency because this this is your agency as you're simultaneously doing parasitic processing within you're doing reciprocal narrowing without those are totally reinforcing each other that's duca and no matter where you turn this is always threatening you can't get free of that you can't run away from it you can't deny it remember the buddha tried self-denial this is like trying to hop over your shadow you can't do it because it is endemic all of this is endemic this is the agent arena relationship you can't do away with this this is indispensable to be you being a person this is self-organizing relevance realizing complexifying processing you can't get away from that because that is what makes you adaptive so what do you do that's what the buddha meant when you realize that all of your life is threatened by duca he didn't mean believe that all of life is suffering so so what we need is how do we address this well once you realize it as a provocation once i should like the point is you should feel threatened you should feel threatened because if i can make you feel threatened by what i've just done here how close and intimate this threat is to you then you're starting to enact the process of moving towards enlightenment rather than just asserting some propositions that are largely inert it so right away here we see the relationship between revelation and agency that addiction agency duca buddha suffering the wheel destroying itself and a little later on the video he talks about that it's like a wheel with a center but the the axle the axle is a little wobbly or it's not exactly at the middle and the more the wheel goes the more it's it's the age of decay it's it's things breaking down and that is the nature of this world and so you have reciprocal narrowing and if you can have reciprocal narrowing you can have reciprocal broadening and and revelation is something that expands your agency but now again be careful because we just talked about our ideas of what the agency would afford us we think it'd be like like heroin or cocaine that suddenly ah we'd be in nirvana or we think it'd be like technology like like antibiotics or or emdr it'd be indistinguishable indistinguishable from magic but but but what is jesus doing with his little three years that he's going to spend dealing with these disciples what kinds of thing is he doing he's doing these miracles but his goal isn't exactly well let's uh let's have a few more healthier people than non-healthier people those would be the kind of goals we would have but jesus is up to something else now now modernist revelation again we what i find is that the the modern imaginary is dominating our ideas of revelation and modernist revelation has the same difficulty we've seen with human beings wielding technology so we enjoy the power and sometimes we do some good things with it but there always seem to be these unintended consequences we are insufficiently wise with the power we have through it and we say well science gives us science doesn't give you anything people in the manifest image take things that they have learned about propositionally through science and wield them science doesn't say science doesn't do science simply is there is no ought in the frame of science we become like the drug addict with his drug only we do so often communally just a little more just a little more power just a little bit more knowledge just a little more this that will fix it and we keep chasing that first high well think about jordan peterson and his illustration of the hydrogen bomb well should we make a hydrogen bomb well we can well is it true now again you've got jordan peterson and his funny ideas of darwinian truth there but but but that begins to scratch at this and expose a little bit of this modernist assumptions about revelation now again the the last video i did i talked about sense making and rebel wisdom i'm trying to get my mind around what they're talking about sense making is attempting to get our cartoon narratives recalibrated with the incoming data in that video i talked about the fact that we have these narratives and in this video i've talked about we have these cached images in our mind we've got this skinny information thing that's coming and even that skinny information thing is too broad for us to manage and so our our narrative sort of swap things down until at some point the narratives get overwhelmed and we have to change our narrative that's a tremendously painful complicated thing you know the um so so the sense making it first makes us more wise so what i mean by that well well you didn't you wouldn't have a narrative if it didn't work for you in some way but it's probably working for you in a tiny little narrow space of the world because you haven't hit up and come that much transcendence and so i watched this very interesting video about psychedelics where this guy was talking about how via and i'm not proposing psychedelics here i've never taken anyone and you know i'm not judging those who have but i'm not recommending them to those who haven't um but but he talked about the fact that at the end of this journey he realized that he had this little narrative that he had developed as a child and it was time to let that narrative go that narrative was a very helpful thing when he was six years old but by the time he's 36 a narrative has to go and that's the way life goes with us and so our narratives keep getting updated and so we keep working on that okay so so so we want them to first make us more wise and that's attunement another verveky word the wisdom makes us more powerful but hopefully in a life-giving way in in a generous way rather than these really dumb technological leaps lack of wisdom oh more knowledge let's grab it let's i we can make a bigger bomb let's go for it might not be such a good idea andy crouch was an editor of christianity today a really wise thinker you can find a lot of good stuff from andy crouch um he wrote a book on power a number of years ago called playing god and at this point already the before it got as large as it is right now you know all of this rather low resolution dismissing of power but the funny thing about all these low resolution dismissings of power is they don't stop those who wield it from kind of continuing to use it in all the ways they decry so it's it's people with power and that just winds up being a sneaky way to well give me the power and i'll make the world right oh really i'm not so sure and you know a classic lack of wisdom and trust um you know when when boromir wants to make a play for the ring well gandalf and aragorn who are wise no we'd better not hold it because we are suspicious and the power that we have the considerable power power that aragorn and gandalf hold with the ring gladriel has the same question when frodo offers her the ring so why is it frodo that carries the ring because he's a hobbit because he's small and the ring is safer with him and so you see a critique of power but andy crouch makes the point that not all power is the same god's power because god is power and wisdom god's power is generative reciprocal broadening rather than reciprocal narrowing and and god's power affords power for others and and it's it's generous and its generosity itself crouch says so yeah you know we ought to be a little careful with power but you're not getting rid of power as a concept what you really need is wisdom so so we see the world through our cartoon narratives and they're sort of like cartoons and and plausibility again is going to be a function of the data and the cartoons that are there and plausibility has everything to do with the patterns of those cartoons well here's another pattern that we're seeing and well it's sort of seems to match and map onto this pattern so maybe i can sort of make sense of it and and that's why we have this complicated relationship between data and narrative we have scott scott adams two movies that that some people look at donald trump and say he's a genius other people look at donald trump and say he's an idiot they're looking at the same data well they're interpreting it through two different narratives scott adams has a point with that and people believe what they want to believe there's another way that we say it and it all depends on well here comes the data i have to fit this data into my narrative because human beings aren't just these biologues aren't just these creatures walking around we're these narrative creatures our money is narrative harari um uval harari goes into that we're narrative creatures it's simply how we are and we have narratives between each other and we're trying to find out what the narratives are and we talk about the narratives and we preach on the narratives and and we're just story within story within story as long as well as as skin and bone and meat and history and all of those things and people are limited by what their narratives afford that many things assault the cartoons and they themselves are constructed of course and sometimes they're overturned and psychologists will talk about transformation i did a video a while ago on transformations and addictions ret and link and you know some of the other characters and in my little imaginary in which you all inhabit christianity we often call them conversions we become we become different people and when augustin is when a woman who was a former lover comes up to augustin and augustin doesn't seem to see her and augustin it is i and he turns and says oh but it's not i what how post-modern of you saint augustin it's not i'm not the same man i was when we were lovers that's why it's not going to happen again because something has happened to me i'm different than i was you see the world through a new cartoon just recently you know i like a lot i like listening to glenn ralph laurie's a person that fascinates me in his story he's writing a memoir i'm definitely going to get it when it comes out he had a very interesting interview with um oh carol swain very interesting story and you know in terms of the political stuff this would be interesting because carol swain you know comes up in a rough household and didn't you know get much of an education but one way or another finds herself you know in academia and you know she starts to excel and and you know starts to climb the ladder and is lauded with praise and credentials and everything that an academic could want and she goes to a little storefront church and becomes a christian and her whole life changes and i think it's complicated from there and it's interesting that glenn laurie's talking to her because of course glenn glenn had the experience where he was you know he he also grew and then he also had a you know had a train wreck in his life and then also had the experience of going to a church and becoming a christian and becoming a christian believer but then deconstructing from that because of a woman who died and and you know you can listen to his story he did a conversation with robert wright on on meaning of life.tv as opposed to bloggingheads.tv and so these conversions shape our world views tremendously and they shape our morals and they shape our lives and of course this is no this is not a hard thing to understand now so our naive view and i don't mean naive pejoratively we're bumbling along and we're using our cartoons and our low resolutions and we encounter something that stimulates a remarkable response the first time you drive into yosemite valley people from all over the world i mean germans japanese chinese people from all over the world pile off the bus and their eyes get big and there's bridal veil falls there's half dome at the end of the valley there's el capitn over to the left is yosemite valley made up of anything different from the rest of the sierra it's just a different pattern it's all granite and pot douglas fur and spruce and grass and it's just different right why do we experience it as sacred when the united states why for so many was the was the shaughnessy dam and hech hech he such a violation of the sacred killed poor old john murray some people think what's going on it's just rock and wood and earth and water right the pattern is disrupted and it gets our attention now charles wesley writes this long my imprisoned spirit lay fast bound in sin and nature's night thine eye diffused a quickening ray i woke the dungeon flamed with light my chains fell off my chains fell off my heart was free i woes went forth and followed thee is he writing about some night he spent in a dungeon what's he doing something had happened in his life all the the narrative poetic rhetorical elements of what we call revelation when we ask does he mean that literally what are we asking how do these words impact you according to your cartoon narrative in your experiential history now some of you might say oh so manipulative others of you are like oh that that verse hits me every time what's happening here i love going to the getty and southern california and i won't reveal what the painting is about some of you will recognize it right away now just watching it right now in the midst of our race conversation oh look a brown-skinned man is running away with a white woman using violence and force is that what the picture is about what's happening now look at what's happening with these young women looking at the picture young women of different skin tones different nationalities different cultures how many layers can you identify between the observers all their cartoon layers and the layers of the famous painting you know why did i take that and the layers of the famous painting you know why did i take this picture i was going through the getty and i often take pictures of things because i think i'll use them and i almost never do for illustrations because when i'm there and i see that when i'm in the same rooms with the paintings it's like oh there's another one oh look at that and then sit and i watch and i look and what does it mean i don't know but i i can't stop looking and and i wonder and and what what strange power these paintings have now we can exhaust a short lifespan just on the questions that this one picture and so i i step back from the picture and i see them watching the picture and oh oh something's happening i don't quite know what my relevance realization things were going off now i've had the opportunity of taking small children through the getty because my wife and i wanted to see it and we have child care responsibilities so we made our we made our trip brief and we exposed them to a little bit of art but i'll tell you a six or a seven-year-old doesn't have a very long attention span at the getty they're just as interested in other things besides these funny pictures on the wall that their parents seem so enamored with so there's a there's a transjective experience going on there to use a fancy verveky term that that somehow now when i take my children in their 20s to the getty it's a totally different thing but now in my 50s i go to the getty and it's a totally different thing these students are growing in appreciation there's some reciprocal broadening that is happening with the picture an artist or an expert you know jonathan peugeot take him and look him at this painting he'd probably say oh i recognize that myth well what what myth well what is the woman well she's a god and what is the dark-skinned man well he's a god well he's he's pluto pluto pluto hades greek roman why is he dark-skinned why is he dark-skinned she's the one that's always out in the sun she should be dark-skinned no she's she's white as they come the european renaissance painter imagines her and he's dark while he's of the underworld so his skin is dark and i'm not an expert in art you could sit down with jonathan peugeot and jonathan peugeot could talk you through this and look at some of the other elements of the painting and describe how this is put together and on and on and on and on and what is jon doing well jon is sort of being a preacher because taking something that is sort of revelatory but we're not quite sure how and translating it to us and that's a funny that's a funny thing in and of itself because suddenly now i see more of it what what's happening there's some the talking and the translation is is is becoming some reciprocal broadening in me and and and something's happening and and this this picture can change your life now the bible talks about these things you shouldn't be surprised um psalm 19 the heavens declare the glory of god the skies proclaim the work of his hands oh gosh please deliver me from these horrible distracting i don't want to put on an ad browser um i guess i can open it up in something else the heavens declare the work declare the glory of god the skies proclaim the work of his hands day after day they pour forth speech night after night they reveal knowledge they have no speech they use no words no sound is heard from them yet their voice goes out in all the earth and their words to the end of the world and the heavens god has pitched a tent for the sun it is like the bridegroom coming out of his chamber it is like the champion rejoicing to hit the course and you're like look at the bridegroom coming out of his chamber boy oh boy what a great night wonder what happened in that chamber with the bridegroom the champion rejoicing as he runs his course eric little god made me fast and when i run i feel his pleasure it rises to the one it rises at one end of the heavens and makes its circuit to the other nothing is deprived of its warmth the law of the lord is perfect refreshing the soul the statutes of the lord are trustworthy making wise the simple notice how the psalmist is playing between these things i'm doing a little jonathan peugeot art interpretation for you there but that is of course what the preacher does general revelation day after day they pour forth speech night after night they pour forth wisdom well what's with us what's what's with these things paul and romans one says the wrath of god is revealed from heaven against all the godlessness and wickedness of people well carl there's a nice natural law verse who suppressed the truth with their wickedness what what they suppressed the truth well how do they suppress the truth what about those narratives what about those what about what about the collision between our desires and what we say people only see what they want to see now we suppress the truth with our wickedness since what may be known about god is plain to them because god has made it plain to them for since the creation of the world god's invisible qualities his his his eternal power and his divine nature have been clearly seen being understood from what has been made so that people are without excuse now clear in rafes tweet is that well well maybe not revelation but but some of the stuff that's revealed to me in it okay fair enough and that's sort of the realm of preachers isn't it and it's actually what the church is and does is sift through these things and and so well often when i fly out east i fly over yosemite i don't think this is over yosemite right here this is over some random mountains the when i look out of the plane it's like oh wow cool it's not like looking at yosemite valley because looking at yosemite valley from above it's not like like looking at the yosemite valley from the valley floor and so there's a lot going on here and and again right away even though you might say well the you know it's the it's the it's what this revelation is supposed to be saying that i can't agree with okay but the supposed to be saying isn't really that different from the seeing it either and so what we have in the history of the church is just a little bit of conversation about what it's supposed to be saying part of what happens is there's sort of a mapping of grace and revelation with grace you have common grace which is sort of the goodness of god sprinkled throughout and saving grace of course saving is plenty fudgy what do you mean by save save from what how when who what what but the application of that grace in a place in a moment to an end for a reason by an agent revelation revelation there's general revelation it's just out there available to the public but then special revelation and it may be that well special revelation is well it's kind of public but it's also right there and it's also just for you because of course revelation is very much that way it's transjective it's watching that jordan peterson video and it's been the same every time but i go back to it's like oh i see something else well did the video change or did i change and why that video and not every video is the difference something like relevance realization now i remember talking to one of the pastors in the dominican republic who told me the first time his mother saw a train she ran because she said it's the devil well if you look at a steam locomotive with the noise and the size and the you know it's it's it's it looks like the devil special revelation is something extraordinary now what i just said before i don't mean to say that it's necessarily always private often it is if i'm reading the bible and well here's the revelation it's it's actually built from different is it actually built from different things my eyes see certain kinds of things they see wavelength and so on and so forth the perceptions of my mind are a good bit more mysterious how does it connect with you and the pattern that you are because you yourself are a pattern watch jonathan peugeot's conversation with andrea and mercury why do millions of the world travel the millions of people in the world travel to visit a place like yosemite is that special revelation well not exactly in terms of what christians talk about but it's not disconnected either so we have witnesses and representation n.t. wright notes that well the new testament these passages about the about the resurrection are terribly unembroidered what does he mean by that it means like many passages are they're filled with little literary clues that the the narrator is is is preaching and making some theological points and he's using symbolism and a whole bunch of other things but the resurrection they just don't know what to do with it that was a a really special revelation and and modernists are right in saying well i'm going to judge revelation by its impact okay we can do that but not just that people i mean john calvin basically said well how do i know that scripture is different from other books i can feel it in my heart it's very protestant of him but it's also very pre-modern of him but it also works today in the in the resurrection of jesus people don't recognize him well well that well that's strange of course they don't believe the story right off the bat even though he told them but you have when jesus says you know i'm going to be turned over to the hands of gentiles and in three days i'll rise from the dead well how do you hear that he said so many strange things they never know what he's talking about anyway and and they're afraid to ask him questions they're always afraid to ask him questions because they look like idiots sometimes he loses his temper at them even skeptical new testament scholars however say the disciples saw something that changed them you're pretty pretty hard pressed now many are materialists and they'll say i can't believe he rose from the dead okay what did they see and and they didn't just see it as individuals he saw it together and what language do i have to talk about what i've never touched and in fact i was doing discord question answer this morning i'm thinking about i was asked a question about something and i defer i'd use some language that at other points i might have critiqued but i was i was answering the question and thinking about the language i was using i was thinking about the fact that this is about the only language that i can use to communicate this thing and something something is out there that i bump into is yosemite valley supernatural well you might say no because we have science of glaciation erosion and volcanism is it sacred hmm is it publicly sacred the american government seems to think so why are you curious about the process that made yosemite valley does it make the valley less or more glorious to know the process a lot of science people say more i agree does it make it less common or more amazing glaciation happened all up and down the sierra why is this valley this way oh because volcanism and i mean you get get up to glacier point and they have a nice representation of it and they have a nice thing in the visitor center and they'll talk all about it does it mean that the valley was an accident well what is an accident not the product of purpose or systemic agency well the systemic agency the systems of of glaciation and volcanism and but but but but nobody oh persons nobody planned it or designed it how do you know are your persons limited to human beings because if you say that well agency emerges well there's all kinds of systems we talk like they have agency well what if there's an agency that comes before the emergent agencies we see we we can't answer that question i haven't proved to you that it is that it is there but it's not an unreasonable thing to believe what kind of revelation is happening here general revelation certainly there's the lighting in the room there's the the skill of the artist there's there's all of that is there any special revelation happening here well yeah the question gets a lot harder could you tell if there was is is my photograph of these young girls looking at this artist capturing or giving evidence for some degree of special revelation well maybe not in terms of christian theology well i didn't say that i'm talking about the category not the instances how might you go investigating as to whether or not there's special revelation going on i don't think you're going to get there from the camera you might stop and pause and speak with the young women and say what do you think about this picture why did you pause why did you huddle up why did you whisper to each other why did you take a picture of it what what what's what's happening what's going through your head you can't see it from the outside you have to see it from the inside might there have been special might there be a special revelation that you can capture well we sort of caught it with the camera it's very low resolution but just look at their body language look at the girl with the with the with the hand over her mouth look at the other one pointing with the you know she's got the brochure in her hand look at the other woman you know leaning over and whispering to what's going on here so in the conversation between brett weinstein and david fuller well people are starting to change in some of these ideas a lot of materialists for whom their category of religion was different now their category of religion is a little bit different and religion plays in the world a little differently than it was before the distributist had quite an interesting little video on this is not water where he talked about of course he's a kind of a reactionary conservative roman catholic who converted into that and he tells i like it when people tell their stories on youtube i'm nosy that way often the stories we tell about the transformations of our narrative are some of the most helpful because some of the patterns match and and and when we're really dealing with the narratives out of which we speak and the narratives out of which we work we realize that we're dealing with ourselves at a very low level and so on one hand you've got a if you've got a someone who was a leader in a church who was going through this performance and was getting a lot of accolades and money and jobs and doing all that getting to a point that realizes well i don't i don't believe this stuff anymore and so i'm gonna go it's always on instagram isn't it isn't that funny i'm gonna go out on instagram and i'm gonna tell the world that i don't believe anymore and then oh no oh you know fortunately justin briarley and sean mcdonald have their head about them and let's not panic let's talk about it what's going on what's what's going on in there did you think that did you think that you didn't have filters through which you apprehended this faith and imbibe the the faith of your your lovely parents his parents were wonderful people we see the through world through our cartoon narratives got some repetitions of slides here and a lot of repetitions of slides here what's going on here we go there's the slide i was waiting for what kind of revelation is this this is the adoption is the the adduction of proserpina proserpina the best way to say it jay pawgetty museum and some of you knew this right away but others of you didn't 1570 italian renaissance well why is he painting a picture of roman classical roman mythology well she's the spring and why does the spring go away well the spring goes away because the god of the underworld kills and and brings her down because why well he fell in love with her and pluto the god of the underworld seizes proserpina daughter of the roman goddess of agriculture and fertility saris and prepares to return with her and she and prepares to return with her to her kingdom on a chariot drawn by four black horses according to ovid's metamorphoses proserpina was forced to live in the underworld four months every year her departure from earth marked the advent of winter and a return brought about spring and summer muscular marble-like figures illustrate the influence of michael angelo on the younger florentine artist while the complex twisted poses and and bright saturated colors reflect that of his adopted father and mother ron zeno painted on the father and master not father and mother painted on the large wood panel this work was conceived as part of a series of three monumental mythological scenes painted between 1570 and 1572 as decoration for this house near florence accompanying scenes depicting a neus and and keys and narcesis are today located at the residence of the turkish ambassador turkish ambassador in washington dc so what is this picture representing it's representing the the coming of fall and the death of winter and the coming of spring does it represent that in a way yeah it does now the subtraction story might say this is a made-up story to explain the changing of the seasons well you can look at it that way but isn't there a lot built into this representation that that little subtraction story doesn't get at isn't there a lot built into this story that is a story that just talking about the earth and the sun and and plants and and all of this other story that talks about the changing of the seasons doesn't doesn't this look at it through a different lens through what is it when the winter snows start coming and the plants die and the flowers go on and what what what what does that feel like what is it like what kind of revelation is this a ball's pushing dominion again the most stubborn historical evidence of the story of jesus christ what was revealed by that man on the cross what movie were the mockers seeing what movie were the followers seeing what was being revealed in that moment the instance of that moment has been revelatorily enormously productive for 2 000 years empty crosses in protestant churches crucifixes and roman catholic churches representation after all over the place here one dawning a book cover what's revelation now of course there are laws of nature and i've made this point in numerous videos and people persist in i think resisting the point of the illustration many of us still can't see the irony in our use of the word laws what revelation or realization are we lacking agents give laws systemic agency of physics you say patterns we have detected and projected into eternity the use of this word laws has its own history so we have supernatural stories and alistair mcgrath noted to brett weinstein you better be a little careful with that word that's not as old as you think and we hear these stories frequently and i just recently told what what's supernatural today miracles don't happen okay what you mean laws of time and space as you've grown to understand them don't happen really i just recently told one in a sermon my life is pretty normal things follow pretty much according to general revelation but every now and then someone tells me a secret and they don't say it in public because in this context they lose status or people think they're crazy or they're unreliable or you know something like that and pastors are keepers of stories and my father put a lot of his stories into his book and some of the best stories he didn't put in his book because he can't talk about them because people are still alive and now i'm an internet pastor so people send me an email or sign up on my thing for a slot i haven't had slots for the end of june because i'm working on this other project that i need to work on and i need the time for that so sorry about that but there'll be more slots in the future i do continue to do the question and answer on discord so if you want to get a question into me that's a pretty good place and i'm still tinkering that with the discord but you know here's the funny thing about miracles is that people think well if i saw one it would change me no no no no no because those miracles are just data and those narratives those those downloaded low resolution images on your hard drive are still pretty powerful and and you know as sometimes sometimes see when it and it rearranges them but the story of jesus and the disciples are full of have these outlandish experiences that jesus stills the storm and you know they're what is he but can they still believe him all those narratives are deep and pervasive and stubborn probably for the rest of our biological lives and then one person and i know on the discord server he shared the stories with a few others of you but he chose not to make it public but he did give me permission to share this i just shared as an illustration i've heard many other stories like it 15 year old from a broken home friend of the family lives in another state has a vision the only vision this guy ever saw not the kind to see visions didn't go to a pentecostal church went to a pisca palian church pay attention when an episcopalian has a vision and he felt the need to travel to see this young man and tell him about this vision because god told him to go tell him and so this 15 year old has this guy come friend of the family guy come and says god told me to send something to you at that point in his life he was a christian there'll be a girl that you love and she'll die young and be with god there's the message what do you do with that why why what kind of a good god would send a message like that boy that will mess up a kid's life and so the kid and his mother imagine well it must be my sister so you know protect the sister keep it from happening so they protect the sister but he has a girlfriend and they get engaged he comes back on a college visit and he's driving in the car and she's driving and there's an accident and she's killed and he's spared and he loses his faith well i don't believe that man had a vision well the man obviously thought he had a vision thought he had a vision enough to drive across state lines to deliver it to a 15 year old kid and he probably felt like an idiot doing it i don't believe these things happen the person who told me this has no reason to lie about it was just interwoven in his story he doesn't know what to do with it he's a believer again but that took a long time why would god let things like this happen i can't answer for god stories that divide time the people are credible there's no motivation to lie no history of lying and in fact they lose and in fact they lose status by telling stories that make them sound a little crazy but they're not that uncommon and they're not they don't have the impact in people that you'd expect in fact like in this story okay let's be a little careful with the sister always wear your seatbelt often they doubt what they saw and they have second second thoughts doesn't necessarily change them any any of the way that we imagine it would change them in our modernist framework it doesn't give them unwavering faith at all usually and it might not change the religious assumptions at all i've had non-believers tell me the most outrageous stories and i'd say does this change the way you look at the world no weird things happen oh okay that's how you file it but oh that bible god didn't write that book how christian's language biblical inspiration and debate it rages on and it isn't going to stop mormons and muslims are a lot clearer dictation theory my tradition talks about organic inspiration it's not dictation or mechanical god moves through the world and there's that bible and and look at bishop barron's comments on on cuomo god isn't inside the system and when when sam harris says a perfect being would sit down and write well how is god writing history right now is he sending it in a book for you to read and these are the steps you follow out it's god's agency for primary and secondary agency my conversation with brett suckled governor cuomo says god didn't god didn't flatten the curve we did bishop barron says you have no idea what you're saying when you use that word do you you just showed the world you don't you just sold cuomo i would imagine grew up catholic here the bishop is saying you didn't really catch it in catechism class did you the bible is less um is the bible less a formation of history than yosemite valley see jordan peterson's intro to the bible biblical series one it's a mysterious book we can't figure it out jordan peterson says these people are awfully dismissive it's strange but what do christians mean with their language say well i believe the bible is the word of god good read the book of james even the devils believe in god and tremble i believe the bible is the word of god good name those propositional things about your bible all you want and they use that language as represent we honor it we try to obey it we try to apply it we try to follow it we hold it as special it's holy it's at the top of our hierarchy but really is that how you really live now we do it badly well what if you did does that mean you would hold slaves does that mean you could um you know if you're suspicious about your your wife you dust the you you take the sweepings of the church floor put it in water and make her drink it and see what happens no you've been talking about this the whole time what does it mean that it's revelation that's what we keep talking about we keep trying to figure it out but what if the revelation isn't just a whole bunch of content that drops on us but in fact properly locating us in the kinds of conversations that will yield the kinds of lives that he wants us to live what if him and i say dropping like yosemite valley being dropped into the landscape of northern california boom it didn't come back that came up this way what if having this book form in the world like yosemite valley was formed changed world history in a particular way according to the kind of authoring that the author of yosemite valley uses to create something sacred and something glorious watch what they do watch what we do and now what we say yeah you're a bunch of hypocrites oh you got that right skeptics and critics have long charged that christians are selective inconsistent and have a canon within the canon guilty as charged all the time nobody knows it better than other christians christians struggle to talk about what we experience and what we do but the similarities aren't that hard to see really they're not there's actually very little insider information in the bible what do i mean by that it's that insider information that's exactly what modernists imagine the bible should be chuck full of and the insider information should be you know smiting us down like heroin and cocaine addicts or giving us tools like hydrogen bombs in order to wield for power in the world no look at jesus peter ends i thought his first book was his best book he compares got kicked out of westminster seminary for it he compares we say that jesus is the word of god and we say the bible is the word of god why do we use that language for both things and he can't compare and contrast inspiration and incarnation yeah that's a good thing jesus comments on the little apocalypse a lot of people have noted was it really that hard to imagine that in a fairly short time the culture war of the first of the second tenth first century in the first century second temple judaism was putting them on a collision course with the roman empire that's not hard to see about marriage and the age to come there's an interesting passage but what on earth will the age to come look like i don't know all of all of what we are told about it are these little symbolic indicators that sort of excite the imagination but we're giving plenty of moral things don't treasure don't store up for yourself treasures on earth where moth and rust consume store up treasures in heaven what does that mean discuss the bible is shaped history clearly different from most mythology as c.s lewis points out and ezekiel kaufman debates about the way the bible conceptualizes history rage augustin calvin they're not going to end we can't put this stuff together well then how does revelation work well look at the girls in front of the painting how does revelation work look at the tourists in yosemite valley how does revelation work the more we see how our conceptualization and language is cultural for us the more complex it gets now and representation is always interpretation here's the battle of white mountain well you got angels holding this thing above that did you see that when you were at the at the battle well maybe you did maybe you didn't here you can go to yosemite valley and not even look at al capitan and just take a little microphone put it by this little baby red squirrel and see some glory maybe there's something to this seeing and representation right now in northern california we're having a big fight about or there's there might be a fight about negro bar which is in the gold mining areas here well why is it negro bar well that was probably a named improvement over its previous name won't take too much imagination to figure out what that might have been well because both freed and enslaved black men came across the united states during the gold rush to try and participate in the gold rush and this was a place where they did it so what do you call it and we have squaw valley i thought wonder what the etymology of squaw is oh it's an al it's an algonquin word word for woman well it was used pejoratively and racists use the word i don't know how much of the english language we're gonna have left brett weinstein said i've seen movements among christians about people understanding the the the formative way in which their in which their their mythology occurs i'm glad he's seen the movement and again no disrespect here but it's not new it's not new at all now maybe fault christians for not being good communicators of what they believe but it's not new at all and of course now as usual i'll probably get into more trouble with some of the christians but i worry less about that because you're already christians but you know the reason why we esteem this book is because of the revelation of the one who quoted so much out of the first testament of this book and the reliability of the other witnesses that wrote in the second testament of this book but yeah it comes out of history just like yosemite only with words and out of the revelation of a guy who says touch these scars put your hand in my side you got something to eat let me have some of that fish i want you to see that i am not a ghost that you can touch me that you can smell my breath that you can see me eat a fish i want that to sink in i don't believe that okay all right religious people have long understood the glacial formation of their revelation it isn't why we attribute it isn't isn't this why we attribute it to god just like we do yosemite valley now literal well pageau and brett should have that conversation about that word and higher and all of these other words because i think the fudgy part is in literal because literal is what you mean by that usually is i'm going to have a very easy association where i can relate these two things causally you know causation what caused yosemite valley aristotle had some clues with his four causes there's got to be at least that many we have so much to talk about on this front christians tend to assume god and extrapolate to the particular manifest to from the manifest to the scientific scientists like eliminating variables to get down to tiny common relationships and extrapolate to the manifest image okay and i think i understand better some of verveckis talks about direction the emanation versus emergence so that takes me a little while to get up to speed on that those fancy vervecki terms what prompts a change in your story making and what is the shape of that story making and the fact that you look at the contents of this revelation and say oh i've got problems with that well maybe you're bumping into something transcendent and you're walking through the getty and you see this picture of a brown-skinned man it's carrying away a white-skinned woman and you say racism i'm not sure that's what the italian renaissance was trying to illustrate maybe we'll have to destroy the painting because it's you know a representation of you see the world is big it's complex what prompts a change in your story making what changes your narrative the transjective in the bible is all over the place jesus baptism some heard words some said it thundered paul on the road to damascus paul sees this others aren't so sure what's happening was that transjective was was paul able to see something that the others couldn't was that god somehow doing a special trick those words are in fact of course a representation did have to do with the narrative inside of paul but those who have ears to hear jesus says that again and again and again and again sounds terribly transjective well well the movement of the holy spirit enables me to this is john calvin understand what's in his word well how does the holy spirit move with glaciers and volcanism and water and time in yosemite with time and people and books and images in paul vanderkley the god of redemption is the god of creation the language of the holy spirit is often transjective where exactly is the spirit god is above jesus is alongside the spirit is inside between coming down spirit is always going this way look at the miraculous again if you'll wonder about miracles read craig keener's miracles it's a long book he has two volumes of it but what does he do he just offers evidence now that might not believe you believe mean you will believe any of it but to say i these things don't happen okay i don't know what you do with the evidence all people who will be fooled here's the thing we're all walking around with these cartoons it's the things that we can't move that that's the fact of transcendence as peterson says much of the observation of revelation in this video applies to miracles as well they're of course perceived the bible is of course the world's best-selling book its track record is unique all of this is perceived eyes to see ears to hear the impact of technology i think is the key takeaway here of our current imaginary and the more we learn about human perception and cognitive science to me at least the more these this common sense modernist framework evaporates we impress ourselves with our new knowledge and our power until we expose to each other that we are gods with clay feet we don't see so good we don't represent very well somebody asked me about christian entry requirements and minimum equipment necessary on today's discord question and answer my answers are simple call out to jesus ask him he says he'll listen what do you mean he wouldn't he live two thousand years ago just crazy yeah but again you may be a Christian but again human beings are very strange things when someday my children put me in the ground well i'm going to continue living in their hearts as even the secular people say christian theology says i'll go to be with the lord and at least within this time frame await the resurrection we have mose we have a samuel coming up to address Saul i mean it's it's full of strangeness it's very strange all you want to be a christian start playing around with it