https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=M-84-dJUWdo

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to do another video on Rhett and Link, and again, partly because they are such good illustrations that are YouTube accessible for something that's been going on for a long time. I just watched their latest video, Are We Scared of Hell? If you listen to some of their other videos where they talk about their rise on YouTube, they're pretty conscious of thumbnails and tags to get audience, and this one certainly would in terms of sort of a clickbait title. They're really part of what I'll call the Not Sure Movement, and I'll tell you why I call it that in a minute. They do treat the subject of hell in their video, and I thought it was worth watching, and I've actually got some clips that I might play in a subsequent video about that, but as is so often the case, I was going to make a video yesterday, but pastoral things came up, and I didn't really have much of any chance during the day to do it, so here I am today, but the video changed pretty significantly overnight. Now, most of the answers that they received were about deconstruction, and I thought it was all pretty much as I'd expect, having seen many people go through this over the years, and it very much reminded me of a book by Rachel Hell-Levins and by John Sook. Now, many more of you will know Rachel Hell-Levins than John Sook, but I'll talk about John Sook mostly during this video. Rachel Hell-Levins, of course, a girl who grew up in Dayton, Tennessee. Her father was a teacher in the Christian college there, very sharp young woman, very clear thinker, good writer. I first came across Rachel Hell-Levins sort of before she hit the big time, probably on Twitter or some social media, and I remember seeing her describe herself as an author, speaker, something like this, and I thought that seems sort of pretentious for such a young woman, but she very much pulled it off, and she very much hit that wave of doubt books really before the deconstruction language took on. Part of the reason I put the Deacon in this book here is I've just started reading Ross Duthought's book, The Deacon Society, and I'm really loving it, and so it'll creep into a lot of my videos. Those of you who have watched my videos know, well, actually, it's not true that I fall in love with every book that I read. I'm usually reading four or five books at a time, and then one book will grab me, and I'll just double down on that book much of how Dominion did, and so this book has really grabbed me, and I really am enjoying Duthought's, I never know how to say his name, Duthought's analysis. Before the deconstruction, before the Rhett and Link deconstruction, we had a lot of doubt books, and Rachel Hell-Levins, her first one that kind of launched her into the public limelight evolving in Monkey Town, it was eventually the title and the cover were changed, I don't remember what they were changed to. I was at that point blogging for a thing on the internet called Think Christian, which is connected to my denomination, used to be called Back to God Hour, now Reframe Media, and I talked about, I opened that review this way. Tim Keller offered his observation in the introduction of his book Reason for God without, a faith without some doubts is like a human body without any antibodies in it. People who blithely go through life too busy or indifferent to ask hard questions about why they believe as they do will find themselves defenseless against either the experience of tragedy or the probing questions of a smart skeptic. A person's faith can collapse almost overnight if she has failed over the years to listen patiently to her own doubts, which should only be discarded after long reflection. And then I wrote Rachel Hell-Levins' first book evolving in Monkey Town is about avoiding that collapse, or perhaps looking back on her life now, she passed away not too long ago. You can decide for yourself whether she avoided the collapse or if she collapsed, and that's very much the situation with Rhett and Link in terms of people's take on them. Very much the same can be said of John Sook and in his book Not Sure, but again this because I've got the Deaconant Society rolling through my head, you know, I'm thinking about the fact that in many ways we're not doing fresh work anymore, we're retreading the kinds of things that have been done for a while, and in a to a lesser degree. So the summary of my review of her book goes like this, Rachel I think speaks for a generation within her subculture when she writes, doubt is the mechanism by which faith evolves. One of my favorite characters, one of my favorite chapters was the brief one where she describes her husband fixing up and flipping a house and repeatedly admonishing her to respect the process. And I think that's that's good admonition. I was reviewing some of Andrew Sweeney's blog posts about John Vervecky's work and you know wisdom not just being true in terms of outcome but also in terms of process. And so you know I think a lot of people jumping on Rhett and Link, I think it's important to respect the process but it's also as you'll see in this video valid to critique the process. These are words of wisdom for an older generation of anxious parents worried about where and how their children will land. And that certainly isn't true and it's certainly true of me too now as a parent of older children. My children are quite a bit older than they were when I wrote this piece I think in 2010 or so. How will this book be used? I think it will bring comfort to a lot of young women who are haunted by what Rachel brings forward and won't feel as frightened or alone because of her book. Most of what I hear her pushing against I've heard in the voices of many others like her. Anxious church leaders that simply can't see why their formulas for generational compliance are falling short might want to listen carefully to her story. Again in Do Thoughts, I walked to church today, I sometimes walk to church so that my car isn't in the parking lot so I have a little bit of time to do videos and I don't have quite so many random visitors to the door. But Do Thought talked about the fact that in many ways religious decadence has set in in terms of stagnation and that's I'm really interested in Do Thoughts book and I'm going to have to engage it in videos I'm already doing it and this stuff just seeps up. Our projects and programs for inviting the next generation into the faith should never replace our faith and the one who calls them. Vital to this transference is the full and free appropriation of the faith which is always a scary process. 20 years from now and again it's a tragedy that Rachel didn't see 20 years from now. 20 years from now Rachel may be writing another book about her daughter's doubts about Rachel's questions and answers. Central is our Lord's generational missionary enter- Central is our Lord's generational missionary enterprise should be central to. The editors didn't catch that, neither did I. Central to our Lord's generational missionary enterprise is the kind of anxious questioning known to every praying Christian. Now about the time Rachel's book came out, John Sook's book came out. John Sook was in the Christian Reformed Church someone who had reached the pinnacle of my profession. His book was published in 2011. He, I'm just looking over his, he was honorably released in 2012 so not too long after his book and I know John personally and I'll tweet out this video on Twitter so John may very well watch it. John very much reached the CRC pastor's career pinnacle fairly early. He pastored local churches. Being editor of the banner in past generations was in many ways the pinnacle of one's Christian Reformed career. The banner all the way up I think into the 70s, sort of ended in the 80s and 90s. The banner was the kitchen table of the denomination. It was a weekly magazine and it was the place that in many ways in the denomination the discussions of the denomination were held. The banner is now a monthly magazine that I don't know too many, well, many of the pastors I, none of the pastors in my cluster to my knowledge read it at all and I don't read it at all. What does that say about the denomination? What does that, I could talk about the Christian Reformed Church a lot here but I'm not going to. John was also a missionary to the Philippines doing theological education and then he left the Christian Reformed Church and when it says here in his CRC minister's database that he was, you can look me up and I didn't even wear a nice suit, I was that kind of a guy in seminary but anyway. John was honorably released which meant he wasn't under any kind of discipline but he was released because he basically said to the Christian Reformed Church I can no longer in good conscience subscribe to the doctoral positions of the church and he got a lot of criticism for that especially having been a high profile pastor but I've always respected him for it. This is exactly how the system is supposed to work instead of not being, instead of, there's a lot of other games that people can play and in my opinion John didn't play those games. He acted honorably and that's exactly the right word and he joined the United Church of Canada and has, you know, he's regarded as many as a traitor but he's remained a blogger and in fact, just recently I'll get to that blog pretty quickly. If his book were to be published today we'd probably call it a deconstruction. Some of this stuff will have some CRC insider stuff in it but a little quote from his book not sure, both Sietsebunnings, I can't say it right because I don't have enough Dutch in me, that's a pen name for Stanley Wiersma who was a Calvin College professor who wrote some delightful poetry about what it meant to be Christian Reformed in the 20th century and quite well known in the denomination. Both Sietsebunnings community and mine shared ethnicity and the cohesive use of doctrine and mores to create stronger identification between the communities many members. The content of the doctrine isn't nearly as important as the fact that everyone in a position of authority, pastors, elders, deacons sign a form of subscription in which they state agreement with the doctrines that, and then even promise to promote them while laying out a very onerous if not impossible process for expressing disagreement with those doctrines. Thus the body of doctrine functions as a means of identification and community solidarity rather than something that lives in the heart and cannot help but find expression on the lips. The truth is most of the people who sign the form of subscription today could hardly detail what the doctrines are that they are agreeing with and that's very true and this has been some of I've shared these criticisms of our system. In many faith communities doctrines, moralities, and ethnicity are used consciously and unconsciously to create identification within that community. Altogether this identification is thought of as the faith I would say. However, that a feature of healthy faith is one that is able to empty herself or himself of too great an attachment to any aspect in this trinity, not the trinity, in this trinity while keeping greater attachment to the core teachings of Jesus about love including love and community. John's book is a wonderful book. I read his book and appreciated it even though it was pretty clear from the outset where he was going with this book. John tells his own story in this book. He had a PhD in communication. This book is both moving and challenging although again I don't think that anybody at this point who paid much of attention to it will find anything terribly surprising in the book. He articulates well many of the challenges that have brought people to and what is popularly called deconstruction today. So I'll leave a link to the book in the notes. And so I've with quite a bit of fascination continue to read John's blog. He's got a blog entitled Not Sure and he writes on it fairly regularly because for me I've always wondered. I don't share. Well I've got my own doubts and I talk about my own doubts and my own thoughts very freely on this YouTube channel but I definitely have wondered you know what does he have to say to this world of fear and pain that we have today because someone comes up to you and says you know pastor what what about this and well I'm not sure. Now part of that might sound refreshing if you're coming out of a community of of hidebound dogma that always had plastic answers to basic questions but if you're not pastoring in a community like that people are looking for something and you know kind of sort of throwing out all of your anxious anxieties and not sure of this and not sure of that. I've never found that to be terribly helpful to people either in overseas ministry or ministry in North America. And so I've been fascinated to to read the sermons that he posts on his blog and he just did a thing on the COVID virus on his blog and mortality very much asking the same question that the nuns ala Nathan Jacobs and Rhett and Link asked you know what happens after you die. This question doesn't go away and I don't find not sure to be a very helpful answer. So actually last night when I went to bed I sort of reminiscent of of Jordan Peterson not being able to sleep and get something does a screed I didn't get up and do a screed because with the volume of my natural speaking voice I would wake everyone up in the house much to the annoyance of my wife and my daughter. I wrote a whole bunch of stuff in a Google Doc that I'm sort of gonna read through as I go through this. I didn't make slides for them but we'll see how this goes. This is I'm always tinkering with my process. I think Rhett and Link's not sureness is really sort of a humble brag and I'll get to why that is. You know the primary message that you'll hear from their question and answer video and from their other videos is I'm not sure I'm an agnostic. I'm I you know not only do I have doubts but I wear my doubts on the outside not on the inside. Now that's not nothing and it's also another form of I would say religious expression, expressive individualism. Again DeThot in his book mentions that you know from from the time that Robert Bellah wrote Habits of the Heart which I read in seminary in the 1980s the stuff hasn't really changed that much and that says something that in some ways society feels stalled and sort of what I think about is that that scene in The Matrix where you know the 1990s was the epitome of our society and it's sort of like well we're in a we're in a simulation and we're sort of stuck there. The calendar keeps ticking but as DeThot and others noted you know some things just haven't really changed that much and then this very much mirrors you know John Sook and and what he expressed in his book. Here again he even wrote a book Not Sure. He was the pinnacle. He came from a good Canadian family and writes about the you know the faith of his father and his grandparents. They were they were Dutch immigrants. The Canadian immigration story is post-World War II unlike the immigration story that brought my grandparents great-grandparents to the United States at the beginning of the at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th century. Now here's the thing I don't fully buy the Not Sure thing because it seems to quite often have a lot of other things that they're quite sure about but don't necessarily own within their Not Sure matrix. You know my Tim Keller made this point I think borrowing it from from Michael Palahni. They're quite sure it is wrong to not endorse gay marriage. They're quite sure it's wrong to block women from serving in church offices like men and these are discussions in our own Christian reform denomination. They are quite sure about their political ideas. They're quite sure about a whole number of things that you know might not be categorized under religion but is very much categorized under politics and again you sort of know my idea that you know a religion is about the always and politics is about the now and so being not sure about a bunch of always things doesn't seem to boil down into being less sure about a bunch of now things. They're quite sure that the ways in which church uses social pressure, church discipline and stuff and exclusion is wrong and while they no longer agree with those old ways that small often insular communities use to pressure and enforce their beliefs and behavioral norms they queen they seem quite sure that government should use their quite broader and more considerable powers to enforce their newer ideas and norms upon often those small insular communities and they come out along you know a whole range of other you know there's a whole ranges of communities that have awfully divergent beliefs but somehow this kind of diversity cannot be tolerated because of other kinds of diversity and so again not sure well they seem quite sure about a lot while the communities that they projected their while the communities that they left projected their ideas that they were sure of sort of within their own tiny little tribes and they projected out beyond them but they had no power to enforce them if you'd leave the Christian Reformed Church. I was not too long ago sitting with some of my relatives and they were talking about the fact that there was this family in the Christian Reformed Church that even in the in the early and mid 20th century was still doing quite a bit of enforcing their norms and beliefs within the Christian Reformed Church. A family had a daughter that was pregnant outside of wedlock and the family stopped attending their Christian Reformed Church and sure enough the elders came by to check on them and find out why they had stopped availing themselves of the means of grace by the preaching and the taking of communion and you know basically the elders were met at the door with the notion that what we joined the RCA and boom there were you know the RCA wasn't enforcing those things like the Christian Reformed Church was and so people in the Christian Reformed Church would tisk about that and feel themselves their their own sectarian self-righteous pride about being the you know God's chosen people who are actually doing what was right unlike their RCA cousins who were slip sliding away but all of this was confined within little communities there were no government enforcement mechanisms to keep people within the Christian Reformed Church and and a lot of what Rhett and Link talk about are the kinds of communal norms and expectations that are indeed painful but you know nobody's being physically tortured or arrested or you know losing financial aid or a whole variety of other government things because they have different ideas about all sorts of things that churches have for a very long time had ideas about while the communities that they left projected their ideas that they were sure of far beyond their own tiny tribes without the capacity to enforce them often making these communities look a little bit ridiculous or provincial and their new ideas of which they don't admit they are not sure are actually enforced upon those other communities quite universally even to the point of a new colonialism which would use the political financial and military might of their nations to impose them on far smaller nations let's say in Africa all of course in the name of beneficial justice but this really isn't too dissimilar to what had been done centuries ago in in new colonialism I made a comment a couple of years ago to someone in during the CRC Senate that in many ways some of the people on the left are never more colonial than when they're complaining about colonialism they're just as colonial as Christian ancestors with the white man's burden bringing all of their ideas to Africa to liberate them from the heart of darkness well this is tough tough business again I think about Jonathan Heights the righteous mind harm and fairness run right to the front and all the other moral taste buds take a back seat a good many of these things they are not sure of are passed along with the justification of we just can't know and so while all the political things they're very sure of and and these things are now self-evident and obvious and only the the conservatives and the religiously recalcitrant are you know dragging their feet and avoiding them all the all the theological stuff is well we just can't know we can't know what happens after death we can't know what God thinks or if there is a god and blah blah blah blah so all of that stuff is relegated to that we can't be sure of and all of the other stuff is sort of well this is what justice demands so we'd better get on with it and spare no expense to to get it done now this is worth exploring because what they are really doing is saying I don't know while deep down they do have some certainties that they're basing their feelings on again see the video I just made about Nathan Jacobs and they're not sure mode I mean what they really are is sort of sort of post-enlightenment and and I don't mean that in terms of in step with the enlightenment but rather beyond the enlightenment and again as Brett and Link if you listen to them in their video it's very much an intuitional process much more than even though at one point after the little commercial break that they have in the video Brett has this long piece on logic and reason where he's sounding like an enlightenment person but he's very much not using these terms he's using those terms as an enlightenment person but he's using them really in a post-enlightenment way and again I thought about doing a deconstruction of that segment of the video because I found a lot of it quite ironic when it comes to the when it comes to things they care about they are they are more saying you their rivals don't know without admitting that underlying well we really do know it's obvious and it's certain what should happen there are whole ranges of things that we don't know like life after death scenarios they would say in all fairness again this is me the knowledge of these things is more limited than our knowledge of a good many things that are you know sort of under our control that we can play around with and play out that really are subject to our our wills and our abilities to colonize them but the subjectivity of this not sure which is so often repeated loudly often slips into an asserted subjectivity and false humble brag humility and again that's that's really I've been struggling to think of the language of of what I intuitively sense and what I feel from listening to their videos and theirs as Rachel held Evans and John Sook also seems to turn into some sort of humble brag and my I have a variety of examples of this oh nobody knows nobody knew when the real fall would happen of the of the housing market and of the housing bubble and and nobody nobody can know this and nobody can know that and I think really before the great recession and the housing collapse of the late 2000s people would say well we sort of know that there's a bubble but no one can know when it will come to an end this is actually false and the movie the big short demonstrates that and Talid Nassim apparently I haven't gotten to his books yet but had written about that a number of people knew and and timed it fairly well actually and so when we say well nobody knows well that's actually not true some people knew and so then how exactly is that language working when we're talking that way this is so well we sort of know that there's a bubble but no one can tell when it will come to an end this is actually false some people did know meaning they looked at the signs acted with conviction upon their beliefs and in fact got it right often against the great pressure as the movie the big short made clear they did their homework they formed a hypothesis they took action upon their knowledge and in fact were rewarded for their actions they did know and compare this to a lot of what link says about not knowing they knew now I didn't know probably almost everyone listening to this video didn't know many of us knew that there was a bubble and it was going to collapse but we didn't know and we didn't act on our convictions and we just sort of were there in the mushy middle so what do we mean by you um know you see I wrote this late at night so what do we mean by you can't know they want to project with an idea like this that there is somehow a thing of public knowledge that is democratically and universally embraced that well nobody knows nobody knows when the housing bubble will collapse well some people did know well why didn't everyone know well that's a function about human beings and knowledge actually and that's a pretty durable function that doesn't seem to be going away and doesn't seem to be able to just be dispelled and dismissed and is probably a feature and not a bug of human beings and why we're so durable in this world so what are we actually talking about we're imagining that this knowledge is democratically and universally available and hence embraced with certainly certainty by everyone now when he now think about what that might be true of and immediately say oh there's got to be lots of things that that's true of yeah there might be but when you think about and again I've got vervecki running around in my head with his relevance realization what exactly do you did you need to be paying attention to to know in that the 2008 housing collapse was going to happen the guy in the big short knew what to watch other people knew what to watch and they acted on it with conviction and sacrifice and again were rewarded for it now again this knowledge that we imagine that no one can know this this knowledge is is democratically and universally available and hence embraced with certainty now in hearing this this doesn't sound unbelievable to us we all manage to we all um we all imagine this to be but if we pause for a moment and ponder this it might occur to us that perhaps this is something we perhaps should be less sure of this is something that I say to them I'm not sure of this and I don't think you really know this either and let me explain this is a form of knowledge too and subject to the same kinds of deconstruction that we're talking about previous to this section in other words let's do a little deconstructing of this everybody knows or nobody can know type ideas think about something that should be that you might assume to be of this nature something democratically publicly and universally known everybody should know this well like things fall to the ground yeah there's there's some things like that but airplanes don't fall to the ground feathers seem to float um on and on and on oh let's talk about the world being a sphere and we're traveling around the sun well everybody should know this and even though one of the things I would often do and I'd be asked to go to classes and talk about Christianity I would ask how many of those people in the nice university lecture room how many of you people believe the world is round about everyone I'd say how many of you can demonstrate it to me without availing yourself of a picture taken from space almost nobody in those classrooms could give me a fairly simple analysis of how to do it even though those things are around in fact I only know those analyses because I used to homeschool my kids and these are some of the kinds of things that homeschoolers know because you actually have to rummage around in the foundation of where a lot of the beliefs and assumptions that we have lie and then you begin to realize that there's all these flat earthers running around and you say huh in fact I remember as I've told in previous videos driving down the coastline of the Dominican Republic with my translator with me who'd translate my Spanish into Creole I very quickly learned that this this school teacher this school teacher believed that the earth was flat and then I had to figure out should I as a missionary correct this in him should I as someone who knows he teaches school correct this in him and if I start this how integral to his life is this particular element of knowledge really these aren't the easiest questions to answer even though everyone should know and no one should know as you go to a marriage counselor and they'll caution you back from always never and maybe I will now too so you know doubt skepticism yeah I can play this game too you'll likely find another group that have had their doubts about nearly everything you can think of and they don't act in accordance with it in other words flat earthers will get on airplanes just like the rest of us um or they don't care about it this is how people are with all sorts of knowledge and and you know when you sort of understand what Rene Descartes was trying to do if I think therefore I am I mean this was in some ways the type of certainty he was looking for and find it finding it surprisingly difficult but you know so perhaps we might think about a near universal observation we might think about a near universal observation about human beings that knowledge doesn't always track well with democratically or universally held information people are really inconsistent about a whole lot of things and even when they say I believe this to be true they don't act in accordance with it now part of this is what John Sook was pointing to in his in his book I think searching for perhaps a better definition of what a faithful community might center itself around but I'm not entirely sure that some of these old standards are necessarily as decrepit as we might imagine in fact they might function not so much in ways we think they function but they're functioning in other ways in other words they're the kinds of ideas that we find useful but don't really know how to wield and in fact some of these ideas might be wielding us and the Rhett and Link question and answer session they also note that this also varies in terms of what they imagine to be relevant okay and this is my question about Fanell and whether or not the world is round how relevant is what I believe was a was an error in his thinking that the world was flat how relevant was that to our little task of him translating my probably not terribly relevant sermons to Haitian people from Spanish to Creole and all kinds of relevancies in his world if I had challenged him he probably would have caved immediately just in terms of status and employment but probably would not have changed his mind or reshaped his life this is some of the complexity about human beings and knowledge common in deconstructions are the assumptions that a variety of religious or theological beliefs are pushed aside into a category of can't know or no one knows but that move is of course itself an assertion of knowledge you know a lot of so now that we're having this COVID-19 virus thing going through um suddenly there's a very big epistemological experiment going on in our societies who do we believe do we believe the president do we believe the CDC do we believe a random English not even a doctor a youtuber who I'm following following every day do we believe the CDC do I believe my friends and neighbors who have experience or do I believe maybe someone I have a personal relationship who has a metal decree medical decree and tells me things now are my decisions about what to do with whether or not we cancel worship services relevant whole bunch of new relevancies sort of crash in when new situations arrive actually and so assumptions about relevance are just as much in this in this question about can't know or don't know their assertion that such beliefs are irrelevant to regular life is too an assertion of knowing and a categorization of knowledge I see the work of Alvin Plantinga and he's done a lot of work on this sort of thing as to whether or not belief in God is properly basic just google that and you'll get references to books and such and you know Alvin Plantinga is a proud son of the Christian Reformed Church instead of a book instead of a church or a book telling you what you can and cannot know there are a set of beliefs mostly crowdsourced and intuitively subscribed to and these are usually some of the things that govern people's deconstructions more than what they read in a book and in fact in a way Rhett dealt with that rather adequately because if you get in this game of well I find experts on this side you're going to find experts on that side and so part of for part of this reason we much more intuitively based on whole ranges of signals sort of find our worldview pieced together I'll talk about that a little bit more later and probably in subsequent videos that the um instead of a church or a book telling you what you can and cannot know there are a set of beliefs mostly crowdsourced intuitively subscribed to and sometimes unconsciously subscribed to that are governing this piece of knowledge that the not sure person isn't really owning up to in their humble brag sort of way we see this today in the COVID-19 epidemic there will be a huge diversity of expressions of this in a free society and we're seeing them already people will have lots of ideas as to why they will or won't get the virus and what they will or won't do about it etc etc John Campbell in fact in his YouTube talked about there have been an increased number of alcohol poisonings in Iran apparently because this might be completely wrong people somewhere heard that alcohol can kill the disease and he made the point well alcohol on the surface of your skin might kill the disease but drinking alcohol especially in an Islamic society that tends to frown on alcohol consumption um I'm gonna drink this disease away not having a beer or a vodka screwdriver will not cure the disease that's not how alcohol and the virus are related remember relevance realization and the more I think about this virus the more I touch my face people have lots of ideas as to why they will or won't get the virus and what to do with it etc etc some people will act on bad or wrong information at least according to the scientists or the experts or the doctor or by virtue of their own actions feel vindicated while others will find themselves in serious trouble and have regrets this is what it means to be human you'll have to make decisions that will be consequential for you based on all of this menagerie of conflicting information and signals yeah you'll be subject to a whole variety of things you can't control you might try really hard to avoid the virus and be you know killed by food poisoning in your isolation this stuff happens all the time global warming is a similar topic if people are making up their minds because of all sorts of ideas and signals around them that's how we as human beings do it and again the diversity of ideas is probably a is probably a feature and not a bug you'll find in fact that you're swimming in such situations throughout your life involving marriage money relationships parenthood etc much of it will be deeply consequential to your life in ways you can't possibly control and often not know but yet but yet here we are making decisions and non-decisions about these things every day now i'm gonna pause here so i can take a drink not of alcohol just water now the title of their video had to do with hell and for afterlife stuff all these same things come into play now let's get to hell and death and dying um you can't know is really what they keep saying um but really what they're asserting is i want to assert that the people who think they know are wrong and my ideas even which i say i hold loosely i am asserting some knowledge over that by virtue of my actions and inactions there will be a cost analysis that they do and i should have had a end quote there somewhere that's what i get for staying up late typing a little screed into google docs so let me let me see if i can phrase that and make better sense of it so what you'll hear ret and linka say we don't know whether or not there's afterlife or something like that but they're really sort of suggesting that the other people can't know and again in some ways that's analogous to the 2008 housing bubble now it might be that everybody in 2006 and 2007 are watching some people that say i know and other people that say i know and a good number of the people are wrong and there's no easy way to verify who's right and who's wrong until in fact after the event and that's very much what a lot of us are facing but you really can't say that nobody knows because lots of people think they know it may it might be that you don't know but what they're really wanting to assert is that i don't think these other people know well okay that's fine to assert but you don't know that either they do think they know but you don't know whether or not they're right or maybe you do that's that's how we are as human beings now there'll be a cost there'll be a cost benefit analysis that they will do and like an investor in 2004 or a health conscious person in 2020 will make their best bets based on what they think they know and they don't know and this is in fact why when ret says i'm not worried about hell because i don't believe in it i mean i've made very similar comments not about hell but about many things you know i don't worry about what muslims believe is my afterlife destination because i don't share their worldview i think ret is exactly right on that but we ought to be a little bit careful about this whole business about knowledge because sort of what happens is we throw those things up in the air and say you can't know well i don't think they know that you can't know either in other words i see your doubt and i raise more doubt to your doubt does that make any sense but there will be a righteous but there will be a rightness and a wrongness about it as with everything um as with everything some who think they know will be right and some will be wrong and the consequences for knowing and acting will be done in other words there's sort of a movement that says well i don't know and you can't know and there's sort of an insinuation that there are no consequences for this move that can't be known either maybe there are and maybe there aren't and so that ought to lead us to a little bit of pause because in a sense what they're saying is there are no consequences to this and i'd say uh you can't know that either especially giving the new posture that you've embraced at least in terms of this everybody knows this democratically universal universal knowledge that that we're dealing with that we imagine is is the kind of knowing that human beings do he makes a point about pascal's wager but doesn't really exhaust it because pascal also had a point about actions and probability pascal's wager lingers on because while it might not close the deal for everyone it's also hard to dispel which is why it hangs around because pascal's wager in a sense says okay well you might not know and we do live with a high degree of uncertainty but that doesn't mean we can't know and there are consequences for knowing or not knowing and choosing and not choosing just like there are consequences for where to put your money in 2008 and there are consequences for how to live your life in 2020 just because you imagine that any of this religious talk is consequence free well i doubt that and i intend to make an argument that says even within as the writer of eclesiastes says that which is under the sun there are consequences to it and this consequentialism psychologically is not unknown to them because a lot of their deconstruction talk deals with the consequences of deciding what now they do and don't know and are and are no longer sure of there are consequences to regarding psychological outcomes in this life which are sort of glossed over even while they're also parading and forefronting other aspects of it there's a lot of talk about freedom of their being not sure they don't have to feel the need to condemn gays or exclude them from this or that you know they can hug a gay without feeling icky i mean i'll they talked about this in some of the other videos um often in a humble brag sort of way they congratulate themselves on their evolution and heroism which might come at a social cost to their old community and those pressures which are again really very true but also come with a social status upgrade because in our culture a lot of the beautiful people in government power is aligned with this evolution that's in fact how communities work that you will be rewarded by some communities for some ideas and punished for others and vice versa and sort of the what the thing we do with respect to social status is we intuitively look around and we say who is everybody looking at what is everybody desiring renee gerard and and what are we all interested in and that's how we move together as a community this is how fashion works it's it's how we as human beings work and so they've made some decisions and these decisions have had psychological outcomes today it takes a lot of courage to stand against the tide on many issues then to deconstruct it in the popular crowd people come up on stage and it takes a lot more takes a lot more courage to stand against the community in which you are living in now here's the thing many of us are living in multiple communities at the same time and so we're either nuancing or picking and choosing and real courage tends to be things that you will pay a price for and when i hear at the end of their question and answer video that they just released when i hear them talking about having you know feeling relief that they finally did this that's a very important statement and it's a very true statement it's a very real statement it's a very right statement but it's also a very psychological statement because they likely had a sense of duplicity now when they go go back home to northern carolina and even visit the church and you know they'll pay some of the social price but now they're receiving i'm sure a lot of acclaim and applause by other groups of people that's how we work and it's inevitable especially when we're living in the midst of complex communities full of differing opinions that's just how we are sociology of knowledge is a real and powerful thing for this reason i'm not skeptical and dismissive both about the cost of deconstructing away from their christian beliefs in their church communities that took a toll it's a reason their wives cried that's very real stuff but at the same time um they're now celebrated by another community so for this reason i'm not skeptical and dismissive both about the cost of deconstructing away from beliefs from one community or of origin but neither am i terribly moved by the heroism of reconstructing into a belief that is celebrated by the beautiful high status and powerful communities of their new setting they you know it sounds dismissive but there's an element of truth to what they were doing even before they changed their zip code i feel these same influences in terms of making new higher status friends these are powerful powerful things as every parent of a teenager knows it's just as we get older we tend to get a little bit more sophisticated but these same pressures remain they don't feel the need to reinforce the social norms of their small community but that but that feels like a weight off their social shoulders but they always seem to be a moral there always seems to be a moral or political or religious out group and their new in group will reward or punish their behaviors in terms of the new norms that must be upheld and reinforced in other words it's the new them but it's the new them of the now and how well will the new now the new them of the now really endure in terms of as they travel into the future this is where we sort of get into the jordan peterson darwinian mode of trying to figure out wisdom here's the thing about the past it's durable as you know i talked to tom holland it changes too oh yeah it changes too because we see the past through our own eyes and through our own filters but that which survived from the past at least has that going for it there is a darwinian time factor involved here too the old norms of their old subgroups may have become obsolete or at least felt obsolete but in many cases these norms have been time and community tested in ways that the new norms aren't and i still have to find that clip of jordan peterson i think it was with sam harris when jordan peterson was basically making the comment and he made it so well that yeah to change change is tough because a lot of changes are bad to not change yeah not change is tough because often you have to change there you are in the middle it's really hard and what you really want to have is relevance realization to figure out well well which way is actually an upgrade well and this is where what has endured i can't remember this saying that i often use um ontology is its own justification something that is is for a reason and this new thing that you've brought out it is now but we're making claims to its democratically accessibility or universal universally known and agreed upon your idea is going to have to weather a whole lot of storms and a whole lot of time before i buy that argument so they don't know how the new norms will hold up or how new things will feel as time goes on and again ross do thoughts some of the some of the when he's talking about a bunch of things in his in his new book talks about this that you know we're if you live in the now you live in a very small place and you live in a very fragile place because the now is always evaporating and it's always becoming into the future and a lot of the things that you're holding on to will not endure well how do i know that that's what we've seen in the past that's in many ways some of our bet the best way to do that is to be able to do it and the best way we can have to judge the now and the future this plays out in politics all the time one person says that they're on the right side of history well okay but history is a large and complex thing in the 1920s to be on the right side of history for many people meant pro-prohibition for the sake of women and children just read history folks pro-prohibition and pro-eugenics the history of Planned Parenthood by the 1950s the right side of history had changed dramatically i hawk this book often but i read it before i started doing videos read um Oneida a free love utopia and a well-set table it's a wonderful book and it's a wonderful book for now when you read the fact that at the end of the 19th century in upstate new york that burned over district you had a free love egalitarian utopian commune that was flourishing why is it no longer there why did they all become capitalists by the 1950 known by their wonderful silverware that they made the Oneida brand that you can still find and is respected you find this Oneida brand silverware and it's like this is from a free love utopia yeah that's where it started and when you read what they thought of what they were practicing and trying well it was a brave new world it had eugenics it had equality between the sexes it had um non-monogamy it had so many of the ideas that people tried out to say oh this is a wonderful new idea well i hate to sound like the book of ecclesiastes or maybe i don't really hate to sound like the book of eclastes but there's nothing new under the sun so just read more many old groups bear the systems of old declining groups and they don't know what declines their new groups will face so enjoy the heyday of your new evolution and your new deconstruction because it probably won't last long because there's the way it's the way of the world to change and all that is new will become old and again reviewing jordan peterson's rather long view darwinian perspective on religious beliefs in the bible there's a reason this stuff endures now there's lots of other stuff that endures that i don't necessarily agree with but is it significant how long it endures how well it endures where it endures it actually is what may feel so broad open and informed today like all the decisions of the Oneida community um might look like yesterday's fundamentalism tomorrow it does not pay to do your it does pay to do your homework instead of just saying nobody knows which is not a humble statement you might say it's hard to be certain but i will have to give it my best shot and face the consequences that's really a more honest statement statement often i write stuff and it's inscrutable to me the next day and seemed so brilliant when i was typing it in the moment it is an assertion that the things left behind as non-essential it is an assertion that things that are left behind as non-essential are actually non-essential you don't know that how do you know what is essential you know but the non-essentialism is of course subject to the knowledge problem that i've been talking about how do you know what is essential and what is not again get back to the verveky stuff this is a lot of the stuff that he covers now again john and i disagree with a whole lot but a lot of his treatment of this i think is is dead on right what do we mean by essential what do we mean by relevance well you can't know in other words how can you know a lot of what we're doing i would call just dead reckoning oh this is better than that well um these internal combustion engines seem better than horse manure and we find all the ways that were they're better but again one of my favorite pieces out of one of jordan peterson's classes is what is a car what is essential to a car you thought it was a conveyance to get you from a to b but it's a machine that rejiggers the chemical composition of the atmosphere and redefine cityscapes and and and changes how people relate to each other what is the birth control pill we don't know what these things are because we don't know their relevance because we're seeing in this tiny form and so all these items about knowledge and non-knowledge well they're all subject to these ideas too the internal combustion engine resolved the not inconsiderable problem of horse manure in urban areas but did they know the consequences do they know what was essential about automobiles we drive in the fog at great speeds there is also the psychological feeling of well-being aspect to this this is sam harris's well-being let's imagine that sam harris and his tribe are right about the idea that there is no afterlife let's imagine some person in some obscure religious group imagined that their tiny religious faction got everything right and this person died in the full comfort and pleasure of being sure that their tiny group was right and will be thoroughly rewarded in a rich afterlife to the degree that they live their days in generosity and anticipation of this eternity ahead it's not hard to imagine all good deeds will be rewarded and all wrongs punished and all the wrongs of history perfectly compensated for by the best possible outcome that only an omniscient all-wise all-powerful being could achieve way better than the four of the good place let's compare that well-being to something to someone who doesn't know and just sort of hopes that either there will be nothing or something read steve jobs by i um biography i forget that it was it was one out it was a big one that came out i can't remember the author right now but toward the end of steve steve jobs just knew that well when he got pancreatic cancer well he didn't want any surgeon cutting him open that's dangerous he was just going to eat healthy and that was going to take care of the pancreatic cancer well he had a treatable form of pancreatic cancer and guess what he waited too long and lost his window so then at the end of his life then he starts postulating is there more well there they talked about it not sure psychologically which well-being is better founded the person of the religious group that believes themselves so sure of everything that they die lovingly surrounded on their bed with the firm hope that a wonderful future awaits them or the people that say i hope so in other words in fact a lot of people are saying well i'm just sure there's nothing okay is that an upgrade from being sure of heaven let's compare that well-being to someone who doesn't know and just sort of hopes that either there will be nothing or something they don't know let's apply pascal's wager to this it would seem to me that the person in the tiny religious sect enjoys greater well-being than the person who sort of hopes things will be okay from this perspective the newfound not sure person have brought themselves all they've brought themselves is a degree of discomfort a lack of well-being was this an upgrade now again some of the things are going to feel like an upgrade some of the things won't that's the dead reckoning that we tend to do with respect to well-being all the time all of the questions of knowledge and responsibility remain that you have for coven 19 virus or the stock market or a housing bubble perhaps it perhaps it is compensated for by the pride and happiness afforded by a status upgrade of joining people who are cool and beautiful in the culture guilty about it and in fact they gain moral status by expressing their feelings of guilt which again i as a calvinist am enormously familiar with i've seen calvinists play this game forever we're totally depraved but i know it and declare it congratulations given the fact that most people of color tend to be more conservative and more religious than the white elites but now i'm just being a little bit cheeky what they really have is an implicit vision of the good life and if you get right before the commercial break in that video that's exactly what ret says it's just our job to make things a little bit better for the next generation ah better involves relevance realization and knowledge and it's that also is constructed by your world view now a lot of things are sort of dead reckoning a b tested along the way but they're not really known is it better to get coven 19 now in a light strain rather than perhaps some other mutation which coming down the road you don't know is it better to cancel things now and face probably a recession or to just muscle through in the hopes that this whole thing won't be as serious you don't know or maybe you do you can't say that no one can know some people are probably right you might not well what does that mean you're left with well you're left with the jordan peterson moment of having to act what they really have is an implicit vision of the good life which is not really subject to their own not sure at all they're pretty sure about the good life in fact they opt for it they've also got not sureness about the good life and they're wrestling with those things but by virtue of their decisions and their actions they are making decisions and they have as jordan peterson said at lafayette college they have a religion back there in the back of their head that vision has been constructed pre-volutionally communally they can't disagree with me that it's the product of the sociology of knowledge operation or maybe it's just been implanted by god or the gods what they but we do know that if we want to shape our beliefs we exert some agency not over the rider but over the path the elephant will take this is what religious communities have been doing actually right from the beginning so again in their video this was actually the first slide of a video i was going to make it might be the first slide of a subsequent video hell fear morality and beliefs your beliefs are pre-volutional your beliefs are pre-volutional you don't choose them they appear self-evident that's what they do they appear self-evident to you not to whoever else you're talking to they are not publicly self-evident they are formed historically that's what my belief system says um they've formed historically out of personal history out of the communal cultural history and also out of things that we don't know what and now you might say god which really isn't a bad word for exactly what we're talking about here and in many ways that's pretty much jordan peterson's argument with sam harris when they talked but now back to jonathan height who in many ways launched this whole video thing that's how that's how warren mills my friend warren found um jordan peterson and in many ways if i hadn't first found jonathan height i probably wouldn't have been interested in jordan peterson and reading jonathan height books for a number of years the rider the elephant and the path religious communities have long known that your agency over your pre-volutional beliefs are partially subject to your volition by exercising agency over the path so you get some say in what you believe you don't get to choose your beliefs you just sort of believe them but you do get some say in how the beliefs are formed and actually when you think about it that's a pretty good mix but it's not as direct as our current agency regimes like to imagine so there's the elephant metaphor the rider is the rational mind the elephant is the emotional mind or the intuitive mind and the path are environmental factors here's what the rider gets to do oh wondering if i look i had a time difference in the conference call okay i'm gonna wrap this up so that's what the rider does another resource to think about why i left and why i stayed tony campolo talking to his son bart who had quite a quite a large quite a large uh departure from christianity um it's a heartfelt video and i'll put the link to it and and the book is also excellent but one of tony's big points was bart you left the church and when you left the church i pretty much knew now you were leaving the faith now is it a chicken and egg thing yeah that's certainly true but but the point is it's the path that in many ways will determine what you believe eric dirksen made the same point in my conversation with him he said you know it used to be in the past if someone started sniffing around church i'd want to get a book to read in a sense that's handing something to the rider now i say start going to church because it's in the context of that community that these things are formed and now john sook of course continues to go to church but there's the kind of church which is again why i'm quite interested in his path and so in many ways i look at things from both sides now and you can sing that old song agency and belief is not are not linear we are rightly responsible for our beliefs and actions and face the consequences for them we face rewards and punishments for them in this world not always justly but like the coven 19 or client our climate or finance we will face consequences reward or judgment in this life and beyond just a little nod to jordan peterson and one of the meetups someone says he gave people ego and i've been thinking about that and some people challenge that and she egos the right word what he did was give people agency he encouraged them to think to research to decide to risk to live and i think that actually addresses some of what ross do thought is dealing with in terms of our agency and so again that's not that's part of the reason why i'm not hugely bothered by ret and links deconstruction nor john sooks nor rachel held evans even though i disagree with them at least they're showing some agency here at least they're engaging in the conversation and i think as tim keller said you need some you need some you need some doubt in order to and you might even need to do some deconstruction and actually in order to actually reconstruct something that is deeper broader firmer better to get beyond our decadence well i'm out of time i gotta run thanks for listening