https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=kLgBtn71srQ

 This is my second video on the nuns as post-enlightenment post-christians and I want to play more of this video. It's an outstanding video. And the link below to watch the whole thing. I think it has everything to do with Rhett and Link. That's the film that Nathan Jacobs did in conjunction with the Orthodox Church and you can find it on Amazon. So there you have it. Flesh and blood nuns. Those are the folks that made their way into the film. But like I said, I sat and talked with probably over 50 such individuals who would say over and over the same sorts of things. And I've spoken with way more than 50 all through years and years and years. And again, the same themes come up again and again. And becoming truly human, you'll hear the same things coming up again. You'll find them in the Pew studies. Any pastor who's paying attention to this stuff will be reading the same things over and over again. Now I want to start by dispelling certain misconceptions about the nuns. A common reaction to the decline in religion, and it's a reaction that comes from both atheists and theists, is that there's this war of ideas going on. We have the new atheists and they're going after religion and you have the Christian apologists. And as I said before, the filming of this, I don't know who's running around. Show the guy who's talking. And this culture war is breaking out and the rise of the nuns demonstrates that the atheists are winning. That is a common reaction that you can see in the cheers of triumph from the new atheists and from the nail biting of the theists. And this is on full display with the Rhett and Link stuff. But there's a problem with this reading of the stats. It's not true. That's the main problem with it. I mentioned in pre-production of Becoming Truly Human, I interviewed 50 plus nuns, only two self-identified as atheists. And even those did not do so without qualification. I lean atheist. And you can hear that in Rhett and Link's conversations too. So 90 percent of the people that I surveyed approximately believed in a higher power, God, something like that. So and that was far from their only spiritual belief, which we'll talk about here tonight. Just as many professed a belief in karma or fate, most consider themselves to be spiritual beings. And more than 90 percent believe in ghosts and other spirits, angels and demons. Even the atheists, incidentally, I say more than 90 percent, because even the atheists who would say, no, I don't believe in God, science, science, science, my apartment is haunted. We'll return to that because I think there's something important there. But let's this be anecdotal. Pew has reported the same findings, more or less. Only 13 percent of nuns identify as atheists in the Pew statistics. So pretty close to the same thing that I found in my sample. In 2017, the New York Times released an article, which I love the title of, Don't Believe in God, How About UFOs? And the point of the article was to say, if what you think is going on with this movement away from religion is that people are becoming atheistic materialists, then you don't understand who these people are. They are more likely than not, statistically speaking, to believe in ghosts, UFOs, Bigfoot, right, and any number of things. And again, if you look at Paul Anleitner, his conversation with Clay Rutledge, same story. Again, none of this is new. And anybody paying attention to these trends, and again, any individual might have a different story, but these trends are broad. And anybody who's paying attention to the literature right now, and a lot of pastors do, this is the story. So if the atheists are not winning, what on earth is happening? Why is this going on? I'll offer my diagnosis. I think neither the atheists nor the Christians are winning the debate. Instead, both sides have lost the audience. Now, why? Why have the nuns checked out of that debate? I did an article for the journal. Now, some of you might say, well, if you listen to Rhett's deconstruction, he kind of checked out the debate. That's true. But he was checking it out on his way out the door. And the debates over evolution, as he even said in his deconstruction, they really weren't determinative for him, but they began to be part of the process of moving away. ...of open theology. And in that article, I trace the discussions in modernity about divine revelation, right? How God reveals himself and what it means to talk about divine revelation. And one of the things that I found fascinating when doing that research and working on that article was that everything that you find in Locke and Hume and Hobbes and Fichte, Spinoza, they are the same arguments that you hear today. Now, again, if you go back to the previous video, to this one, I'll call this one part two. This is all the enlightenment arguments. These are enlightenment figures. These issues haven't really changed dramatically since the enlightenment in this area. There's quite truly nothing new under the sun in terms of that discussion. And so in many ways, when you listen to the new atheists and you listen to the Christian apologists, you're listening to a modernist debate. They are through and through modernists. And the problem is that the nuns are not children of the Enlightenment, which means they completely disconnect with both sides of the discussion. Now, if you didn't watch the beginning of this video, he himself has been through this process eventually joining the Orthodox Church. And if you want to hear Nathan Jacob's longer story, there's a video on my channel of him telling his story. It's about two hours long. And we talk about we talk through the whole thing. It's always it's also in a compact form in his movie Becoming Becoming Truly Human. Sometimes post enlightenment, right post modernity can be taken to signal there's no such thing as truth, right? Moral and moral and metaphysical relativism. This is not what I found with the nuns. The nuns in my assessment place greater trust in intuitions, what I'll call intuitions than in reason. So it's not that they've abandoned. Now, I want to nuance that a little bit. And I don't think I'm betraying his sense of it. Intuition in terms of this is again, anybody paying attention to what's going on in the broader culture will notice that this is been stock treatment of Use the force, Luke. You know, keep the thing shut. Trust your feelings, Luke. I mean, our culture has been putting this out for a long time that it's this it's that it's this self down below that will manifest itself and lead us into truth. Now, intuitions are not a bad thing. I was just having a conversation yesterday that with Aaron Parker, who's got his own YouTube channel. And he and I had a conversation about a year ago and he wanted to hold it until he had some more stuff. And then he had some different feelings about Jordan Peterson. So he didn't post it. And then he asked if I would do another conversation with him. And we spent a fair amount of time talking about intuitions. And intuitions, I think, are are well understood as signals. They are they are parts of your awareness, minimally telling you things that your conscious mind might not know. They're other parts of your consciousness, Congress, that are informing you of things. They're good. They're good signalers, but they're bad masters because the problem with intuitions, just like instincts, which isn't too far from intuition and feelings, which also isn't too far from intuition. They make bad masters. And in other words, as a human being that is integrated, you have to use these things to make your way through the world. And and there's plenty of science right now that will say, you know, your intuitions can yield knowledge for you, not just your reason. So your intuitions are not necessarily bad things to take into account and listen to. But your intuitions are not infallible. And what you find, what what Nathan is saying here is that for the most part, people are far more intuitive. And again, if you if we bring in Jonathan Heights, Elephant and the Rider, the elephant is far more intuitional and the rider is far more reasonable. And often the rider will create post hoc rational rationalizations to make sense of the intuitive decisions of the elephant. And most of the brain science books today will tell you that's closer to how we operate. And that makes a lot of sense for watching actual people in this world in the irrational ways that they live. And in reason, it's not that they've abandoned truth, but it's that they're more driven by certain types of intuitions, moral intuitions, spiritual intuitions, aesthetic intuitions. And in part one, I talked quite a bit about moral intuitions. OK, now, now, again, morality has to be both universal and contextual. And in a sense, morality is where the universal incarnates into context in the world. It's where the moral word becomes flesh in action. That's what morality is supposed to do. And, well, if you have a moral rule book and moral intuitions in the past, people might have stuck more to the moral rule book. Today, people are perhaps deferring and in public, it's being recognized, legitimated, reinforced, rewarded. That didn't just that just didn't feel authentic to me. Well, then you shouldn't have done that. If you listen to these conversations today as compared to, let's say, when I was a child 40, 50 years ago, you will hear that rationale much more today. You should do what feels authentic to you. Now, one of the things that you'll notice in morality is that even though there's this morality of authenticity that's in play today, there's still sort of covered up moral rules behind the scene. And again, if you listen to Rhett and Link talk about these things, you'll hear them. You'll hear them basically pinging moral rules while they're talking intuitional fronts. Maybe, in fact, I'll get back into that other video because I do have I do have the link for it. And when I set up the slideshow for part one, that's not it. Come on. Didn't I put it in? The reason maybe people had such a in addition to obviously like the kids watch you angle. Right. I saw that getting thrown. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Was it's it's such a core thing for them. And you're such reasonable guys. I even. Okay. Reasonable guys. What does that mean? Now, one of the things that earlier in the show they talked about was, well, they run such a clean show because YouTube likes that. It's very interesting how this this Christian standard lingers even in a commercial framework because YouTube doesn't necessarily want to tick off everybody who has moral intuitions deeply developed by Christianity that doesn't want to see nudity, that doesn't want to hear profanity, that doesn't want to hear certain kinds of content. Even YouTube, which will allow, you know, certainly far broader things than network television will. YouTube has a standard in order to reach a broader audience. And this this morality doesn't doesn't just comply. It also shapes. I went through one of the pieces that was kind of like going after you. And I use that kind of loosely, but it was almost like the point of the article was we need to get better at like debating. See, see, that's much more of a modernist rational. So here's our foundations. We do our reason and we live out our summaries. And again, I'm not saying that that isn't true and I'm not saying it isn't good and I'm not saying it doesn't function in some people. But the majority of people today, their intuitional aspect is what common, let's call it folk morality is popularly reinforcing. You do you. You do what's authentic to you. But if being authentic means voting for the wrong political party or having ideas about a particular sexual or racial or behavioral group or or or this other morality, which is sort of hiding behind the veneer of all this authenticity language, it will come to the fore. And if you listen to this video, you'll hear it come to the fore often. These points. And it was so weird. Rettling like are too far gone. But it was very political. It was so strange to me. Yeah. And I and I we understand that because we were intimately involved in that side of it. Now, if you go to my part one video, what you'll hear there is you remember I said there post enlightenment, his tone of voice there. What does that say? We've been there. We know Christianity. We've know the modernist. We've done all this. And and here American pragmatism comes in. It either didn't work for us or it was no longer authentic to us or later. It's immoral. So again, the authenticity language is sort of covering this morality language, which will peak up every now and then. I think we we have regrets associated with that. But it. And again, this is self-effacing. This is how you present yourself as a moral person in terms of our categories. Remember, there is that universal morality that is the universal aspect of morality that is at play. And we appeal to it. But we also appeal to the authenticity. It still hurts when you say when you share this is who I am. And then the response is this is where you're wrong. And I think he said it perfectly there. But if you think about this long enough, so anything that I feel to be authentic in me is above and beyond social commentary and even moral commentary. That's not a rule any of us can live by. And that's not a rule these guys are looking to live by. You know, and I think that's where I start to I start to relate to people who make the brave move to come out of the closet is that there's. And this is a pretty gutsy move. This level of appropriation. You know, not everybody's going to be cheering this thing. This is who I am. And they do get the response a lot. That's like this is no this is a choice you made or this is a you know. Well, let's see. Now, as I said in the last video, you can't camp too hard on that choice business because as LGBTQIA on and on and on goes, a lot of this is, you know, this is self-expression. My choice is my identity. My choice is what and who I am. And you ought not to judge or complain about that. That's that's nothing that will no community can hold together with such a standard. And I I feel for those people more than ever now. And so that's what I was trying to say earlier. But I also because I think that's why that's the emotional component. You know, I should. That is an emotional component. But again, where are emotions in our knowledge hierarchies? They're a lot higher. It's we're living in an intuition. All age who I was. But then now I'm dealing with the criticism of. Well, you just you just did it wrong. If you would have understood or lived certain things or if you didn't have a certain neurosis like if you didn't have the anxiety you have or. And again, nobody likes to be deconstructed. And we all like to imagine that the especially within this current worldview that, well, if it's based on my intuitions, that's sort of the sacred platform of my identity. And so don't deconstruct my intuitions. That's wrong. If you deconstruct my intuitions. Well, now we're right on the we're right on the cusp of the meaning crisis. What will be left of me? Maybe all of my intuitions. I mean, we've we've basically spent 100 years learning psychology and sociology saying that intuitions are constructed. And we're ready to point that out and other people. But we don't like to see that about ourselves because if if I am my intuitions. And my intuitions are constructed, then there's no me. This is something you put on yourself and it's that's not what God wants for you. Or you don't understand grace or whatever. You don't understand grace. Oh, it's a theological problem. But that that theology stuff that comes from dogma. That comes from books. The true source of knowledge is inside is my intuitions. That's that's the fount of my true self. I think. You know, and I think I think those things are true to a certain extent that like, yeah, this is part of who I am. But it but it hurts. It just hurts when you're sharing who you are. And then people pick pick it apart like it's separate from you. None of us wants to be constructed. When you said you said a moment ago there were regrets with something. What were you saying? What did I say? I have been judgmental of being. You mean you in the past. Yeah. Of being. And again, the judgmental thing is difficult to continue to manage because. Give all the little. Well, you do you. But if you're excluding gays from your church, that's wrong. Oh, well, now again, the universal morality now comes to the fore. See, we're not going to get away from the propositional. And this is let's give modernity its due. And you know, we can we can cloak it in all sorts of these things, but it's coming to the fore and it's not going away. You know, I think being on the receiving end, I think we were on the giving end for a long time of just being able to put people in a in a box. Well, I labeled it specific specifically to render judgment when you. The difficulty that you have is you can't do a transformation. Again, go back to my transformation video. You can't do a transformation without rendering judgment about better or worse. There will be a hierarchy. You are going to have to promote or demote things within that hierarchy. It's not going away. That's. Maybe a couple of minutes. And listen, everybody has their own biases and everyone everyone basically thinks that they're right. Otherwise, I mean, you hopefully. Yeah, we all do. Everyone is sort of as close to the truth that they think they are like, you know. Authenticity. But there's an interesting sort of there's this interesting thing that happens when you subscribe to a worldview, which says that you have the truth. Like you have the preeminent truth that comes from the creator of the universe and you have a special relationship with the creator of the universe. And that's the universality. And a lot of other people don't. Even if you're a loving person, because there's plenty of people who are incredibly loving who are in the Christian community. And of course, where does the Christian community get that love from? And if you listen to these guys and their deconstructions, they all continue to profess an ethic of love that that part of Christianity they haven't dropped. But if you subscribe to that worldview, you can't help but delegitimize so many other experiences that people have. Well, the thing is, you can't have an experience without delegitimizing delegitimizing other experiences that you have had that have been in competition with them. Because we're all having many of them. That's sort of what it means to be a human being. Like you can't help but delegitimize. If you're if you're the kind of Christian who subscribes to the idea that the and and what he's suggesting, he doesn't want to say it. But what he's suggesting is that's wrong. So, again, authenticity, but the morality sort of comes out. Let's go back to Nathan Jacobs. And for my part, I think this is actually a positive shift, a useful shift. And I'll explain why to initiate this. Let me start by drawing on C.S. Lewis is the problem of pain. So C.S. Lewis and the problem of pain in the opening of that book, the introduction, Lewis begins by saying he's offers a critique of the proofs for the existence of God. Right. We all hand camera guy. What are you doing? Offer these proofs. And all we really demonstrate is how weak our proofs are. It opens with a quote from Pasco. And one of the things that's interesting that I think nobody really points out about what Lewis says here is he never actually identifies any logical problem with the proofs. He never says they don't work ever says they're fallacious. Nothing problematic about them. His critique is just that the proofs have very little to do with how people became religious in the first place. That's his criticism. It's not a logical problem. It's an existential one. Now, Lewis. In other words, Lewis is critiquing that he's saying modernity. Basically, Lewis is framing out the elephant in the rider here and saying, yeah, you know, all what the riders are saying, it's true. It's fine. It's good. But that's not what's moving people. It's the elephant. It's these intuitions and they're herd based and we watch each other and we gain status by making making the noises that the people that we want to impress. Those are those are the noises we make. This goes on to offer in his introduction to the problem of pain, a genealogy of religion. And if you go back to the video where I treated this video the first time I walked through some of the problem of pain back. Now, I'm going to talk about how he's trying to figure out how did people become religious. And he talks about these three stages that that religion develops through and in Christianity one more. I wonder if I could have somebody read a quote from me for Lewis. So, reader. Thank you. We find three strands or elements in Christian. Now, hand camera, dude. The first of these is what Professor Otto calls the experience of the numinous. Those who have not met this term may be introduced to it by the following device. Suppose you are told there was a tiger in the next room. You would know that you are in danger and probably feel fear. But if you are told there is a ghost in the next room and believed it, you would feel feel indeed what is often called fear, but of a different kind. It would not be based on the knowledge of danger. No one is primarily afraid of what a ghost may do to him, but of the mere fact that there is a ghost. It is uncanny rather than dangerous. And the special fear it excites may be called dread. With the uncanny one has reached the fringes of the numinous. Pretty good. All right. Okay. So the background of Lewis's argument here, in case you are unfamiliar with the numinous or Professor Otto or any of the things that he is talking about there, is Professor Otto refers to Rudolf Otto, a German Lutheran thinker who is most known for his book, The Idea of the Holy. And this book is in many ways a response to Immanuel Kant's philosophy. So Immanuel Kant had spent time trying to exposit the nature of human experience, the parameters and the boundaries of it. And one of the things that Otto critiques Kant about in this book is that his exposition of human experience has left no room for direct experience of God. Now, it's a very good reason Kant has done this. That's important to his project. But Rudolf Otto thinks there is a problem with that, namely that human experience has this universal experience of the numinous and more particularly of the holy. And that's how Rudolf Otto begins his response to Kant. Now, Lewis, drawing on this point, drawing on Otto, points out that the numinous, the numinous experience is central to the birth of paganism. I have another quote here, if somebody would be willing to read it. Can I get one more reader? Yeah. Now, nothing is more certain than that man from a very early period began to believe that the universe was haunted by spirits. We do not know how far back in human history this feeling goes. The earliest men almost certainly believed in things which would excite the feeling in us if we believed in them. And it seems therefore probable that numinous awe is as old as humanity itself. But our main concern is not with its dates. The important thing is that somehow or other it has come into existence and is widespread and does not disappear from the mind with the growth of knowledge or civilization. Okay. Now, building on this point, what Lewis goes on to argue is he's basically suggesting that numinous awe, right, is universal, but it's inherently irrational. Okay. Now, to be clear, by irrational he does not mean false. What he means by irrational, he's using a modernist definition of irrational here, is that it's not deduced from the fact that the universe is haunted by spirits. It's not deducible from the empirical or logical predicates of the situation. Okay. So putting aside the very technical word salad, for example, when we talk about why a square has four sides or other sorts of geometric truths, we can begin to appeal to the predicates, right, the things that are inherent to the definition of what these geometric shapes are. So using empirical examples, if we were talking to start to talk about why you're afraid of fire, right, you could begin to expose it the nature of fire and its capacities to. I'm going to cut to the chase here, as I don't think his explanation really preaches that well. What what what's the business with CS Lewis and the numinous here. So basically for the post, basically for the non enlightenment, the numinous is a is sort of a sense that we all have, like our other senses, it's not infallible, but it's not necessarily always wrong. It's right in that gray area, it can tell us things, it doesn't tell us the right things. Now this again for the post enlightenment people, it's not a bad thing to hear that you have a you have a sense of the numinous that you have. You have the capacity to sense the realm, the spiritual realm, as it were. And again, the vast majority of post enlightenment people are not going to have a problem with this. It's your modernists that are going to tend to have problems with this. But your your post enlightenment people, they don't have a problem with this at all. They believe in ghosts. They believe in that things are haunted. They they very much believe in the numinous. They believe that. And again, when I treated this before, I connected this with John Calvin's our census divinitatis that in fact we have a faculty that is able to sense the numinous, the numinous realm, the spiritual realm. And so and again for a group of people for whom their post enlightenment, well, they don't have a problem with this at all. Just like pre enlightenment or non enlightenment people don't have a problem with this at all. To burn and you exposition of why precisely you would be afraid of being touched by fire. And Lewis's point is that the uncanny and the numinous is immune to this type of analytic dissecting. That's what makes it irrational. Right. It can't be analyzed in that way. And this is this is where some of the analysis that Rhett and Link are receiving feels offensive because for them, well, their decision is based on what they've seen. And it's sort of like telling someone who's seen something. Well, that's not what you saw. It's that sort of thing. And Lewis's conclusion is that where you're what you're left with is this fork in the road. The fork in the road is either that it is a universal malfunction and human experience because that would be what the modernists would say because it can't be rationally analyzed and deduced. Or it is revelation. It is some sort of intuition about the world that we all share and therefore have come to understand something about the world through it. This type of argument is what contemporary philosophers would call properly functioning faculties argument. Alvin Plantinga is an important analytic philosopher. He's done a lot on these. So we can we can see what this looks like. Am I just asking the following question? So how many people here believe in an external world, you know, that you are not just a mind in a vat, that there are in fact other people in the room, that there are chairs, walls, things like that? How many folks here believe that? OK, looks to be universal. I think that's good. So I'll just pick at random then at that point. Father Moses, may I pick on you? Why is it that you believe in an external world? OK, so because you've seen it before. Right. And presumably that would be the answer that pretty much everybody would offer. We've seen it. We've tasted it. We've touched it. We've run up against it or it's run up against us. And yet, at the same time, there's little by way of arguments for, you know, for the external world. That's pretty much the only argument that can be offered in the history of ideas. Everyone who's ever tried to come up with an argument for the external world can't really do better than I've seen it. I've tasted it. I've touched it. And I just trust my faculties are telling me something correct. Right. So essentially what a properly functioning faculties argument is, is it says, I trust that I have faculties, right? Sight, sound, taste, touch, that these faculties are aimed at truth telling and that they're properly functioning right now. And therefore there are people in this room because here you are. Right. That's that's pretty much properly fun. And there and that is completely rational. Right. It's perfectly defensible position. Now, for this reason, though, what Lewis is basically asking us to do is to say perhaps we should treat with the same level of integrity other intuitions that we have rather than limiting it to say sight, sound, taste. We have these other intuitions that press in on us in the same way, telling us something about the world. The first that Lewis talks about is the numinous, right? The spiritual intuition of the uncanny that there are that our world is haunted. The second one Lewis goes on into the second stage of his genealogy of religion to talk about is morality. And in truth, morality has this same sort of character about it. It is just as difficult to analyze moral judgments about certain acts as it is to analyze the numinous. Now, now, again, what we see here is that a lot of the post the postmodern I see when I use that word, it goes in a certain way. The post evangelicals, they have a point that they, I would argue they do have faculties of apprehending the numinous that they do have faculties of apprehending morality, that morality is the kind of thing that we have faculties about that. That for the most part, we don't just every time we try to sense right and wrong, we don't do a little syllogism and build up morality from first principles or just simply take morality from a list of rules, even if it comes from your holy book. We don't do that. We have senses in both. Now, again, our senses are real. They're not necessarily erroneous, but they're also not necessarily infallible. And we have exactly the same situation with our senses of sight, with our senses of sound, with our senses of taste. This was David Hume's entire skeptical treatment of morality was to say, well, why are the human relationships so peculiar relative to other sort of relationships like stocks and blocks? But his point was simply that a mere logical analysis of situations don't actually give you the moral deliverances. And for that reason, we tend to just rely on the fact that we have these moral intuitions that tell us that's wrong. Right. And in many ways, that's why ethics is an exercise in in reverse engineering. We set up scenarios. It strikes our faculties as wrong. And then we say, well, what's what's an account of morality that makes sense of that? Now, I will also say that these intuitions are also formed. OK, and I think most of us, if we sit down for a moment, can come up with plenty examples of how our moral faculties are formed. They're formed by our experiences. They're formed by our biases. They're they're formed all over the place. The same with our in its same, probably to a degree, maybe not as much our our numeral faculties. They've they've been shaped by the experiences we've had in the world, our communities, what we've learned from our parents. You know, and you could say similarly to the way that your your hearing is formed or your taste is formed or even your your eyesight is formed. What you see has been formed by your community. Well, what do you what do you mean? Don't I just see out of my eyes? Well, there's a difference between your eyes taking in light and what your brain sees. When you walk into a room, there's salience. You will look at something and the the app that you look at is formed not just by your biology, but also by your culture and your history. And so there's all of this into all of these faculties. But we rely heavily on our moral intuitions because it can't be analyzed in that way. And finally, Lewis points out that the convergence of morality with the numinous is something that's exceedingly odd and not really defensible, but nonetheless was revealed to the Jews. OK, so this and again, read read read The Problem of Pain. It's an excellent argument. I find to actually be very timely. And the reason I think it's very timely is because the nuns are not against reason. They're just more interested in intuitions and the sorts of intuitions they're interested in are spiritual intuitions, moral intuitions and aesthetic intuitions. OK, and I think there's something commendable about that. We are not just a mind, right? This is an error of the rationalists to think that reason can offer everything about reality that we ought to know. Morality begins with intuitions, not reason. And Lewis is right. Religion begins with intuitions or experiences, not reason. Now, of course, intuitions without reason, unhinged from reason, is dangerous. Unexamined morality can lead to immorality. And again, if you look at the Vervecki stuff, you know, part of what, you know, his redefinition of rationality is a little different from what Nathan Jacobs is using here. This, you know, we pour wisdom in here. And so we we try to all of our faculties are subject to error. And so we try to do what we can to minimize those errors so we can navigate better. Unexamined spiritual intuitions leads to paganism or the occult. Right. So reason does need to be engaged in the process. Yet the churn from this purely empiricist rationalist framework is something that is intuition driven is actually a healthy thing, I would say. So where have the intuitions led the nuns? Right. Where have they been led? Answering this question is the remainder of this talk. But first, I want to offer a qualification, one that I've already hinted at. There is no singular nun worldview, right? Just because two people disassociate from religion doesn't mean that somehow they all believe they both believe the same thing. Nonetheless, there are very interesting common patterns, right? Dominant patterns within their thought. And I want to focus on four tonight, OK, which will set the backdrop for tomorrow. So let's begin with this one. The common belief in karma or faith, believe it or not, that shows up all the time. Again, even in the atheist, it's really weird. But now Rhett and Link didn't talk much about this, which which kind of interested me. But I think probably in a different conversation, you might have heard it come up. It could also be their deep Christian roots that suppresses some of that. But I wouldn't be surprised if you push them hard enough, especially their wives. I don't know their wives at all. I've never heard anything about them, but I tend to find everything happens for a reason. But now what is what do they mean when you have a religiously unaffiliated person, right? A nun say, I believe in karma or I believe in faith. Let's start with just the term karma. Of course, Hinduism has the death and reversal law are explained first. I mean, this is not what the nuns mean. I mean, so it's not Hindu karma. I'm fast forwarding through some of this. And again, I've treated this before about eight, nine months ago. And you can find those videos. And I'll tell you why. In my interviews, first of all, the nuns never once mentioned a belief in reincarnation. So that makes it very unlikely that what they mean by karma is the traditional Hindu doctrine of karma. And in fact, a lot of applications of the traditional Hindu doctrine, they would find as morally, morally offensive. If you would say that, well, children are born with birth defects because they had sinned in a previous life. In my experience, most most people who like using the word karma don't apply it in that way. In fact, most admitted to being unsure about what happens after death. And we'll talk about that a little later tonight. And you heard that with Ratan Lake. So instead, what it seems that the nuns mean when they say they believe in karma or fate is that they think, put colloquially, things happen for a reason. What goes around comes around. Right? Something like that. And they've picked up on this term karma as a sort of social signifier to say, oh, yeah, that's that's what that means. My name is Earl. Look it up. But now here's here's where an interesting tension emerges in the world view of many nuns. Rather than telling you what it is, I want to show you a clip and see if you can identify what the tension is. So this would be the clip labeled Karma. The problem of evil. This, again, is from from his movie Becoming Truly Human. Was hugely important to how I thought about God and how I navigated a lot of these questions. The problem of evil being that if God is all good, right, if he's all good, he should want to prevent evil. And if he's all powerful, he should be able to put this evil. Eric, you were somebody who had a lot of questions. What were some of the particular questions that really troubled you? My big one was the question of suffering. Why is there suffering in the world? We had a God that was all powerful, but didn't ever seem to do anything. You know, it seemed like. Now, here again, now he's going to make things you can talk about this in a minute. But notice I've been doing a lot of this work on you've got the Medi-divine realm and you've got God. These kind of the two options, the two big options, the Medi-divine realm, that the world is fundamentally at its foundation. It's impersonal and personal agents try to make their way according to their desires and their choices and their moral intuitions, whatever, try to make their way. Of course, God, the world is fundamentally personal and and there's a person watching it. Now, if you go back and you look at my conversation with Brett Sackold, implicit in this in these descriptions of the problem of evil is God is in the system, that there's a system out here like the Medi-divine realm. And the way God is supposed to be is supposed to be this this nanny state, as it were. And God is supposed to intervene and make sure that the things that I don't want to happen to me don't happen. OK, this is moralistic, therapeutic deism in the mid in the bound 2526. Tim Keller kept talking about gospel and religion. This is exactly what he's talking about that. Well, I can somehow through moral performance put God in my debt. And if I put God in my debt, then God is a divine watchdog who's constantly looking out for my well-being and will intervene before something bad happens. Therefore, when something bad happens, I know God is either uncaring, unreal, illegitimate or the whole story is whacked. And we go back to a Medi-divine realm cosmology. And it's finally up to me to save myself. Just didn't seem to care. Both of my dad's brothers died within like a five, ten year span of each other. My first uncle died in like an apartment fire where he just like fell asleep and his cigarette just caught the apartment on fire. And he just died in his sleep because he wasn't aware of it. And then my other uncle had cancer, I think, and he died like a year and a half ago or so. Like when both of my dad's brothers died, my dad cried and he never does. And it was just like really heartbreaking for me to watch him. I don't know, I would just have these like conversations with my mom about like, well, why is he so all-powerful? Why can't he solve like suffering or hunger or world peace or... So again, God is in the system. So you have the system, which is impersonal. So that's sort of the Medi-divine realm. And God is one God in the system. And this God is supposed to be all good and all powerful, all loyal. He's supposed to come in and fix all the things that we think are out of whack. Why isn't God a superhero? Like, it's sad. Like, I don't even like watching the news anymore because all of it is just crime. And she's just like, well, it's in his plan. You gotta trust it. And I'm like, well, why? And she just, like, she never gave me a definite answer because, I mean, nobody knows. Why do you have to trust him? If you don't trust him, you're going to hell. Oh, oh, well, then he's not good. That doesn't sound like a good Mr. Incredible who's, you know, he's incompetent and he's petty. And if I don't, he's petty and corrupt. And if I don't pay a legion and violate truth to the petty and corrupt God, well, then you have a moral failing. It kind of just made me like start thinking about all other things that goes along with being faithful and having faith in somebody that you can't talk to or see. I believe that there's a higher power. I mean, I don't necessarily think it's like God, like one old man that just controls everything, but. Notice again, God in the system. Notice again, the representation. I mean, you're not going to get that from Exodus 20, old man in the sky. I mean, I believe in like karma, fate, like things happen for a reason. So. OK, so did you catch the tension in the worldview? Anybody feel clear enough, bold enough to suggest what they what what the tension is there? Yeah. OK. Yes, that would be the tension. So on the one hand, you'll see in these interviews, I began to lose faith when this thing happened and I started asking, why did God allow that? And somebody would say, well, God, let things happen for a reason. And then when they circle around to the current beliefs, I definitely believe in karma and fate. Things happen for a reason. Now, what are we to make of that? What are we to make of that tension? Right. The uncharitable reading of this is that it's just a boldface contradiction. It's a product of sloppy thinking. They're idiots. Right. Things like that. That would be the uncharitable reading. I think there's a better explanation. God is personal and karma is not. I think that's your better explanation. And right there, you have the tension between the meta divine realm and God. As Christine Hayes talked about it, Ezekiel Kaufman, this theme that I've been working on for a while now. The main objection is that God was watching. He could have stepped in and he didn't. God is inside the system. And God's job is to make sure bad things don't happen to us. God is incompetent. God is negligent. Or God isn't who he says he was. Or God is absent. When you say karma, there is no person to blame. No one was watching. No one could have stepped in. No one should have stepped in. Because it's an impersonal force. In other words, the objection is not that the events in our world, it's not that the events in our world can't be part of a larger mosaic of meaning. As we'll see, they clearly think that is, right? That is the karma doctrine as they understand it. That the events of our world are part of this larger mosaic of meaning. And you didn't get into meaning yet with Rhett and Link. And it'll be interesting because when you get to the end of that video, they start knocking on a door that if they keep going, they're going to arrive at a meaning crisis. And so even though they feel they're sort of at the wave because, you know, for whatever reason, they're probably heading to a meaning crisis that many of you who have been listening to me have already been at yourself. The problem they see is that no person should ever let evil go unchallenged if he can stop it. And that's what they see God as. Now this is a real part of contemporary morality and call out culture. But it isn't terribly well executed because on one hand, if you see some wrong, it's your duty to stand up and call it out. And so there's a lot of calling out going on. But now if, you know, you're a white person, a person of privilege calling out people who don't necessarily have the same privilege that you have, well, then you should keep silent. Then again, you have the rules emerging from the background. Well, I thought I felt authentic in calling it out. No, but here's this other rule. That rule trumps your authenticity. And that's where, you know, there's we kind of forefront the authenticity, but very quickly the rules come up and manifest themselves. Now, wait a minute. Where does this rule come from? Well, everybody knows this rule. Well, this rule is self-evident. Oh, I see. Someone who lets evil go unchallenged. Who could stop it? And that, of course, you know, always having to challenge evil presumes that, you know, what in any given instance is right to do and wrong to do. So you've got that to deal with. So in this doctrine of karma, what is being affirmed? Right. What is positively affirmed by the nuns? The conviction is that the world is meaningful. And this conviction has two components that are interesting to it. The first is that we are all connected. Right. This comes up again and again. It's a rejection of some sort of rugged individualism that says, I am an island. Meaning in terms of a meaningful world is not actually necessarily my story. Right. The meaning is something larger than that. We are part of this larger complex, this fully integrated story. And what we do sends ripples from ourselves into the cosmos and what others do and have done send ripples back toward us. And there is a conviction that that is not chaos, but it is somehow purposeful. Has anyone here seen the film Life Itself? And again, if you look at my treatment of this video in the past, I spent a fair amount of time on Life Itself. Very interesting movie. No. Okay. But basically in Life Itself you had the sense that, well, there's justice in the universe. And so things come around, but it's much more mechanistic. That's far more how that works. Well, this is our next clip. This is beautiful. And it really does capture that reconciliation of the meaningfulness of life that the nuns are grappling with. With the problem of evil, I mentioned that the shocking moment early in the film was not gratuitous. And it's because it deals in many ways with the problem of evil. And so this is where if you really want to understand the heart of the nuns' worldview, I think this is the best picture of that you could possibly see. It's compelling. Now to get back to the barfieldy intention between participation and separation, sort of what Life Itself is, is gets at participation by saying, Life Itself. That's all there is. And it makes an assertion of order and purpose and meaning. But it's sort of cold comfort when, well, you've been the one that suffered the traumatic accident. And someone three generations gets the benefit of it because your story arc ends because what we're coming up to is the crisis of life after death. It's beautiful. And one of the things that I think is so telling about it is that what you begin to see is that for the nuns, everything doesn't work out well for everyone in the film. This is part of the whole. Everyone doesn't work out well for the individuals. And in fact, in Life Itself, there are some individual characters. And again, I recommend that movie too. It's really a beautiful movie. But there's some real torture that goes on with some of these individuals. And maybe subsequent generations receive some benefits from the tortures that others have endured. But the people who have suffered the injustice and harm, there's no recompense. There's no justice in there for them. The whole point that the world is meaningful doesn't necessarily mean that it works out for me. But somehow the grander mosaic works out, which is a surprising twist from, say, rugged individualism. Right. That's a shocking turn in thought. The second element of this commitment to karma, what they're calling karma, is that if you do good things, good things will happen to you. If you do bad things, bad things will happen to you. And again, we didn't hear anything from Rhett and Link. I haven't listened to much of I haven't listened to much other stuff beyond those four videos. But again, my guess is this will come out because this is exactly what I see and hear from others who have trod their path. That, well, there's a pay it forward element and that's the way that one should live. Link insinuates some of those in his deconstruction video. What happened to you? But the world is self-correcting, right? That it could be just in the sense that good is rewarded and evil is punished. But also important to this, and this is what sets up the second conviction that I think is critical to the nun's worldview, is that this justice is dispassionate and impersonal. Okay. Now, again, when you listen to, and I'm talking the last video a little bit about woke religion, there's that sense of it too, that justice is dispassionate and impersonal. And since there's no God within the system who's going to bring it, because again, the frame is the meta divine realm and God is a God in the system. I think pluralism kind of leans people to that, that finally justice is in our hands. So this is where we move from karma, the first feature of the nun's worldview and what they mean by that, to the shift to a higher power, right? Away from God, right? A personal deity. Now again, God, again, the difference between the meta divine realm, which is this impersonal area in which there are agents to God in which the universe is fundamentally personal. To a higher power and a non anthropomorphic rejection of anthropomorphic deity or divinity. So the question is, why embrace the impersonal? I see two answers here that begin to emerge when we talk with the nuns. The first is that there is an underlying distrust of the Christian God. They do not trust the Christian God. Now if you go back to the other video, this is where the moral shifting is important. Because what don't we trust him to be? We don't trust him to be moral. Well, why don't we trust him to be moral? Well, look, he allowed slavery in Israel. He commanded the death of the Amorites. He allowed, look at the way women were treated in Israel, certainly not according to our standards. We have, we stand in judgment over this God and we have found him wanting. And we would very much imagine if you go to the scene in the book of Daniel where Meany, Meany, Tekel, Parsons, you have been weighed and found wanting. We can imagine a modern person saying, no, you're found wanting. How are you going to back that up? Your hand is attached to an arm and you probably can't write in a stone wall. No, you're found wanting. That's essentially what we say to God. I was, pause here a second, just a little peek at the rough draft for Sunday. I dipped into the Brett Weinstein Discord server and he was chatting and I got known that I was in the chat room and some people who were on the Discord server, the Bridges of Meaning Discord server, sort of said, oh, I'm in the chat room. And there was a technical glitch. I didn't really have a chance to talk to Eric. But in that, he didn't say it to me, but in the conversation there, he said something which when he said it, I, he articulated what I had heard by many people who don't believe in God, which I think has exactly to do with this. It's better if there is no God because if there is a God, you have to worry about what's on his mind. And so what we're looking for really from the universe is for a rather libertarian universe that respects our rights and leaves us alone and allows us our agency so that to one degree or another we can shape the world according to our desires. But that of course presupposes that we have a pretty good idea about what good desires are. And that's a pretty big ask for human beings. We feel that about ourselves and we would could very easily say, well, that's a bias on our part because we certainly don't trust each other with it. But now would we trust someone with as much power as God? Again, we've got real trust issues. God of Christianity. I would say when I was younger, I always saw like God as like really strict because he always had all these rules to follow and you have to do this. Okay, remember the little short list of rules that Brett and Link talked about? Same thing. To be a good person, do that, to get in heaven. So I always like saw it as like strict dad basically. I've always listened to him. Don't make him mad. I think that the story is that we were created in God's image, but I think man created God in his own image. We've created this deity or all-knowing thing, but that is infallible, but also jealous and also rageful. See, if God's a person, you've got a real problem because he's got that much power and you don't. He's not necessarily going to mirror what you want. Loving and kind. So it's like a human. Basically like said, angry, jealous, you know, vengeful, murderous. Hell, the idea of hell caused. And again, this is where morality comes in because our moral intuitions are shamed and fraped by everything around us. And, you know, it's all the way back to Marcy and you had this split. Well, the Old Testament God and the New Testament God. Anxiety, not so much the concept itself, but I've been taught that you weren't supposed to question its existence. And I was. I knew I couldn't be sure that it didn't exist. So I think that scared me too. Would I be punished for questioning the existence of hell? I do wonder if it's OK with God that I don't necessarily believe in God the way that it was presented to me. Like, I wonder if I end up being completely wrong and God and Jesus are completely real if they would be unforgiving and mad that I questioned my religion for a while. I love that's that's one of my favorite moments in any interview is when Kristen is honest about that. Uneasiness. Notice this is a moral objection to Christianity. Right. God is tyrannical. He is violent. He is vengeful. He is not good. Forgive me here. I'm going to use a reference to Game of Thrones. I do watch it. I probably need one of you to absolve me for that. Would my kids ask, you know, am I old enough to watch this show? I am not old enough to watch Game of Thrones, nor do I know any who are. But within Game of Thrones, for those who don't watch, there's lots of, you know, sort of, you know, religious content in there. And one of them is that you have this this burgeoning cult, right, of the deity of the Lord of Light, right, who is this sort of fire deity. And the followers of the Lord of Light actually speak a lot like evangelicals, right? He's the only true God. All things happen for a reason. We can't understand his ways. You know, they they they shuffle out a lot of the sort of bumper sticker theology that you would typically get from Christians. And there is one episode when the Lord of Light demands a sacrifice where they burn alive a little girl. And the skeptic who has been watching this whole cult with some level of dis dis with uneasiness, he's he's. And I guess nobody not not in the room that that Nathan is in, but nobody in the writers room thought about Abraham and Isaac. He's gotten over his skepticism that there's nothing real. He's seen enough strange things from this cult that he thinks obviously there's something real to it. But at one point when he discovers that they've burned this girl alive, he says, if your God demands the burning of little girls, it is evil. Your deity is evil. That's the charge he levels. And he's right. And the nuns see in the biblical depictions of God something similar. That's their worry. In the Old Testament, they see an angry genocidal God. Unless we pulled a Marcionite maneuver and we say, oh, that's just the Old Testament. God, no worries. In the New Testament, everything's fine. They see in the New Testament images of God as the eternal torture of people in the flames of hell. In Christian exclusivism, right, they see this insistence that God damns all non-Christians. This is what they've been raised with. And all these things come up with Rhett and Link. What puts them at a certain level of distrust and uneasiness with this deity. So what is being rejected by the nuns? It's not meaning. Right. Karma is a conviction that there is a meaningful world. It's not justice. Karma is a system of justice as they've defined it. What is rejected is that the world is capricious, that it's arbitrary, that it's tyrannical. That's what's rejected. And the guiding intuition is that the core of reality, this higher power, must be good. And what this means is that its core dealings are just, they are fair, and they are dispassionate. Now again, you'll notice if you get back to the Barfieldian participation, separation, that, well, it must be this way, but it's this way. So therefore, since forever that there's been philosophy, this is what people have been trying to work on. What is the difference between the way the world should be and the way the world is? And any sort of anthropomorphic deity, they have trouble being able to say that about. Now, the second component of this, why is there this movement away from a personal deity? This is a more personal one for them. It's an existential crisis, I would say, for most of them. Many nuns express a desire for some sort of proof for the existence of God. That comes out at the end of Rett's deconstruction. It's also very interesting in the Unbelievable show where Douglas Murray and Esther O'Reilly have a conversation. Notice how often that comes up. Well, if God shows himself to me, and I always hear that and think, really? I don't think we work that way. Aren't you the intuitive ones? Intuition takes a whole variety of signals and puts them into a fairly compact thing. Now, when you talk to them, they really don't know what a proof would be. In some cases, Joshua, the one fellow in here, he's a chemist. So when he talks, he talks about science, and he does say, yeah, I'd like some sort of metric, some sort of measure. I think he says, sign me up for whatever religion is associated with that measurable God. Now, again, if you look at my conversation with Brett Suckold, God in the system. He wants to be able to measure God, and once he has a scientific measure for God, then he's on board with it. But most of the nuns, I don't think, mean that. I think Joshua is the exception in terms of the nuns. When they talk about proof, I think what they really mean is an undoubtable experience, personal experience of God. I cannot doubt that I have experienced God. That's what I think they mean. And there are two data points that push me in this direction. The one put negatively is that the proof that they offer sometimes, that God is impersonal, is usually based on some sort of personal absence of God. So Tiffany, for example, Tiffany, when she talks about proof for God and why she doesn't believe that God is there, she says, well, my parents, their marriage was in crisis, and I was told to pray, and I did, and God didn't answer. Again, the moralistic, the moralistic, therapeutic, deist God that doesn't intervene. And their marriage didn't get better, and they got divorced. He's apparently not there and not listening. It's it's an absence of God. And in this sense, it's something very similar to the problem of evil. Where was God? If he was watching, if he could have stepped in, if he heard my prayers, why didn't do anything about it? On a positive side, I would point to the fact that they believe in the paranormal, right? So as much as I chuckle about the my apartment is haunted, the reason that woman who said that believes that is because of certain things she's experienced in her apartment. And this, again, is consistent with the Medi-Divine realm that modernists will say there are no conscious, agent, meaningful being actors beyond human beings. And people before and after modernity have said, no, we think there are. And some people say, yeah, we know there are. But again, they're all within an impersonal realm subject to the rules of that realm. So all of a sudden, science goes out the window. All I know is that weird stuff has happened in my apartment that convinced me there's such a thing as ghosts. And they're in my apartment. Right. And here they would also point to things like, you know, there are many of them admit to being enamored with Ghost Hunter shows or paranormal movies based on true events or things like that. So the central problem here is what philosophers would call the problem of divine hiddenness. OK, so the problem of divine hiddenness is that if God exists, why does he not make himself more known? Why does he hide himself? Or if you wanted to put it stronger and more and more adversarial way, if God exists and it's important to me as a human being that I believe in him, then it is incumbent upon him to make himself known. He ought to make himself known to me. Atheist philosophers have used this in recent time. This is sort of right alongside the problem of evil as an anti-proof these days. So atheist philosophers use divine hiddenness to justify atheism. Yet with the nuns, what's interesting is here we get another interesting tension. Can we pull up the clip on spirituality? It's the fourth one down, I think. Do you think a person has to be religious in order to have certain religious beliefs, say belief in God or the afterlife? I would say you could be a nun and have some religious beliefs. I do consider myself spiritual. One of the few strong beliefs I have is in universal interconnection. Everything in the universe is interdependent on each other. Every action and every thought is also included in that web of interconnectedness. And I feel like that's been my strongest teacher throughout my life. I definitely have a spiritual side. I try to meditate and connect with a higher power that I do believe in. I try to, even if it's just private talks with myself, I do feel like someone's listening. Because when I say I'm not a Christian anymore, it doesn't mean that I'm not spiritual. It doesn't mean that I'm just worshiping Satan. It just means that I don't believe in religion the way it was given to me. I don't pray necessarily. Sometimes I just talk to the cosmos or whoever wants to listen. But I like a growth here with meditation and that alone time is really good for your soul. So here we get an interesting tension. There is this visceral response. Push away from the anthropomorphic deity because God wasn't listening. This is what compels me to say that God is not personal. He's not there. He's not listening. And yet you get this, and this is our third feature of the nuns' worldview, karma, the movement away from the anthropomorphic and now to this deep conviction that reality is inherently spiritual. So this is what I find interesting. For philosophers, the problem of divine hiddenness is usually used as an anti-proof to become an atheist. Whereas for the nuns, it becomes the driving force in their view that the world as a whole, the fabric of the cosmos itself, is somehow spiritual. So nuns, concerning spirituality, they will frequently identify that human persons are inherently spiritual beings, that our connection to one another, they spiritualize, right? That karma and faith, this is a spiritual principle, that the good or the evil that we send out into the world somehow reverberates throughout the fabric of the cosmos. Nature itself is spiritual. They tend to associate their sort of aesthetic accountants of beauty, right? These aesthetic intuitions that that's meaningful or somehow that it excites spiritual feelings, that that itself is a spiritual experience. And as mentioned, most of them believe in ghosts and angels and demons, right? That there are other types of spirits in our world. And again, this is consistent with the medidivine realm because we're in this realm and the world is basically impersonal, and there are other agents within it, and now they might get to the point of saying, well, I want to interact with these other agents so that I can get the healing and the therapy and the advances and my desires met. In other words, it's sort of a redux to an earlier religion, which is amazing because, as C.S. Lewis points out again and again in his books, people always come up with this and say, Oh, this is the new thing. And C.S. Lewis says, No, this is the old thing. This is the shoe that feels like it fits because this is the shoe that's been very well worn. So the tension is that God, a personal God, is too hidden to be real. But our world is inherently spiritual and the resolution is that we are spiritual beings in a spiritual place governed by a good and just but impersonal higher power. This higher power can be connected with but not in a relational way. The connection is more abstract. We drink in spiritual experiences through the world and nature. We send goodness into the world. We receive goodness. And again, all the agency in the Medi-Divine realm, it's all right there. And it's again, the shoe feels comfortable because the shoe has been well worn. Essentially, spiritual resonance through the fabric of reality that is our experience of the higher power. That's what underwrites that fabric of the cosmos that's inherently spiritual. In short, our spiritual experience is life itself. And this brings us to the fourth feature of the nuns worldview, fourth and last. And that's their most unresolved question. What happens when I die? And again, you listen to Rhett and Link, it goes right here. And again, in my experience with talking to countless people in this situation, now here in America, if they're healthy, if there's enough food, but now the coronavirus is coming. People are going to feel antsy about this. When they get older, they start creeping back into church because this is unresolved and their worldview does not have the resources to resolve it. The modernist atheists will say, well, do you remember before you were born? No. Well, you won't remember after you die. Yeah, but we don't act that way when we do a funeral. Nobody stands at a funeral and says, oh, they're gone. We'll say things like, well, they're there in our hearts, they're there in our memories, but we won't say, bink, they're no longer in existence. We all default to they're in a better place. Now, maybe this is a vestige or a leftover of Christianity that's lingering a little bit longer than the other pieces. But I suspect this is a big piece of the worldview that they're not going to fill. OK, this, I believe, is our last clip. So the one on afterlife. When I was about seven years old, maybe I started to question ideas of the afterlife, purgatory, eternal damnation, even heaven. I didn't understand how anybody could be so certain of what eternity would hold. It just didn't make sense to me and it scared me. My preoccupation with religious art led to a preoccupation with one particular theme in that art. The theme was that the choices of this life somehow shaped the next. Are there any religious? Now, again, you can watch the whole thing. I've played a lot of it. But if you go back to. The last video I did and part one of this and where this ends and part of the reason that I'm doing. Part of the reason that I'm doing, I can do the rough draft for sermon yet today. Part of the reason that I'm doing this series on the good place is exactly this. That what we have in the good place is. The nuns trying to work out their stuff and you'll notice that on one hand the show is about morality. But on the other hand, it's about the afterlife and they're not going to shake this connection between morality and the afterlife. Now, if you talk to Adam Frendit, he'll make the comment that, yeah, that's the trump card because we see Chairman Mao or Joseph Stalin or Adolf Hitler getting away with it. And well, the universe is just. So how can that be? And so this is part of the reason that many religions far beyond Christianity have imagined that, in fact, there has to be justice in the afterlife. Because if there isn't justice at all, if basically if you get away with it here and now, you will get away with it. And the victims of this world have no hope at all. We find that instantiation of reality unacceptable in two ways. Either it makes us nihilists or it makes us evil because now we're going to, you know, we're going to find vengeance and justice in our own hands. And when we do so, we realize we are poor justice givers. So it becomes an ontological argument that if there is justice in the universe, then there needs to be a justice giver. And again, this isn't far from how C.S. Lewis begins mere Christianity and says everybody seems to imagine that morality is universal. Everybody seems to imagine that the only way that this world will be satisfying is if. Now, again, in this impersonal world, well, maybe somehow there's karma and it'll all balance out. Yeah, but that doesn't do anything for the victims of Hitler or Stalin or Mao or Pol Pot or your neighbor who was an axe murderer. And that's why it's unsatisfying. And I don't think it's going to get resolved, which is why I think predictably these deconstructions tend to lead to nihilism. Or paganism, and some of them at least will find their way back to Christianity. Some don't, obviously, but some do. And this is why I got into making videos about Jordan Peterson, because I saw them coming back. So I think I'm going to close out the video there. I've got a bunch of things I have to do. Thanks for watching. And, you know, I know this video, I felt a little bad about it because kind of a repeat of something I did eight months ago. But I figure there's a bunch of you might have forgotten the video or don't remember it. I treated it a little bit differently than I treated it a few months ago. But now with Rhett and Link coming up, it's the same issues. This Rhett and Link are just new examples of this on the landscape. So thanks for watching.