https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=RrCgQGfZeeg

 Lawyer of the Christian Reformed Church, Reverend Rodney Hugen. Applause If you're willing and if you're able and if you'd like to, and if you just feel moved to, maybe you could, you don't have to do this right away, like with a full exclamation, you could stand up again, and if a bunch of you would kind of stand with your feet and start clapping your hands, and maybe some of you could scream my name and really holler, really loud. Hey Rodney! So let's go ahead and try it, if everyone wants to try it out, that would be great, but to do that right now is just... Applause Okay, that's enough. Well I'm tired and so weary, but I must travel on... Okay, enough of that. I had always... Thanks, Rudy. I had always hoped to be a rock star, but there's a lot of jobs, and particularly CRC jobs that I'll never get. I've written a poem about it, and I'd like to share it with you now. I've always hoped I'd have a job where folks would give ovations, and be a famous singer would be a great occasion, but I have no friends or groupies. I'll never be a star. The problem is I cannot sing or even play the guitar. Still there are lots of jobs I'd love to do here in the CRC, and there seem to be some openings because of our retirees. I could have been the top exec taking over World Renew, or gotten into lots of trouble like banner editors tend to do. If Senate had decided we need to dig a hole, Joel Boote would have had to plan it and figure out each role. He'd have been leaning on a shovel, asking how deep the Senate wanted. And wondering about the budget, and if the RCA had already done it. DeMore would have heard about the hole while sitting in the shade. He'd have Gaila write a story while he cranks his lemonade. This time he'd follow guidelines, avoiding any trouble. But he'd only talk about the depth. He'd never touch a shovel. Mueller might have spent his time discussing implications, turning how people should dig holes into theological gyrations. He'd explain throughout our history reform folks came to understand that the digging of a deeper hole is easier when they're sand. Bryce Gimp would have grabbed the shovel after stopping for a brew. He'd walk past all those deep thinkers and do what deacons do. He'd stick a shovel in the ground. Soon sweat would stain his shirt. Because he'd be the only person who was actually flinging dirt. Now I wouldn't want to have this conversation about the deep hole. It's not my job. It sounds too much like work. And doing all that heavy lifting is the kind of thing I serve. When the deacons come to Senate it should be lots of fun. Because maybe for the first time some wheel work will get done. When Bryce Gimp was in Bangladesh he was sexy. Deacons, haha. He was sexy and creative. While serving as an agronomist he decided he'd go native. He wore a lungi in the rice fields. Which involves binding up your loins. If World Review showed us that picture not just kids would send their coins. I've got in to Kelvin Sim which means I'm somewhat duller. I do not have a doctorate like Dr. Richard Muller. I could spill that shit if he sits in. But things would slowly worsen because I can't teach reform dogmatics. Since I'm a big cat person. I believe Lin Vanerzee has helped us understand that the retiring Vaner editor was dealt an ugly end. It wasn't that he made mistakes or even that he's dense. It's that he's finally reached the level of his incompetence. Me and my shadow is the song Jo Booth was singing. He was working around the office while Timmermans was clinging. I'm sad you had to deal with that. We all know it's annoying when you're forced to deal with someone so clingy close and cloying. Dr. Timmermans became a pastor. Not a real one. Just permission. So you're good to preach in churches you've been vetted and positioned. By way of an exception you're ordained in every classes so you get no benefits anywhere. When you preach on half full of glasses. I used to be a CFO. I don't mean to sound too brash. But I could help out with accounting. Show us how to spend our cash. We could send some down to Tucson. We could send a tidy sum. Because according to the Timmermans graph we actually have a sum. I've been known as an evangelist of ministry associates. I've attained permission to pastor so please take note of that. My job has always been the same. But it must not be too vital. Since every time I need a raise I just get a brand new title. D. Wrecker said at roll call that we should announce if we're not here. I might have missed just how that works. Because I was playing solitaire. We're not allowed to livestream or let angry birds entice us. We have to pay attention and not plug in five devices. I think that I could run a senate. Not now but maybe later. Because unlike every person there I'd not be a mean dictator. Bruce likes to run a real tight jib. Like some power hungry hoarder. Senate couldn't just applaud with joy. No, we had to clap in proper order. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. No, we had to clap in proper order. In alphabetical order, Steve Timmermans had us twos. The trolls defenders knights. One would win and two would lose. Steve was once a college president. So you'd think that he would know that T comes after D and K. Because that's how the alphabet goes. I did not attend a reform school where the mascots all seemed scary. Armor, claws, and weaponry. They're not things that I would carry. Grand Canyon used a university to which I matriculated. Only known as Antelope's. I confess we're not feared or hated. I could be a college president. It would be the perfect gig. I'd have folks over to the house where I would roast a pig. That's what Dr. Huxford did. It surely was delicious. But a very odd thing happened that has me, well, suspicious. See, I was going through the serving line behind the Kelvin, President. That there's a bit of rivalries and became quite evident. Just as we got up to the place where we finally go eat, the serving line ground to a stop. Because they were out of heat. In zoo center, they ran out of pig. Sure, I understand. This couldn't be an accident. I'm quite sure that it was planned. Because there are lots and lots of pigs here. Trust me, we can smell the scent of pig. So yeah, we know you just ran out. In front of Kelvin's President. There is one job I'd love to have here in the CRC. I could be the poet laureate. But I just can't work for free. And unlike Rich Bodini, whose grammar's just a crime, I can use words perfectly and even make them rhyme. Salabri, salabri. That has gone very badly. Salabric, proliferating rhyme in iambic pentametric form. Sustenas, sides, villanelles written sitting in my dorm. Delaney claims to use big words, but he said he might say eight. He said that we could say it too. But I'm sorry, girl, I just can't. I'd hoped to see the cannons here, right here at good old Dork. But apparently they're missing. I can't even find the fort. What will happen to our children? Will they even be attenders? If there are no forms of unity, how will we be defenders? When I was just a little kid, I thought I'd be a choppy. I'd be writing for the Triple Crown, but I'm kind of big and stocky. As a guy who misreformed, who walks the straight and narrow, I think it might be kind of fun if I can crush a pharaoh. That's a horse race, people, come on. American pharaoh, Triple Crown winner, holy shit. If I'd been born in Canada, I might not be so holy. I might have learned to ice skate. I might have been a goalie. I'm sure that I could stop a puck. You could even make a bet. You could wager its importance, because I fill up a net. Who's going to score? According to their website, Sue Center's Mighty Proud, to have an annual gathering that packs in quite a crowd, it's called the Women's Expo. It's just for girls, no guys. So they feature lots of vendors of cooking and cleaning. It's true, but look. I should have brought my wife along. With some money she could spend, I think I'd greatly benefit, was she able to attend. She could buy a vacuum, pots and pans, and other stuff, their kitchen, to help me do a better job of working in my kitchen. Thank God for the lighthouse, was what Canadians were singing as we drove in on the bus. But soon their hands were ringing. They saw the empty building, their greatest fear exposed, for a big sign out in front, red. The lighthouse bar is closed. Don't worry, dear Canadians, if you're sad about your hockey, someday you'll hold Lord Stamins cup, and someday I'll be a jockey. So if you're feeling lonely, it's okay, just light a torch. You can still go study scripture, but just don't step off the porch. I've offended people to my left, and also to my right, not to mention my poor sleepmate when I snore all through the night. Dort College put me in West Hall. I don't mean to be a fake, but those accommodations are the reason that I sleep. Folks hate to sit beside me over breakfast, dinner, lunch, because as the PD noted, we are a dour lunch. The real reason is I cannot fit into that tiny shower, so I can only wash half of me, and that's what makes folks dour. Thank you, Dort, defenders, you've done your college proud. Thanks so much for serving us, the ball went really well. You've shown the love of Christ to us, your love to us, lifts. We thank you for your servant's hearts. You've given us good gifts. Thank you, Joel, for leading us throughout these past few years. Please know you've been God's gift to us, your love and sacrifice. And thank you, Bucky, for challenging your writing, made us thank your humor, love, graciousness flowed through the banners, ain't it? Thank you, Andy, for showing us your godly, deepened heart, for all your selfless acts of love and the kindness you impart. To Richard, we are also grateful. For one goal you've all been pressing. May God's rewards rain down on you, and to each of you, a blessing. Thank you.