https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Gy9Fd-csZCs

 I was thinking prior to this, I was like, this must be like blind dating for you, you know? These people and you never know who you're going to run into. Yeah. Obviously know who to see on the screen and then you're like, who's it going to be? That's exactly right. And well, except there's no kissing and no romance. So yeah, take some of the pressure off. But as a pastor too, you do this kind of thing because people visit your church and then it's a small enough church so that I always greet the visitors and find out a little bit about them. And so it's not that big of a stretch for me. So I am recording this. Is that okay? If you don't want it recorded, I can not record. Okay. Yeah, that's fine. And then after we'll see what we want to do. Well, Ryan, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? Because obviously you know a little bit about me, but I don't know anything about you. Yep. So I work as a drafter currently. I guess I go back and can I encompass that in with my story of faith also that I was brought up Catholic. And when my parents got divorced, I pretty much just went to church with my mom and I was more like a dragging along kind of thing. So it was more of a thing I didn't want to do. Graduated high school, went to college for a couple of years. Two into my faith would go to church every now and then. And then kind of what spurred like a renewal was I moved in with my grandparents for summer. I was going to be like a self-taught man, Renaissance man. I was done with college and I was like, oh, if I just read the textbooks, that's easy enough and after summer of that. If you just read the textbooks. So after a summer of that, it was like, okay, you've got to go back to school or get a job and ended up going back to school. But while I was up there, I just got like a continuity of going to mass every Sunday. You know, EWTN morning mass on the TV in the morning. Got involved in a young adult group, which kind of built up a decent foundation. I also read some books that kind of sparked, I guess, searching, searching for truth. One was Peace Pilgrim, Her Life and Works, and then the other one was The Dialogues of Plato. I think it was more like The Dialogues of Plato that kind of caught with me. Really? Interesting. And then, well, Peace Pilgrim was more of like a curiosity of her faith. Like this woman just had this really strong faith and went through all these obstacles throughout her travels that struck a chord with me. And then, I guess, from there, I always kind of been a bit of a YouTube addict, but moved back to my hometown from Wisconsin. I didn't mention that, live in Eau Claire right now. And still kind of kept it, but kind of faltered, faltered in my faith. But then I started seeing, I guess, benefits of going to church, where, you know, like throughout a weekly basis, I'm just like, oh, you know, I seem to be more, I guess, in control or more, you know, centered. So that kind of kept me going back. And then the next step from there was I got involved with some youth ministry at a church in town. And that's kind of been the next stepping stone where I'm currently at, where I'm learning more about the ins and out of the faith and then trying to, which is something that we can get into during our conversation, is integrating what I'm learning through Jordan Peterson, you, John Brevecky. And you know, that was like a whole thing for me, too, of getting me back into the church and piqued my interest and trying to translate, you know, the lesson plans that I have for the confirmation kids into the language I'm starting to pick up to see if that catches their attention the way it did with me. It's a good, you'll learn a lot working with kids, especially if, you know, working towards confirmation or something like that, because you begin to recognize the conceptualization, the gap in conceptualizations. And so, well, if you have to reach over and reach over to them, that that's going to force you to do translating. You know, again, a lot of the Jordan Peterson, Brevecky, a lot of this is working through language issues because things, I mean, the culture and assumptions, it just continues to migrate. And so even a gap of 10 or 20 years between a generation can be a huge gap in terms of just conceptualization. What are we talking about in church? What's going on here? So that's a good thing to do. Yeah, the current one is the foundations of discipleship. So like, the supplied text starts with, you know, like having the kids imagine they're a fisherman and Jesus is coming to, you know, cast aside your nets and follow me. And I'm like, well, you know, these kids aren't fishermen, you know, they're not even working yet. So how do I, you know, how do I get this, you know, yeah, translate that message into something that's a little more substantial for them? Although I'm afraid I might be going like over their heads with some of the Brevecky stuff. I've pretty much lost it with the cognitive science stuff. So I'm going back to the old like philosophy to try and, I've been going through, I think like episode 16 to 18 for this one, because that's when he starts getting into Jesus, Christianity, and then the Gnosticism. And I'm trying to, so there's, they basically have the three foundations of spending time with him in prayer, getting to know his teachings, and then that leads to ultimately loving and worshiping him. And I guess in 16 where he talks about the altered states of consciousness to higher states of higher state of consciousness, and then like transforming all that. So it's like, okay, well, what is prayer? Is that getting us into the altered state? So then we're like in communion. And then also learning, reading the scriptures, and also going to church, the sacraments, the community is building our worldview, our frame. So how and like how to mesh all that together. And I don't, have you, I mean, have you had much experience? Like where, you know, like I find this stuff super fascinating, but to, you know, do the general, do general people like to hear it like that? Or they prefer the? Verveckis, Verveckis basically establishing a new vocabulary. And so much of my work is trying to take ideas and fit it to, you use another people's existent category. So, you know, Jordan Peterson, because he uses much more of a mythological frame, I found much easier to to appropriate for my work than Verveckis. Verveckis stuff is, you know, I learn a ton and I can to the degree that I can use some of some of the vocabulary he's using and the insights I'm gaining from it. But that stuff usually doesn't get too close to the people I'm working with because I it's it's I mean, just to just to figure out what John is doing the whole time, you just have to spend a lot of time figuring out what's he saying with these words, you know, so big words. Yeah, big words. And but that's, you know, that's, you know, Verveckis is basically doing an academic, you know, he's trying to popularize it a little bit, but his frame of reference is very academic. And I'm very technical, very technical. So it's you got to do that. You got to do the translating yourself. So, yeah, I don't a lot of Verveckis stuff. It's in my head. But the way he he he puts it out there isn't too applicable to most of the kind of work I have to do. Because, yeah, like, yeah, for me to tell, like these kids that, you know, the prayer is like the, you know, us transcending or like opening our minds to try and reframe problems or like the I think they understand the worldview type of thing. I think that's kind of a basic thing. But then I'm like stuck on I came across a quote off a comment off of a video about Bonhopper or what the call to discipleship or whatever. Yeah. This woman had mentioned, you know, like, how do you phrase it? Authentic transformation, actualized faith. So like, which Verveckis is kind of going through in a technical aspect. So I'm trying to combine the practices of. Yeah, how do we. Which I don't know, it gets it gets tricky because then I was like, well, now am I like preaching Gnosticism or it's like, OK, yeah, we have to keep transcending up these levels and, you know, actualize, actualize agape, which I guess we're we're trying to do and how to define agape so these kids understand it. Why? And that's, you know, and I think that's so how do how do I don't think they need to so much have a definition of agape is just more I think it's it's more important that they learn to notice it when it's around them. And in fact, agape is is around just a Sunday, you know, every time every time a new mother has to get up out of bed to take care of a newborn. There's there's. Sorry, I got someone that. That's OK. Office. So you have it, this self donating, self giving love. And, you know, for Vickie, I thought that was one of his best. That was one of his best lessons talked about how this kind of love develops and creates persons out of others just by. You know, at some point, at some point, the child receives all this love and the child might get into a position when the child in a small way has to has to also do what it's seen the parent do. And so that's where I think Gerard's both mimetic desire is sort of inverted into the child learns love by being loved. And my my wife, my wife teaches at a Waldorf school. And so she goes all the way up to eighth grade. And then she had to go back all the way back down to first grade. And she comes home just exhausted, not because, you know, the material is so hard, but because the children are so young and you have to pour so much into them out of very basic things. And it's just so much love that you pour into these kids all the time and that they just sort of build up as they go. So, yeah, I think that to me, the Vervaiki stuff is is helpful. Well, part of the difficulty is that he's he's basically saying these established, not just Christian, but these established Christian practices are no longer can no longer be, you know, legitimately employed and and deployed. And that's obviously something where, say, Jonathan Peugeot and I disagree with him. And and he knows that he's very upfront with that, because when I what I see him doing is sort of looking at the Christian faith and translating it into a lot of this technical language so that it's it's sort of out there in the general. You can see it within sort of general revelation and then saying, OK, if this is if this is what these religions afford it, can we establish sort of a new religion that affords this without some of the areas that he sees as being problematic of historical religions? So I don't find those other areas as problematic. So I don't see the need for his general his general program. But in listening to him, I can sort of view and say these are a whole bunch of things that I was embedded in and practicing. And now from a cognitive science point of view, I have a little better understanding of why this stuff works in us and how this stuff works in us in terms of life under the sun. So that's really where I see the benefit of his project for me. I and I've said this in a number of videos and I'm dubious. I'm very doubtful that he can achieve his project because I and it's it's similar to Jordan Peterson saying, you know, you can't write a fairy tale. And the reason you can't write a fairy tale isn't so much that you're not smart or you can't write a good story. It's that there's just simply not enough time. You know, religions take, you know, many, many generations and thousands of years to to sort of accumulate and develop the wisdom and the practices. And and this then grows in a communal way. It's it's it's very, very difficult. You know, if let's say John establishes some new thing, you know, that would actually be helpful and beneficial if it lives 100 years. That would be extremely unusual if it lives longer than 100 years. That would be extraordinarily unusual because when you look at, say, founders of world religions, there aren't that many of them. And there are significant contributors all along the way. And so, you know, it's it's a it's an audacious project. But again, given given the opportunity to sort of overhear what looking at learning something about cognitive science and then turning around and seeing what in the church we've practiced for generations, we can say, oh, wow, look, look at what we've been doing. We didn't know we weren't using that language, but we can appreciate the benefits that these practices and beliefs have afforded over a great amount of time. So that's sort of how I locate for Vakey's project. Yeah. And I think what I'm or what I would like to do is take that technical knowledge that for Vakey, like you're talking about where, OK, we've been doing this for so long. Now we kind of understand it in a more technical aspect. And then, I mean, to combine that within the church to just make it a more, I guess, efficient practice or to, like, you know, help smooth things along. Well, I don't know if necessarily. I look at it more in terms of. This these are the practices of the church. Now I have a little better understanding of why the practices have developed as they have. I'm less of a reformer in that way that I'm looking necessarily to change a lot of the practices. But I think his language is helpful, perhaps to explain to secularized people. Now, here are here. Here is here is a different view of what's going on with this practice. And this is why we know it has benefits. But I don't know. See, again, part of it is just the disagreement in terms of a metaphysical foundation between myself and John Vervecky. I don't know necessarily that the practice needs to be overhauled as perhaps better understood in a secular frame as to even simply some of the benefits of it. That's kind of how I see it. OK. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, sorry. I've kind of got like a jumbled mess of notes here. So if you had anything off that's fine, go for it. It's your time. You you're one of you. You got a slot. And I know sometimes I get emails from people. I can't get a slot. It's like, man, so something will open up. Just be patient. Right. Yeah. I was surprised. I had been like I started looking back in August and I was kind of like checking it daily for a while. And then I was just like, well, whatever. And then randomly checked it one day and I was like, well, what is this? This must be a fluke. But well, what I do is I, you know, I just look about a month ahead on my calendar and I say, OK, I've got these these weeks. But you're going to be real busy this week, looks like. So then I just open up slots sort of randomly. And so they're just bound to just pop up out of nowhere, seemingly with not necessarily a lot of notice. And, you know, people check intently just like you and it's like, I never find a slot. And then they give up. And sometimes I wonder if there's a lot. Boom. And there's one. There's a slot. So sometimes they stay open for a few days, which is which is sort of cool. So I don't I don't want to I don't want to have a situation where, you know, you have to support me at one hundred dollars a month to talk to me for an hour or something like that. I just I just find that kind of distasteful. And, you know, maybe at some point. So so I always want to at least have some slots that people can just, you know, I have to regulate it in somehow, but because I only have so much time. So that's the best system I have so far. When the lottery. That's right. It's kind of a lottery pick. That's exactly what it is. If you're really determined, if you build a structure or you check it every day, you'll have a much higher opportunity. But sometimes it'll be like, oh, there's a slot rabbit. Now, yeah. You haven't had that. Retreat yet, have you? Well, that's not on the East Coast. That's coming up this week, this week. OK, yeah. And I'm thinking about, you know, I think once we get everyone in the room and once we kind of go around the circle and get to know each other a little bit and then find out, OK, what do you want to do with this time? And then I kind of structure the rest of the time and figure out. I always do that with with the meetups. You know, what do what do the people in the room want? Because they're the they're the ones. And then I can usually if they want something from me or a different perspective, I can put things together pretty quickly. So should be interesting. Yeah. It's going to be cold, though. And you'll see my brother-in-law, I hope he chopped enough wood. He's got all these wood burning stoves. So, oh, that'll be nice and toasty. Then those stoves put off a lot of heat. Yeah, it'll it'll be it'll it'll be sort of like being back in the 18th century in some ways. It's an old farmhouse. So it should be interesting. Oh, so one thing I had on here is from Episode 17, where he was talking about how John was talking about how he was reading Spinoza. And then he started to see the world spinozistically, I guess, or like. Through. Yeah, like through the way Spinoza may have seen the world to come to his set of beliefs. And I was wondering, like, what what would that look like for a Christian? So that's I mean, you have and that kind of gets into his where he talks about. So we have these sets of beliefs. And I think that's also what I'm trying to get for this transformation aspect is turning those sets of beliefs so that they actually change our being. And I get that's going to the sacraments, if that has to do with like the worldview stuff and then how to if there's like a framing problem or how we reframe that in a religious context. But. Well, I think I think one of the you know, Reveke is talking about propositional knowledge, then the perspectival participatory and procedural. And and I think in many ways. The I think the propositional type knowledge is. Is very useful. Because it's it's the way in which we often we can kind of communicate with each other and can have a group also. OK, this is what we believe these propositional truths. But I don't know that that particular way of knowing is as powerful in terms of how it transforms us as the the perspectival and the participatory and the procedural. Because and I think to the degree that the the propositional sort of begins to shape the others is the way we're is the way we're changed by it. And that's sort of the point of Jonathan, Jonathan Heights, elephant and the rider in that the the rider is very propositional. But the elephant is very procedural and participatory and perspectival. And so the the things that that we that the rider hears somehow has to get all the way down into the elephant. And that usually happens in community and over time. And and also through like ritual and practice. Exactly, exactly. Because ritual and practice, the elephant understands. And you can you can see this if you if you train a dog or a cat or an animal that, you know, it's it's repetition, it's reward and punishment. It's I mean, that's how you train something that's that isn't capable of doing highly propositional work. And so then if you can figure out the interface between the propositional and the other three peas, then you can actually gain some success in terms of having a community formed around these beliefs. And the church has actually been doing this for for a very long time. But they don't. So and that's I guess what I'm trying to do is say that explicitly. I don't know if explicitly is the right word, but, you know, like, you know, pull the the curtain behind the machine and let you know, that's that's the view I want to bring to them, because I guess that's the view that I am now learning about and is hitting home with me. But I guess if I guess not everyone operates that way, I suppose. But is but I guess that's the goal I'm trying to accomplish. Well, the Roman Catholic Church has actually been very successful at this sort of thing for a very long time, because more than I mean, part of what happened in Protestantism is that the the propositional got to the propositional came rather late in keeps coming. It's kind of a keeps coming late in the game. It's after we're knowing with the other three piece quite a bit that and I think I don't know if you're following many Mary Cohen's videos. She's doing videos on Ratzinger's book. And I'd had a number of conversations with her. Now she started her own YouTube channel. She had she had a real nice video on, you know, the propositional. It's kind of out there. So the reason to put it out there is that we can well, now we can sort of see it a little distance from ourselves and and we kind of figure that out and kind of a Peter Sonia, Peter Sonia way after watching each other for so long. And once it's out there, now we can kind of do something with it. But then to make that jump back to the other way. But Roman Catholics have been doing this for years and years and years and years. And really sort of what the Protestant Reformation did to the Roman Catholic Church, obviously the Council of Trent and some of that history. But but what it did to the Roman Catholic Church is force it again to level up on some of this propositional stuff. And and that's because of the Council of Trent, there was significant reform in the Roman Catholic Church, especially with respect to the corruption, which was a big motivator of the Protestant Reformation. So. So I, you know, I think I think what, you know, where some of Verveki stuff is helpful is that you can say, oh, this is what we've been doing and this is why we do it. And that's, I think, a good hedge against the modernistic. The modernistic tendency to look at this old stuff and say, oh, why are we doing this? We don't even know why we do this old stuff anymore. We should just stop doing this stuff. We're at the point now of saying we didn't know why we did this old stuff, but it was really important. And now with respect to some cognitive science, we can appreciate the value of what we were doing and the significant contribution it made to the overall life of the community and life of the church. Whereas what happened sort of in modernism is everything went highly propositional. And then we said, well, this all these all these practices, we don't really need to do that. We'll just think propositionally. But then the rider and the elephant sort of get disconnected. Yeah. So I guess I guess that would be, yeah, trying to communicate the reasons why we do those things. I guess so why did. So John and like Brett Weinstein are trying to. So you're saying they're more on the propositional side where they're still trying to keep. You know, they want the practices, but they want to change some of the language. They almost want to like, you know, have like another council or something to. I think sort of what happened. So I think it's helpful to understand. Secularism as sort of late stage Protestantism. OK. And. And and so what what Brett Weinstein and John Vervecky. Do is sort of having come through, well, especially. I don't think Brett is terribly. Reflective on any of this stuff, not not anywhere near as much as John is. So I think what John is in a sense doing so, John, John's personal story gets into this because he was raised a Christian and for a variety of reasons, distanced himself from it and discovered some other things and some Eastern practice and but but it's still a physicalist. And so he's trying to, in a sense. You know, have more of a secular develop a set of secular practices which can be done communally, which will afford the benefits that traditional religions have afforded without some of the. What he sees as liabilities in terms of their some of their worldview issues. So. So what he's so that's that's generally his program. What was your question again about Vervecky and Weinstein or your supposition? I think that that they were basically trying to take those practices. They basically want to trim some fat off of biblical teachings, I guess, or like the Bible or the canon. Yeah, they they'd like well. Or what they consider fat as they'd like to be. They'd like to be fat. They'd like to be fat. They'd like to be fat. They'd like to be fat. They'd like to be fat. They'd like to be fat. They'd like to be fat. They'd like to be fat. They'd like to they'd like to relocate it as such. And and that's partly an issue of pluralism as well in in terms of Western, in terms of the West. But. So so what happens in secularization is that you imagine that you can the mythos gets gets relocated. And this is, again, a sort of a difference between Peterson and them, because Peterson wants to very much keep them the mythos and the mythology is a very active element, whereas the proposition. Oh, yeah, that's where Peterson gets into. You know, you you can list all that stuff, but it doesn't have an effect on us. Whereas once you put in a story, that's almost like a shortcut to the elephant. Well, that's exactly right. Yeah, that's the elephants operating. That's that's in some ways the the machine that's that that's the nexus between the elephant and the rider, which is narrative and mythos, because the elephant understands narrative because the elephant just lives narrative and and all this propositional stuff. Well, that's just kind of floating up here for the elephant and the rider can intersect with that. So. So. So, John, for Vicky would very much like to get beyond the merely propositional and get back and establish practices and and institutions and wisdom communities. The difficulty that I think he has is in is in some ways the rider and the elephant problem, too, because. You can talk about this stuff all day long in propositional language, and you're still mostly talking to the rider. And that's why John is very much into his playing his Tai Chi and and the martial arts and the work that he's doing, because that's very much elephant training. But you've got to figure out how to get all of these pieces working together. The the mythos, the narrative element of it, you know, informed by the propositional embedded in practice. And again, because of the organic ways in which religions develop over long periods of time, all of these things tend to come together quite organically in a rigid religion. So if you're going to try and sort of take things out of it, avoiding what you imagine to be problematic, it's it's a tremendously difficult project to say, OK, we're going to put this together, partly because then I think this is the this is the foundational defect of secularism in that you have to sort of have a a barrier of skepticism between ourselves and, you know, the stars, as it were, that which is out there. And and that means that, OK, so I'm finding these practices helpful and I'm finding these practices meaningful. They give me the experience of meaning. And so you work hard on not bullshitting yourself in terms of all of these other things that he talks about. But at some point, it has to connect up to the most real. And again, all of religions sort of do that because they have claims about the most real and it's part of the package. And so at some point, metaphysics has to be engaged and you can't keep it just in terms of this seems to work for us. I mean, because you really are attempting to construct an entire world in which you inhabit. And so it's a it's a tremendously ambitious project. So do you think I have a better not me personally, but I guess what I'm trying to do is kind of like do that, but within the existing Christian framework. Oh, yeah, you have a lot less to do. Yeah, because it's more of like a plug in from like, you know, like a software aspect where it's like, OK, you know, I just want to get you involved in more of these practices that are going to help. You know, like I guess I'm trying to make it more efficient or streamlined where it's like, OK, you know, you pray you're going to build your framework faster. You're going to have you're going to you're going to build that. I don't even know if this is the right way to put it, but, you know, that altered state of consciousness, that's altered state of consciousness. That's what praying could be considered. You know, like if you and you know, like, oh, you got the monks on the MRI machine and you're like rewiring your brain. So it's like a very practical aspect of, I guess, growing in. Religion, I guess, or growing in. I don't know that it necessarily makes it more efficient, but I think what what it does is is helps you see because. For generation generations practice it, practice it in a sense innocently. And I say in a sort of naively, I don't mean that in the pejorative sense, but naively with respect to scientific ideas. And so what happened in the 19th and 20th century, you know, the 20th century, you know, the 20th century was there was so much scientific dismissal of religion that religious people sort of took on a communal inferiority complex in some ways. And what some of the verveky stuff says is, no, actually, there's a ton of wisdom in all of these practices. And I see, I see his work as affording me really a fair amount of apologetic. Tools, because I can see the credibility of ancient Christian practices within a framework of cognitive science that now he's then got the further challenge of saying, I'm going to take this and I'm going to create something out of it in which people can inhabit. That's a that's a tremendously ambitious project that you don't have to do because you inherit a metaphysics and a sense what you're doing is simply adding a little something on and adding adding new perspectives on a huge body of received wisdom and institution and all of that. So it's that way. I think it's you know, it affords you something without the challenge of having to build everything. Yeah, why do you suppose I guess I was because the thought occurred to me like am I like trying to solid Scientology Roman Catholicism in the sense like I came across some videos where it was like Scientology this like video of like very it's like almost well, very propositional and very therapeutic in the sense of like, oh, you know, do these things to be a better person or like, you know, they're like, it's like a video of like walking you through, you know, like someone's perspective of like saying, oh, this person's being very confrontational with me, you know, maybe I need to consider that they're having a bad day and they're under a lot of emotional stress. So I shouldn't respond with anger. And Scientology is part scam, part self help. So yeah, well, I guess what my question is, why hasn't well, at least my experience, I have never had a spiritual director, but maybe that's where they would come into play of like combining religion and therapy and like a lot of those type of practices. Yeah. And a lot of, you know, Christian therapists in the Protestant world, a guy like Larry Crabb, the guys who wrote the the Boundaries book. I mean, there's been a there's been a lot of this. Well, no, there's been plenty in the Roman Catholic world, too. I'm just I'm just less familiar with the Roman Catholic world because there's a sense of siloing between Protestants and Catholics in some of this stuff. But but others. I guess that's specifically Roman Catholic, but like implementing that kind of aspect into the practices of. Oh, yeah, because I mean, I guess it's out there. Many people have been working on things like this. It's out there. And yeah, if you if you went to a spiritual director, now spiritual directors come at this in all kinds of different ways. And so their backgrounds, you know, it will will will shape their approach. But no, that's very much pastoral care, spiritual direction. Many have attempted to integrate, you know, what we learn to have it enhance the wisdom traditions and a lot of the wisdom that has been carried forward in the institution. So what what kind of stuff are you working on right now? What's on the on the forefront of your interests? Well, I've been so I've been interested in in the Kanye phenomenon, partly because of my experience in the in the black community. I've been thinking a lot about. So, you know, my last few videos, I've used a fair amount of Tom Holland, and so now I'm working through Tom Holland's books, a bunch of his different books. And I'm. And so in a sense, you know, part of his thesis is that. Secularism and Christianity have sort of made their way through together. And many people, you know, even the new atheists that, you know, Jordan Peterson says, well, you're you're really sort of a Christian. And then, of course, you know, Dilla Hunt, D and Sam Harris recoil in horror and outrage that Jordan Peterson would make such a statement. But Tom Holland basically historically comes around and says, no, that's pretty much right, that Christianity has so deeply impacted the Western world and via via colonialism and and and just the the the power of the Western world. This has deeply impacted the rest of the world. And and so these values. Disconnected from the mythos. OK, so the values disconnected from the mythos, even amongst deeply secular people, have been shaped and molded by Christianity. OK, so so if if we if we look at that and we say, OK, so. It's it's we can sort of call Sam Harris and Matt Dilla Hunt, the Christians of a sort, or at least deeply impacted by Christians. So so what acts what actually is a Christian? And that's when you get into some of the the propositional truth, if people say, well, I profess these things or maybe some of the some of the some of the procedural truth. I do these things. These are my practices. Some of the participatory or perspectival truth. Well, I trust I trust in Jesus. I trust in God. I believe in God. And so what you have actually, I think for Vickie's stuff is helpful with this. What we have actually is is we see that this question of identity, of Christian identity is actually quite multifaceted. And an atheist, a new atheist like Sam Harris, maybe has deeply. Embedded within his worldview, deeply Christian values, but it's disconnected from a whole bunch of other things. Then you have other people who have very different mixes. So so at that point, then we can begin to ask ourselves, well, especially as a Christian with a missiological bent like myself. OK, so so what should be my approach? To. To to people out there. And one of the interesting things is that over the last 50 years. The the context has changed dramatically. It used to be well, America is a very large and diverse place. So so let's say if you were in certain areas of Wisconsin, some communities might be deeply Roman Catholic, like some of the communities where I grew up in New Jersey, the Italian communities were deeply Roman Catholic. And the Irish communities, the Dutch were deeply reformed. And so, OK, so we've got these and then people sort of leave those communities and become secular. I'm trying to get I'm trying to figure out a framework for. Thinking through these and describing them and talking about them and part of you know, why Kanye is interesting for me and this is that. What he's doing, I've been around the black church long enough to know that a lot of the stuff that he's doing, the music he's taking some pretty standard. Late 20th century music from black churches and of course, reproducing it and, you know, adding all the star power and such that he has available to him. And then watching people get interested in this and talking about, well, is Kanye really a Christian and what really makes a Christian? So Kanye sort of prompting these questions out there and. Muslims or Hindus, people from different parts of the world would look at North Americans and say, oh, yeah, they're all Christians. And of course, North Americans recoil in horror, just like when you go to the Dominican Republic. And if you have pasty skin like me, someone would go to the Dominican Republic and say, you're all black. And people be like, I'm not black. I'm indio obscuro. And they got all these other terms for differentiating themselves from the Haitians or people, you know, that so internally they have all this differentiation, but people from the outside look and say, oh, now you're all Christians. And so I'm I'm trying to get my mind around these things and figure out how to talk and classify and do that. So that's really what I've been thinking about, but I'm not going to I'm trying to. So you're trying to classify secular people? I'm trying to figure out where the lines are and how we can talk about it. OK, so kind of like we're. Like if you would like draw the difference between two denominations, someone would be like kind of. Right. Realize I believe that and they believe that and they're kind of similar. Why do I believe it this way? Right. And we've had this between, say, Protestants and Catholics for a while. Fifty years ago, there was a lot more antagonism between Protestants and Catholics than there are now than there is now. And I think that's a good thing. But part of it is because is because. What we've seen since the advent of this public media, first radio, then tell, you know, actually first newspapers, then radio and television and now the Internet, that there's a common formation in in the country between people. I mean, you know, 70 years ago, if someone grew up Dutch Calvinist and in, say, a little town where I'm going to White'sville, Massachusetts, Dutch Calvinist and Roman Catholic, they'd be living next to each other. And there'd be a degree of commonality, but there'd also be significant differences because the religious demands and requirements were pretty thick than informative other communities. Now they're they're going to work in the same places. They go to church on Sunday. They go to different churches on Sunday, but their churches aren't anywhere near as different as they were before. Their beliefs aren't as different. And so this is sort of happening all over. And that has implications for my work, which is a Christian minister, because people come in and, oh, where did you go to church? I went to a Baptist church. And OK, and you've got that disagreement about infant and adult baptism. But I'm just trying to continue to try to get my mind around what's happening in the culture. And people like Kanye are just sort of defining moments where you can say, oh, I can gain some perspective by looking at this this new emergence, sort of like Jordan Peterson was. Because I guess you get into a bit of, you know, on the one aspect, you kind of dissolve in tribalism. But a lot of religions will go under the universal truth aspect. Especially like Catholicism, you know, this is the universal truth. We got it right. So you can't be involved in those other groups or, you know, they're they don't see the full picture kind of thing. Well, and so again, 50, 70 years ago, people were very much baked into, boy, if you were raised Catholic, if you were raised Christian Reformed or Dutch Calvinist, I mean, you were very much baked into it. Now, you know, people have a little fight in their CRC church and they go to whatever church down the road sort of hits them as right. And doctrinally, it could be very, very different. And that shows, OK, these how we're interacting with these propositional truths is changing. People don't see I mean, one of the one of the people in the little community that has joined me on the Discord server. I talked to I talked to Sam, Sam, who is a non-Trinitarian. And, you know, he looks very evangelical. But then, you know, at some point in time, he'll make the comment, oh, but I don't believe in the Trinity. And then suddenly, pastors have to pull back and say, oh, my goodness, now what do I do with him? But but and everything else, he looks just Christian in terms of their definitions of Christian. So it's a good time to sit back and say, OK, what are the what are the little litmus tests and the markers that we're using? And and how do those actually intersect with the historic claims of the church? That's especially true of, say, Roman Catholics. And now that process, of course, this process has been going on for a long time. So Vatican II, you know, was an emblem of this and and putting away of the many churches, putting away of the Latin mass and going to masses in the vernacular. What a deeply impactful decision that is. And then some, you know, a few churches around the US then going back to Latin masses. And it's like, this is all very interesting to me and makes me say, well, what's going on? Hmm. Yeah. Trying to judge the. Mood of the times, I guess. Yeah, yeah. And what's going on? And you know, what's going on with them and what does this mean? I you know, I think about my grandparents and the world we're living in in terms of our church worlds would be unrecognizable to my grandparents in, you know, before the Second World War. Things have just changed dramatically. But I don't think we set a lot of people. We have such a progressive ethos about a lot of people say, oh, these changes are all for the better. And in the Christian reform world, you don't have these sabbatarian laws. You can now go swimming on Sunday and you can go out to eat on Sunday and you can do your grocery shopping on Sunday. My grandparents generation recoiled in horror at this. That's just abject worldliness. And the churches have made these changes with little or no communal conversation or theological reflection. And some of those chickens are coming home to roost. And we don't like how all those chickens taste. So it's it's it's there's a lot going on. But we tend to just simply be distracted by technological changes, political murmurings and then churches institutionally just trying to keep their stuff together because they're under somewhat stress because they were built for larger populations, populations that gave more sacrificially. And now they're dealing with a wealthier population for for whom the church is less of a priority and their particular individual religious priorities might not align with the institutional priorities. All of those are tremendous changes of the last 50, 70 years. And I don't see anywhere near sufficient reflection or conversation or work being done on those questions. So they're interesting to me. And they're they very much intersect with all the other kinds of questions that I've dealt with on my channel. So it's like the market is flooded with religious affiliations. You know, we're in a bubble right now. What happens when the bubble bursts? Well, that's well, that's right. And that's happening. Churches in North America. So so churches like mine in North America, that is a declining market and churches hold on and hold on and hold on and then just disappear. And it's kind of like an ecosystem sustaining a drought. But now. There's more people than ever out there. And it's not the case that the atheists are correct and that people are just giving up on God there. It's all changing. So then again, you see something like Kanye Sunday service and people who it's the same thing as we saw with Jordan Peterson. I saw Jordan Peterson. I said, people are not going to dozens of churches and hundreds of churches in Toronto to hear preachers who have been developed by theological seminaries and institutions and all that. They're walking past all of those things to go and sit into a sit and listen to a psychology professor ramble about the Bible for two plus hours and they're paying 40 bucks for the pleasure of it. And what's with that? And now, you know, Kanye Sunday service, you know, people who they don't they there's innumerable churches they could go to and they have no interest in it, but they would go listen to. They do want to go see Kanye and they would get excited about his music. It's like, OK, what's with that? Oh, OK. So I guess so that kind of plays into what you're talking about. The trying to read the secularists are people who identify as secular because and this is something the religious institutions have been doing since their inception is like they read the cultural feelings, I guess, of the time. And then you have to adjust the teachings accordingly or translate it into something that hits home with people. Or they don't adjust the teachings and they quietly tinker with practice until at some point a practice and a teaching come in conflict. And then there's an explosion. And what happened in the Protestant Reformation was there was so much of this built up and the church was so vastly connected into every area of life that it was a tremendous explosion that the Protestant Reformation was. But Protestantism has sort of been just a continued series of explosions. The Roman Catholic Church sort of handles that in a different way because of their theology of institution. But, you know, and but this is happening in the Roman Catholic Church with, let's say, the papacy of Francis. You know, so change is happening quickly. And the church, the small C church, is always adapting. Christianity is the most adaptable religion that I think the world has ever seen that can maintain its coherence. But that adaptation process is tremendously messy. And in times of rapid change like we're living, it's very messy institutionally and in church and in people's lives. And when you say small church, you mean like the local church? What I mean, not just the Roman Catholic. I mean, the Roman Catholic Church, the Orthodox Church, the Protestant Churches, Church in general, rather than the Roman Catholic Church or the Christian Reformed Church or the Orthodox Church of America. So small, small C meaning churches. And that gets that's theologically problematic, too, because Protestants, Luther developed this idea of the invisible church. Well, what do you mean the invisible church? Well, it's it's it's sort of the category of church that transcends Roman Catholic and Protestant. So, but. Well, I just like comment on my lack of knowledge and all this stuff. I mean, I find it extremely fascinating. I'm just trying to absorb more of it. And there's just so much to learn like philosophy and history of the institution's theology. We learn we can learn our whole life long and just scratch the surface of it. It's. There's no end to it. There's no end to it. Well, we're about out of time. I can send this to you or if you're willing to have me share it, I can I'll probably post it in the next couple of weeks while I'm while I'm away on my trip. Either either way, I can just send it to you and you can review it and let me know what you'd like to do. That's fine, too. OK. Yeah, I wouldn't mind having a copy just to go over everything and have some notes available. Yeah, I don't I don't have a problem with the sharing it. I don't think. OK, I'll send you to explicit said so I will. What I'll do what I'll actually do is I'll upload it unlisted and I'll send you the link and that way you can look at it. If you hear something in it, say no, I'd rather not share it. Just send me an email and and then we'll just keep it private between us. But that way you get a copy of it and you can see it. You can share it with whoever you want. So I'm sure the biggest thing is going to be my Midwest accent that I'm not totally aware of. That's just like blatantly obvious in the video. But I don't know. Sounds kind of normal to me. I lived a long time in Michigan. So, oh, yeah, you know, it's not too bad. Well, great talking to you, Ryan. Yeah, you as well. Paul, it's been a good experience. I hope I'll let you keep you posted as to how this lesson plans go. Lesson plan goes and see if I can actually integrate it into a coherence narrative that the kids can pick up on. But good for you. Good luck to you with that. Thanks. Take it easy.