https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=nxYdSkGtctE

 So you just mentioned to me that you've got students who are interested in Christianity because of Jordan Peterson. So then you start, I mean in the context of a public university, how do you introduce them to the Christian tradition? I mean it's so enormous. Yeah, so as I mentioned, I've had a variety of students become interested in Christianity, largely through Jordan Peterson's lectures on Genesis and Exodus and approaching them in sort of a mythical manner. So between the secularists who want to trash the Bible and the literalists who want to read it in a fairly simplistic manner, there's this middle way, a sort of mythical exegesis. And so they've been quite taken by that just because the personal application and their own journey and where they are. So now at a public university, we have programs in religious studies. And so at a lower level, it's a general introduction. Second year, you have religions of the East, religions of the West, and I teach those. And third year level, it's particular traditions. So in the West, Judaism, Christianity, Islam, and the East, obviously Hinduism, Buddhism, and then at the fourth year level, people can take particular themes or thinkers that they want to dive a little deeper in and explore their thinking and their relevance both for the past and the present. And so these particular students, this is an upper level course just on the Christian tradition. So I tend to approach it through, given a lot of people's interest today, they come to, some do, not all of course, they come to Christianity through an interest in the contemplative traditions, the spirituality tradition. And so I use a book called Thirsty for God. It's a lovely overview of the Christian tradition of spirituality. And then to give them a bigger sense of the great tradition, I use Jaroslaw Pelikon's The Vindication of Tradition, where he talks about difference between tradition and traditionalism. One's the dead faith of the living, the other's the living faith of the dead. And so it gives them a nice understanding of what tradition really means and what happens if you have caricatures of it. And then the other is a very personal journey with some of the great contemplatives within the 2000 year old Christian tradition itself. Okay. And then I usually add them to three autobiographies, Thomas Merton's Seven Story Mountain, C.S. Lewis's Surprised by Joy, and then Bede Griffith's The Golden String. Okay. So what happens in your experience? So what happens after? Do they find churches often? I mean, because it's one thing obviously to study it over here, it's another thing to practice it. So what happens to them then? Well, yeah, the second question, it's one thing to be interested in a sort of a dilettante-ish sort of way, a curious sort of way, even to sort of come through the portal a bit. The second question is always the ecclesial question. Okay, so are we going to be sort of ecclesial butterflies here and sort of flip from one little place to another? Or is there, what's the relationship between Christianity and life in the body of Christ to the Corpus Christi in that sense? So a lot of our discussion hinges on those two elements. What's the relationship to spirituality and ecclesiology? And then the third question is what's the relationship of spirituality, ecclesiology to public responsibility? So that triple chord of any sort of minimally mature faith. And so I go through that. And so not separating spirituality from larger justice, peace, ecological issues, but not also doing the leapfrog over the ecclesial question also. Okay, okay. Have you been, you know, I know Peterson obviously has become a huge force. Have you seen, have you heard from any students who've been plunking around with Verveckis meaning crisis stuff? Has any of that come across your student radar that you've heard? What particular element are you focusing in on there? Well, so John Verveckis has started a new, it's part of what's interesting about Peterson is that I'm watching other academics see the potential of social media to make a larger impact with areas of study that they're passionate about. And obviously for many academics they've had, they've had, you know, students that they could colonize as it were and share, you know, an influence. But via Peterson, you know, I've seen a fair number of academics who have looked at Peterson and thought, wow, there's real potential in YouTube for, you know, even what we're doing right now. There's real potential in YouTube for talking about some of these bigger ideas here on YouTube. You have so much more time than you do in a tweet or a little Facebook post. And so John Verveckis, who also teaches at University of Toronto, he did a course on Buddhism and cognitive psychology, which they had recorded, but the sound was poor. And so he is now embarking on a much larger project where he's doing a set of 50 videos called The Meaning Crisis and, or, forget that, it's basically addressing what he calls The Meaning Crisis. And he's, he's about 17 videos in at this point, but they, they recorded them in, the first videos were just kind of a computer setup in a classroom situation. In these videos, they've got a little bit more production value. Some students have been working with him on it. And so, so they've been, they've been pursuing that. And he's the first part of the video series. He's dealing with philosophy is kind of an overview of some philosophical traditions and then also some religious traditions. The basic thesis is that, well, it's a little bit more coptic. The basis thesis is that here in the, in the secular frame, people are finding themselves without meaning. And meaning had always been connected with these religious traditions that had been connected with other philosophical assumptions about the way the universe works. And so then the question is, can, can modern secular people, how can modern secular people regain meaning in their lives? And so partly, I think, because Peterson has been spending all of his time or most of his time doing his book tour. And there's simply been a lot of repetition with the Peterson stuff. A lot of the Peterson followers have kind of gotten bored and look, moved on to graze and other pastures. And John Vervecky has been around continuing to do his work online, continuing to put out new video content with every week. And so some of the Peterson crowd has sort of wandered over into Vervecky's field and been grazing off his work. So that's where that's, that's where that's come from. Yeah, I mean, I think most people see Peterson as a suggestive thinker, a gateway thinker, a portal thinker. He points to those obviously more substantive or in depth than himself. And in that sense, where you're doing actually courses where you're exploring varied understandings of meaning, both within the Orient and the Occidental tradition. That's what people are hungering for. I mean, it's one thing to invite them to the table and say, there's food here. It's another thing to have a real feast of meaningful intellectual, spiritual, aesthetic, ethical, political thinking. And that's not Peter's forte, as I say, his, his, I mean, his background is in psychology with a, you know, earlier degree in poli sci. But he can only point to areas which there's others far more in depth understanding of that. In that sense, the meaning crisis, which I think is with many thoughtful people today, this obviously this is being addressed by more substantive people. I think the one since the limitation of Peterson came up, many of my students have been were very interested in the Peterson Zizak debate in Toronto a few weeks ago. And I think what was, I mean, first of all, it was advertised as sort of a sort of a clash of titans and it looked as if it was supposed to charge one another and one was to dethrone the other. And it became more of a collegial gratefully so. But what I think became obvious in that dialogue of sorts is that Zizak comes from a much older European tradition of intellectual thought. And he has a depth and a breadth that Peterson didn't quite have. But he was respectful of Peterson and he certainly didn't want to trash him or undermine him. And so most of my students found that approach was a little more collegial, a little more respectful. But there was no doubt Zizak has a greater breadth and depth than Peterson. So I find a lot are also quite interested in Zizak as well. He's become a bit of a cultural icon and he probably can take people to places at this point where Peterson cannot. And so quite a variety of my students are quite interested. So I think these other people that are on the stage or coming on the stage will catch the ball that Peterson has thrown and run further down the field with it. OK. Now I had no idea who Zizak was until Peterson had mentioned him. Are you familiar with his work? Can you give a bit of an overview? I'm still a little confused as to where he's coming from and especially where he thinks we should go. Well, I mean, his roots are Eastern European heritage. He probably in terms of a little more sophisticated thinker, he's much further down the road than Peterson. He's grappled with political left. He recognizes the aberrations of the left. But he also realizes there is immense good in the left. And it's how do you mine that meather load the best while being critical of its abuses, its... He's also a cultural historian in terms of literature and music. So he brings this broader cultural, intellectual, philosophic tradition. He's both deeply critical of elements of Christianity, but also deeply appreciative of elements of Christianity, as any good thinker will be, given the fact Christianity has played such a substantive role in the West as well as other parts of the world. And so he's always analyzed at the level of theory and at the level of practice, just as he does with leftist Marxism, variations of Marxism. He looks at what's the good it's contributed, what's its Achilles heel, the good of Christianity. And in one sense, he arrives at this meaning question, because what happens when Christianity vanishes or religious traditions disappear? Because these have been the sort of focus, the core of people's longings and how they've tried to make sense of that logically, philosophically, in public life, literary, larger cultural issues. And so he's sort of deconstructionist thinker, but he's also a constructionist thinker. And he lives in this not easy tension, much easier to deconstruct, to critique. But it takes a creative thinker to say, OK, we've diagnosed the problem. What's the prognosis and how do we move forward? So he has a breadth of intellectual history, and he marshals that in just quite a variety of publications. He's a very prolific writer. He's certainly graced the stages of public life in terms of grappling with where does where do thoughtful people go in a post-Christian, post-secular, post-science world? And how do we find meaning in that process? And are there resources in the past we can still mine that point us forward? And if there are, what are those resources that we can we can mine and bring the gold forth from that? So I would say he I think why a lot of people are drawn to him is his sheer sort of breadth and depth, but his thoughtfulness, but also his creative thinking on the other on the other on the other hand. So but he certainly for many of my students, he's become their North Star in some ways and trying to find their way forward. Really? That's that that fascinates me. And, you know, I in listening to the Peterson, the Peterson debate, you know, I heard him deconstructing a whole lot of things all along the way. But I never got a sense of, OK, so here's, you know, here's what won't stop capitalism. Here's here's what will stop capitalism. But the whole world stops with it on and on. So I was curious as to exactly what he points to. Yeah. And this is I mean, it's it's always the dilemma. I mean, he's been stung a variety of times because he was very involved politically at a certain point in his life. You know, he's acutely aware when you move from theory to practice the duplicity at times in practice, similar to we've talked before. Herman has this glass bead game where you go from the intellectual elite, the thinkers in Castalia. So what's this look like when you enter the valley of actual praxis or working out your theory in the layered level of human interaction? And so he's always he's always trying to say, so what's the relationship to thought and action? How do you live that tension? But be careful of being betrayed in both both levels. And because of a certain experience in Eastern Europe and engagement with leftist politics, he also sees how that that can betray you. So he's the thing I think was Isaac is that he he deconstructs, he points to praxis, but also be wary of praxis if absolutized and uncritically you genuflect before it. Probably his strength is as a cultural intellectual, you know, the importance of the aesthetic dimension. Well, certainly not using that as an escape mechanism from hardball politics also. Yeah, so it's but this was the first time these two who are I think for many have been seen as good pointers for meaning, for purpose, for how we make sense of, as I mentioned earlier, post Christendom, post scientific, post secular world without becoming cynical on the one hand, which that's a dead end. And without becoming a Pollyanna optimist, on the other hand, and that's a dead end equally, which often naive idealists then often become cynics when their highest hopes are betrayed. Yeah. Did you watch the debate? Yes, and then actually in our class yesterday, I had my various students, they saw it and then they had to reflect on their various reads and get feedback and then we debriefed on it and we'll pick that up again. Well, what kind of takeaways did they have from it? Well, I think, I think as I said, the it was advertised as sort of two thinkers who are going to clash one fight for capitalism, and the good that it delivers versus variations of communism, socialism, the other defending marks and that tradition versus capitalism. And since neither of them are ideologues in that sense of saying this versus that, you know, either or, they were both willing to critique their own traditions and say, yeah, there's darkness in it, there's shadows, there'll be dragons there. And so it was more of a suggestive dialogue between these two who are acutely aware of their own heritage with its goods, but its flaws. And in that sense, in that sense, I mean, a follow up dialogue probably could be more fruitful, but this was, you know, your first one is often a beginning if people are taken by. So the students appreciated the collegial manner because often these things are framed as debate and one sort of thinker tries to unseat the other and it's sort of an intellectual jousting match. What do you think, what do you think Zizek meant by, I mean, he identified himself not so much as a Marxist but more as a Hegelian. What do you think he meant by that? Well, Hegel, I mean, first of all, as you know, is that Marxism is left-wing Hegelianism. And so at the heart of Hegel's thinking is this dialectic, you know, you have the thesis, antithesis, synthesis. At the heart is that there's a position, then there's a counter position and be careful of freezing any way of thinking. And so if Marxism, I mean, Marx himself was very appreciative, for example, of Adam Smith and the wealth of nations, he was never critical of capitalism in its earlier stages. He actually argued very clearly that the thesis of capitalism was suggestive in the bourgeois class had to reach a certain state of affluence and wealth. And then the proletariat, the antithesis would rebel, rebel against the bourgeois and they then would take over. But then you had to move through there. So the withering way of the state and bringing in the new utopia. So what happens in certain forms of Marxism? Of course, you get a freezing. And if you're Hegelian, you say, OK, well, this critique of certain forms of capitalism is good. Wealth is being distributed a little better. The state is playing its minimal role. But there's also there's a freezing here. And in Hegel, wherever you reach is only a penultimate or an antipenultimate to the next stage. And so for Zizek, it's like, OK, elements of Eastern Europe have critiqued elements of capitalism and its abuses. But they also freeze at a certain point. And if you take Hegel seriously and Marx's read of Hegel, then you have to critique where they are. And so they use the Hegelian dialectic to critique Marx and the application of Marx. And so Zizek has that Hegelian dialectic is wherever we are, we still have to move beyond it because it's imperfect in an East of Eden world. So that gives them a certain freedom to critique. But say there is sort of a direction we're going to, we're not there. But where we are, we can constantly critique in Hegelian like manner. And so I don't know if that sort of makes sense. But yeah, well, he you know, he he basically said, you know, I'm not really a Marxist, I'm Hegelian. So I thought, OK, what do you mean by that? Because obviously there are many kinds, there are many types of Hegelians running around. Yeah, you have right wing Hegelianism, left wing Hegelism, humanists like one of our great Canadian political philosophers, Charles Taylor is what you call a centrist Hegelian or humanist Hegelian versus left or right. And he's trying to synthesize the romantic, the rationalist tradition. And how does Canada perhaps embody that? Or many Scandinavian countries or things like that? Yeah. So it's it's that attempt to find how did two different traditions, how can they work together for the greater good? It reminds me of a little bit I mentioned to you this new book by Michael Lassing in which he looks at the he looks at the tensions between Luther and Erasmus and how on the other on the one hand, it's called fatal discord in the West, the Reformation, how Luther can come as a great critic of the aberrations of the Roman Catholic Church. But he simplifies reality and you have an Erasmus needing to come along and say, well, you know, reality is a little more complex and a little more nuanced than you're articulating it. And how do you how do people allow the more ironical Erasmus, the more moderate nuanced to get inside of them, but also allow Luther to live inside of them at the same time? And so it's this is its own little dialectic. And if a person has this desperate need for certainty and clarity and everything is black and white, there are times when that's that's appropriate. But there are times when that, in fact, inhibits the form, the ongoing critique of that which needs to be critiqued in terms of something. And that's where the Erasmus tradition comes in and says, you know, ease off a little bit. And life is a little more a little more complex than your reductionist approach. And so in one sense, this new book by Michael Massing, Fatal Discord, he looks at how the fight over the Western mind, the one hand, the Western mind, the one element that wants to be certain. And you get your you get your confessions right, you get your exegesis right. And then people salute to that. And then you have the Erasmus, which says, well, be a little careful about that, because you might be getting everything wrong in the process or many things wrong in the process. And so this this important little work by Michael Massing, Fatal Discourse on and where has Western history gone as a result of the Lutheran. In many ways, our culture wars today are just secularized Lutheranism. Say more about that. Well, when you get, say, politically correct stuff, is the sense we know what's right. And if you disagree with us, that proves, you know, you're a bit of a hillbilly from the Catskills, you're not as enlightened as we are. But the notion the notion that our interpretation, obviously with Luther, it's an interpretation of the Bible. And so, you know, with politically correct stuff, it's an interpretation of the issues. And these are the issues a person is meant to line up if they're going to be a good social justice warrior. Or this is what you're supposed to line up if you're authentically on the right or an authentic conservative. But the lines are drawn in clear and distinct ways. And in that sense, that's very Lutheran. And so, you know, we have a lot of people who just clash with Erasmus, for example. And so, you secularize Lutheranism. You just get, you still get this notion of right, wrong, black, white, just the new orthodoxy, say, the social justice warriors or the reaction to them. So, they're just updated Puritans in that sense, for secular Puritans. But the way of thinking remains exactly the same. But that need to decide black and white, right and wrong, dualistic categories remains the same versus an Erasmian tradition, which takes the position. Listen, in 16th century, yeah, there's aberrations in the Catholic Church, but there's good in it. Yes, there's insight in what Luther's doing, but there's blind spots to it. So, a much more nuanced and nimble thinker, which is often not tolerated in the red heat of the culture wars, when you're supposed to line up between this tribe or that tribe. And that's just secularized Lutheranism or secularized Puritanism, the mindset. And they don't tolerate an Erasmian approach as much, which is more nimble and more dialectical in that sense. I've been in my adult Sunday school class, I've been going through the book of First John, which is a fascinating book. But it is very much a book of black and white. You have Christ and Antichrist. And the author is John is always contrasting one to the other. And that way of thinking obviously has its place. But there are other ways of thinking that have their places too. So Michael Massing, I hadn't heard of this book. Where is Michael Massing? Where is he from? Is he a professor someplace? No, his roots are in journalism. So this is what makes the book. I mean, he's done extensive research on late medieval thought and then obviously the early 16th century. And so it's a wonderful and superb, in fact, tour de force, chapter by chapter into the details of the unfolding Reformation and the emergence of what Erasmus was doing, how initially Luther drew from him. And then the tensions between Erasmus and Luther. Luther's final break by 1521, the Diet of Worms. And then this, where did they differ? But underneath what Massing is trying to get at, because he talks about essentially it's the fight for the Western mind. So what the fight is, in essence, is how we interpret and perceive reality and how we treat the other who differs with us. And this, are we going to move in a Lutheran direction or an Erasmian? And it's not a case of either or, because there are times when you have to be Lutheran. And that's important. And there are times when you have to be Erasmian. And the task is to know when to be which and in which conditions. So it's not pitting Erasmus against Luther or Luther against Erasmus. It just says, he's basically arguing, there are those who do divide into an Erasmian, a peacemaking, a dubish, a dialectal. They don't want to stand anywhere too firmly, too long, which of course that was not particularly Erasmus either. But they don't want to line up and serve the left, center, right in the culture wars either. And other people do. They say you have to take, it's like the Luther here, I stand, I can do no other position. And what Massing is arguing is that we need both within us in that sense. And underneath it, it's the, I mean you use the book of 1 John, for example. What underlies it, many ways we think of the book of John, you know, in the beginning was the word, the word was with God. And often that's, I've often found problematic in its interpretation. Because in the Greek it means, it means, and it's often translated in the beginning, which is, are the archons in classical thought. So at the ground are the guardians of all things. And sometimes is interpreted as reason or reflective thinking. And that's not a good translation of the Greek. The Logos in pre-Socratic, TS Elias tops into this also in four quartets. Logos in the classical sense was the presence of all things. And so when you interpret John, it's the ground of all things is the brooding presence. And the presence entering and guiding history. And so when we think of the culture wars, it's often people are insensitive to the very presence of reality or truth. Which, aletheia in Greek again is an openness to that which is. And that doesn't fit easy into culture wars in which you line up between a particular. So the task is always, how does one contemplate remain present to that which transcends the tribalism of left and right? Because the presence of reality and that which guards all things does not fit into our simplistic often interpretations in the culture wars. Whether the laundry list of the right, the laundry list of the left, and there can be 15, 20 issues here. And so one sense what massing is getting at is one sense the Johannine understanding of what does it mean to be the guardian of a greater vision, the archon? And how does what does it mean to be open to the presencing of that which is present? So how do we mean remain present to the presencing of that which is present, which is bigger than simply slipping into human interpretations of what we should think in the culture wars or ideology? In which the right can be right at times spot on. It can be blind at other times. The left can be right at times. It can be quite blind at other times in key issues. And so this is where John in many ways, particularly in the opening prologue of John, really can be a wonderful pointer if we understand that inarchy, hologos, hologos, and he moves on. But it's often the book of John, the prologue has been very sanitized or simplified as well. And I've often found, I mean, John is the great mystic or contemplative, quite different from the synoptics. But what he was up to, great law tradition, pre-Socratic thinking and Plato and Aristotle and then how he draws together the Hebrew tradition with the emerging Christian synthesis of classical thought and Hebrew thought into the early apostolic and the post apostolic. So I think in that sense, when you get back to some of these issues, it's even when you get Peterson or Zizak, you get Erasmus or Luther, the danger is to say I'm this or I'm that. And the more difficult thing is this. Well, this is appropriate under certain conditions. This is appropriate under different conditions. And how do we allow these people to live within us? You had mentioned earlier, I forget who your thinker was, but he was looking at emerging thinking in the Middle Ages. I don't know if he was dealing with Bernardo Clairvaux or Peter Abelard. You'd mentioned someone, I don't know who you were reading, but again you have Abelard who have a great fondness for early scholastic rational thinking. On the other hand, Bernard, the mystical approach. I mean, Bernard was terrible in his treatment of Abelard and Elohim and some of his early novices became popes. He preaches crusades, so you get this mystical right wing hawkish stuff. On the other hand, you want to say what's the good of Bernard? What's his blind spots? What's the good of the Abelardian way of knowing? But maybe some of the downsides. And again, it's the danger of lesser people. They shrink both how we know and what we know into little tribes and clans and then lesser people line up behind them. Whereas the Logos is something quite different. Well, you know, it's interesting because I think people want to associate mysticism with a kind of free for all libertarian approach. But many mystics are hardly that. You know, some mystics are, I just recently found a new favorite YouTube channel that has all these little biographies and they had a terrific little biography of Joan of Arc. You know, talk about someone who is, you know, drawing hard lines and bright lines and one side or the other. And, you know, mystics do not just come in one variety. They're all over the place. Absolutely. There is shallow mysticism, which can be very narcissistic, very indulgent. And as you say, skating all over the place, paper thin. And then there are thoughtful mystics that are grounded in a deeper understanding of transformation, the unio mystica, what that means in terms of the certainly within Christian mysticism anyway, being united in the historic body of Christ. And then that what does that mean for prophetic politics? And so you can have very immature mysticism in the contemplative. You can get right wing mysticism, left wing mysticism, but the noblest of contemplatives, mystics. Again, they transcend all of that in terms of mature, contemplative theology, which is grounded in a pretty solid ecclesiology and then impacts the world in a meaningful, prophetic manner, again, as that's the triple chord. But, you know, everything has its counterfeit and lesser people often get taken in by the counterfeits. And you want to walk them into, I mean, this is the nature. I mean, one of the illnesses of our times, I think, is the problem of mamoricide. We have no memory. And so when people have no memory, but they're hungry spiritually, often the markings are gone, the landmarks are gone, and then they're vulnerable to anybody who comes along and offers some sort of magic solution to their hungers, their longings, their disappointments. And often then they get taken in and they become cynical. But the more a person's, this is why I mentioned the course I'm doing on Christian tradition, I make sure they know their Yaroslav Pelikan very, very well in his five volumes of the Christian tradition. Okay, then we can then we can understand the relationship of experience to theology, to philosophy, to creeds, to councils. And so it's not some reductionistic, silly, little narcissistic understanding of mysticism. Do you think the Protestant Reformation was inevitable? I mean, because when you have Erasmus and Luther, I mean, obviously Erasmus is, clearly part of Luther is his personality, his culture, his situation. I mean, obviously, and then also, you know, there's, it seems, I read the last Luther biography, I guess it was maybe two, three years ago that I read the last Luther biography that I read. You know, it very much seems that, you know, Luther posts his 95 Theses, is obviously a volcanic personality, but post the 95 Theses in Latin gets translated into German pamphlets go out. Now suddenly the Catholic Church has a political difficulty on their hands. Obviously, you have an institution that is spanning over, you know, a variety of cultures trying to hold all of this together. You know, and it seems in many ways that one thing, one thing happens after another, and Luther, you know, Luther just keeps getting backed into a corner and a guy with a personality like Martin Luther, you pack someone like Luther into a corner, he's going to act in a very predictable way, which is reactively, and things continue to sort of, you know, things continue to sort of spiral out of control. But as many scholars have noted, there are only parts of Christendom where the Reformation took root. And there are other parts of Christendom where, you know, either by, either they were able to pull off a cleansing, let's say, such as in France, or in other places in Spain, in Italy, just, you know, didn't take. So do you think that Protestant Reformation was inevitable? I would say no. I think definitely the reform of the Roman Catholic Church was inevitable. How that reform took place in many ways hinged on two different temperaments. Erasmus preceded Luther, and am I coming through? Yep, yep, you are. He paused for it, it had stopped, but it's back on. Yeah, I mean, the, what we call the Oxford Reformers in England, John Collett, Erasmus, Thomas More, they were acutely aware there were all sorts of problems in the Roman Catholic Church and certainly emerging from Rome, and they knew, they knew a renaissance had to occur. The question was, how do you remain critical but loyal? And this was the underlying dilemma. Catholic, a Catholic thinker at the deepest and most meaningful is always critical of the aberrations of what the Church is meant to be, but they're loyal to that. And this is where Erasmus, Thomas More, John Collett comes out of. And so Erasmus shared with Luther, actually he went much further than Luther in terms of criticizing the Roman Catholic Church, but he was more moderate on his tone and texture, but he also held to loyalty to the Church as well. And so yes, it's an imperfect body. It can be reformed, think over the long time, whereas Luther, he, very critical, but increasingly given his bullish nature, he's, the confrontation between he and Rome reached such a pitch, and he wasn't going to back down. He didn't know how to compromise, which infuriated Rome, and you essentially, you essentially get two people in a ring going at one another. Erasmus was a moderate middle. He was as critical, I mentioned, as Rome as was Luther, but he believed there was ways of reforming the Church in an ironical and just manner in which you didn't slip into schism. That's all. And so it's one thing to say, you know, go back to the Bible. Well, the Bible and reading Romans and Galatians, and this is where Erasmus differed with Luther, he says, yeah, that's their justification by grace through faith, but there's more to Romans and Galatians and St. Paul than that, for one thing. So he differed with what he thought was Luther's reductionistic read of the text. He also says, read John, it's about the unity of the body of Christ, or Paul, you know, head, body, bride, bride, groom, vine, branches. So if you want to, if you want to do the biblical thing, then let's really do the biblical thing, Luther, not just go cherry picking with little texts based on your own journey. And so how do you hold together the one holy Catholic and apostolic Church? This was, so I would say reform, absolutely. But then the question is, what do you mean by reform? And this is where finally Erasmus and Luther parted paths. Well, it's helpful to remember too that it takes, it usually takes two to schism. And, you know, I mean, obviously, John, you know, Jan Hus, the Catholic Church knew how to silence its foes pretty, you know, pretty dramatically and, and make, you know, make examples of them so that others would, would, would hold the line and stay true. It's always, it's always a dilemma when you get to the confrontation between two different ideals, and people polarize on it. That's one way of dealing with it. And so if you get Rome, you know, standing on its high haunches and Hus, on the other hand, taking a position and neither backing down, neither knowing how to compromise. This is, yeah, this is where you get in. Same with Luther. And then where does Erasmus fit into that? Because he's aware of the problems of Rome and the Curia and the Pope, Leo X, Julius II. He knew that stuff. He knew how to criticize without unduly alienating to know how to reform without being schismatic. So he shared, I mean, he would have shared many of Hus' ideas Erasmus. He shared most of Luther's concerns. But why, but what is it about Erasmus to understanding a reform that goes one way and Luther's that goes another, given the fact they shared so many concerns. And, and but also the reality that many of these concerns had been live taught. I mean, these had been, the corruption in the Roman Catholic Church was very known for quite a long time. And it seemed that part of what motivated the church to finally really address a number of these long standing issues was that it had been losing, you know, it had lost, you know, the power of the Church. And so it seemed like a good bit of, you know, what would become Germany and that the reformations did spark reform in the church. It's difficult to know how much of that reform would have taken place without the reformation. Yeah, good point. And I think what also happened is that in the whether it was the Lutheran or the Calvinist or the Anabaptist tradition, the dilemma that emerged from that, and I think this is what massing book is about is that the Lutheran and reformed and Anabaptist traditions, what they did is they drove the Roman Catholic Church into the Tridentine or the Council of Trent, which was equally reactionary. And the Chastness himself was put on the index until Vatican II in the early 60s. So and then you get all the Protestant confessions emerging. So you're getting as a result of what's happening, people redefining their faith in a reductionistic manner. And if you don't agree with with Trent or this confession or that confession or this, then you're not an authentic Christian or you're a Judas or you're misinterpreting the authentic and gin. So I think the genius of a massing book is it created in the Western mind, a way of thinking that was reductionistic, simplistic black and white. And then in that sense, you secularize that way of thinking, you're right into the you're right into the culture wars of today in which people still think structurally they think in terms of black and white right and wrong. It's not religious anymore, but the way of thinking, thinking is the same. Eric Fogelin, I don't know if you've read his book, New Science of Politics. It's a lovely little work. He uses the word Gnosticism in a much more updated way. And he looks at, obviously, in the early church, there was Gnosticism, but he says, what, what, what really is gnosis all about? And he says, underneath it, it's, it's the Gnostics thought their understanding of spirituality is more than light than the historic church and underneath it is that we know we're the ones in the right and if you disagree with us, you're not as enlightened, not as bright, you're a traitor. And he looks at political religious Gnosticism initially in Joachim Fiora, the spiritual Franciscans, where they saw they were the ones, you know, in tune with the spirit. There was the age of the father, the son and spirit. So you get spiritual Gnostics, political Gnostics, then you get Cromwell. Again, his purge of England was bringing together various forms of religious thinking and politics. They knew what was absolutely right. You secularize that, you get the French Revolution, okay. They're absolutely, and we'll purge, we'll purge those who disagree, or then you get USSR, you know, Marx. And so here you have secular Gnosticism in its French Revolutionary form, or its Russian Marxist form, or you get the religious Gnosticism. And then really a lot of these culture wars are just modern Gnosticism in that sense of we know what's right, our interpretation, we're going to purge you, we're going to, you know, we're going to go on the witch hunts, we're going to trash you as a human personality, we're going to caricature you in the public realm if you disagree with us. Well, that's just Gnosticism in terms of the underlying meaning of Gnostic is to know, but not just to know, but to know certainly, you know, and our read as and you get that in religion, you can get in secular things. And so in that sense, secular Gnosticism being the French Revolution, and the Russian, we're seeing it played out in the culture wars today, in terms of gnosis. And so Fogelin's work in New Science of Politics is really good on naming that for what it is in a mindset, and the way that is incapable of seeing nuance and in certain areas where there should be nuance, and where there shouldn't be tribes, but they do exist. And so it's that, it's that Gnosis Gnosticism. Okay, so that's a newer book of his science, politics and Gnosticism, two essays. Yeah, that's that's a follow up book that is equally worth reading. It's very good. He critiques Marxism, Hegelian, and there's a variety, but his earlier work New Science of Politics came out in the 50s. And then this book you mentioned, it's a much smaller work, but it's really worth reading too. And it's he takes the classical understanding of Gnosis takes it out of it's sort of the, the, you know, sort of the spirit is good matters the problem and says well no what what does Gnosis really mean? Well what it means in this sense is those who know versus those who don't know. And so he takes it and updates it fast forwards it and says, Okay, listen, look at how this this epistemology in that sense continues to live and continues to thrive initially, and you'll come and then And then the secularization of that in the French Revolution, and then the application of that in the Russian Revolution as well. So it's very applicable for the culture wars too. Okay. In that sense is Gnosis, Puritanism again where the pure ones secularized Puritanism, the left or the right or the pure ones it's that same structural mindset. Yep. Does that make sense? Yep. Yep. Recently I saw, you know, so Peter Kreeft and I, you know who Peter Kreeft is, he's a lovely Roman Catholic. Yeah, so Peter Kreeft and I enjoyed the same. He grew up in North Jersey, he went to Eastern Christian as I did. He went to Calvin College as I did. And then he broke the philosophy department's heart by becoming Roman Catholic. Catholic. And actually in some Christian reform forums when I mentioned Peter Kreeft's name, there's a silence that goes over the room, they don't want to talk about him. But he just recently put out a book, he had a number of years put out a little dialogue between CS Lewis, JFK and Aldous Huxley, and he just recently put out a book where he did another little dialogue on sacraments with CS Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien and Billy Graham. And I haven't picked it up and I haven't read it yet. But part of where, you know, part of where a lot of these lines are falling, when I think this through has a lot to do with the Reformation and the kind of the, you know, it's one thing to look at the Reformation and say, okay, so you've got, you know, obviously you had a class of personalities that developed into the Reformation. Obviously you had a lot of political tinder in terms of the shape of the Holy Roman Empire and Italy and then the, you know, the kingdoms of England, France, Spain, you know, that blows up into the Reformation. But what's fascinating is that clearly one of the big hot spots in the Reformation is around sacraments, where you have Luther trying in some ways to nuance the Roman Catholic transubstantiation, but not willing to settle with that. Calvin goes to his real son, you know, you know, you know, the spiritual food. All right, well, what do you mean by that? And you've got Zwingli who goes all the way over to it's a, you know, it's a symbol. And so obviously, so Creeft who's gone Roman Catholic himself, he's got Tolkien, the loyal Roman Catholic, Luther, the Anglican, and correct me if I'm wrong, you know, Anglicans often sort of take an English pragmatic approach to many of these debates that we can't seem to resolve, especially after the great wars of England where, well, we're killing each other over them. Maybe we should stop killing each other and figure out how to live with each other. And then of course, the Zwinglian tradition, which takes its root in American evangelicalism, which in many ways sort of de-emphasizes sacraments completely. And you might look at these, you might look at these options on the menu and say, oh, well, to each his own, but actually underneath, there's a lot going on here, which in fact seems to have everything to do with what Vervecky calls the meaning crisis, has everything to do with some of the questions about, I mean, lurking behind a lot of Peterson's conversations. Our big questions about ontology. And if you listen to Peterson talk, you will regularly hear him come back around to, well, that depends on what you mean by real. And in many ways, the sacraments become this, this, the sacraments become this opportunity to engage in this question about that which is most real. And so Roman Catholics will point to miracles surrounding the host and, you know, they have this long tradition of miracles surrounding the Eucharist, you know, Lutherans, Lutherans, they're just worried about law and grace. So sacraments, well, you can kind of do your own thing. We won't worry about it. Calvinists, you know, they've got their own things they're worried about. And then evangelicals are, well, we're just trying to have people pray the sinner's prayer and come to church and follow our program and so on and so forth. You know, one of the things that strikes me as a pastor as I watch, you know, as I've been watching in my Calvinist corner of, you know, my corner of Dutch Calvinism, it's been interesting how for many church planters and young pastors, the questions of what is the Eucharist? What is the sacrament? It is all coming around and it seems like, you know, again, all of these, if you have a schema of, let's say, a house or a car, all of the wires seem to go through this tiny little area. You know, this is my body, Jesus says. Okay, what do you mean by is? And almost the entire Western tradition gets stuck right there on that question. And then the question is, how is this the body of Christ? And what does that mean? And then how does that get into all these further questions of meaning? Do you have any thoughts on that or reflections on that? Especially, you know, because, you know, obviously, Luther splits from Luther splits with Erasmus on this and Erasmus remains a loyal Roman Catholic, but very quickly, I mean, the questions of sacrament will continue then to fracture in the Reformation. You know, what happened that the church lost its consensus on something so central to the faith? Well, I think as you're saying, first of all, right, and that the it is an ontological question and what the church is always grappling with at its deepest is what's the most meaningful way to encounter ultimate reality or Christ? And so what role, how does our understanding of the sacrament either facilitate that or prevent that? Because if you take the position that the sacrament, particularly Eucharist itself, is the ultimate means of participating in Christ in the body of Christ, then this is why this is so important. And so the debate goes on. And so if it's memorial, that's one thing, if it's transubstantiation, it's another, it's a consubstantiation of its presence. Underlying the question is, where do we turn to nourish the deepest longings of our human heart and mind in our journey? And then how does sacrament fit into that specific sacrament, a sacramental understanding of life itself? If people I think get excessively focused on these sacraments, the danger is that they close down on a sacramental view of life, how God meets us if we have the interior openness and attentiveness to various means of grace. And so what's the relationship of the sacraments to a sacramental view of life? And underneath it is, what's the relationship between a deeper attentiveness to God's grace and understanding how that grace operates efficiently, meaningfully in our lives? And on the one hand, you can have the objective or an attempt to give an objective understanding of the sacraments, but how can those sacraments, just because you take them, people can leave them, they're no different as human beings, you know, so you can have this formal thing. But I think underneath it is the deeper question, how do humans in their all too human journey encounter and be transformed in the life of Christ, the life of the church, and in the life of the communion of the saints? And so those are not easy, and that's what's divided different ecclesial communities. I just have to scamper now. I have to meet someone at 330. To be continued. Okay, Ron. All right. Nice chatting with you. Good chatting with you. Take care. We'll be in touch. Okay. Bye-bye.