https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-hGS7aVDFXc

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm having my second conversation with Ron Dart and you can go back in my channel and find my previous talk with Ron. Ron, why don't you introduce yourself a little bit so that folks know who you are. Okay, I live up in British Columbia on the west coast. I teach at University of the Fraser Valley. It's one of our bigger middle-sized universities in Canada. It's about 16,000 students. We have about 1,400 faculty and staff. I teach in the area of political science, philosophy, and religious studies, and so the old humanities in that sense. And so it covers quite a span in terms of classical thought, in terms of the western intellectual, political, religious, theological, philosophical, artistic tradition. And then I also teach eastern traditions as well. I did my master's degree and PhD in terms of western intellectual thought and eastern intellectual or oriental thought. And then a third level was biblical studies. And so I've taught here for 30 years. Before that, I was Pacific Director of Amnesty International. And then I was head of the Middle East for Amnesty International within Canada for a while also. Okay, okay. Now you've told me that you're editing a book about Jordan Peterson. Tell me a little bit more about that. Well, as you were, certainly since 216, Peterson's been catapulted onto the front stage of public life, and there's been a variety of reactions. Some very much dismissing, demonizing, caricaturing him. Others, it's genuflecting, hagiography is the best thing since motherhood and apple pie. And so between these two reactions, this book, it's three aspects to it. One is asking the question, why has he become so prominent on the public stage? What's the gap that he is filling in that a lot of people are not speaking into and doing it in a way that's obviously creating diverse reactions? The second part of the book will be to ask what is the good he's contributing to the public discussion? And then what may be critical questions to ask of Peterson? What may be some of his blind spots, his Achilles heels? So we're trying to find a middle way between hagiography and demonization and saying he's obviously contributing something. He's speaking into a vacuum that a lot of people have been timid about. They've been hesitant about saying things because they know they're going to get reactions. And then what is the good he's contributing? And what may be some of them, as I mentioned earlier, some of his limitations, blind spots, overreacting in certain situations. Hopefully it's a gracious but critical reflection. We've got about 15 contributors. They'll be covering a wide range of what's the core of Peterson and then what are the many spokes that come out from that core that sort of make the wheel of his life go round. So anything from biblical studies to myth to symbol to the postmodern neo-Marxism to his interest in religion. And obviously his work in clinical psychology, his work in Carl Jung and other psychologists as well. And so we've tried to, he's a bit of a Renaissance thinker. He dips and dabbles in some areas. In other areas, obviously, there's a greater level of research and understanding. But there's a breadth to his thinking. And so we're trying to just explore that a little further in the book. So the articles are coming in. We hope to have the book out probably by the summer of this year. So what do you think is, well, first of all, what first caught your, how did he first catch your attention? What caught your eye about what he was doing? Well, I think primarily being a teacher, inevitably have students in their late teens, early twenties, mid late twenties. Many of them were quite attracted to his, he hadn't published really anything until 12 rules for life came out. Back of that, of course, was his maps of meaning. But most hadn't read that. That was a 1990s book. So it was more his coming on the public stage and raising questions on the one hand about perhaps the fragmentary nature of postmodern thought in terms of how do people navigate, orient when there are no markings on the path or they're always being deconstructed. The other hand, the other hand of liberalism. One is that you can't say anything substantive. Everything is perspective. The other is almost the politically correct element of liberalism. These are the issues you have to line up. If you dare to differ, you must be living in caves most of your life or in the cat skills in your hillbilly. There's this sense that this is what you're supposed to stand for. If you differ, then there's obviously problems in terms of what's going on between the years. So he challenges both those two agendas. And then the response often to that is some form of reactionary conservatism, which is equally problematic. So students get caught between those three pathways, intellectual pathways, and they're not satisfied with any of them in that sense. They're looking for an alternate way that one hand is willing to interrogate the model. The other is fragmented, perhaps simplistic and uncertain issues of the liberal wing, but also they don't want to be reactionary conservatives either. So they find in Peterson a nimble, somewhat of a nimble thinker that can't be easily cornered, pigeon-holed, or Shakespeare would say, cabin cribbed and confined. So I would say the initial introduction was students coming, wanting to do their papers, class presentations, wanting to do guidance studies on Jordan Peterson. That's very interesting. So now you, what interested me too is our last conversation, we talked about Erasmus and Luther. You've also written a book on Erasmus. Can you give just a little thumbnail introduction to who Erasmus was and why he's important? Yeah, Erasmus was probably one of the, if not the most significant thinker of the Reformation period of the early 16th century. And he constantly tried to walk this middle. I mean, he was very critical like Luther, as Calvin would have been later, of course, of the aberrations in the Roman Catholic Church. And Erasmus was raising the criticisms of the church long before Luther came along. He was part of what's called the Oxford Reformers of John Call of Thomas More, and Erasmus was part of that group. So he was probably one of the most significant pioneers in terms of critiquing the Roman Catholic Church and calling for reform. And so in that sense, it says he laid the egg that Luther hatched. And his critiques of Jerome's Vulgate, he had better equipped with languages in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek than a lot of people of his time. And you had a lot of the people fleeing Constantinople, particularly the Orthodox tradition bringing manuscripts of Greek that they were coming, like refugees today when they're fleeing from Syria, these were fleeing from Constantinople because of the Muslim takeover. And so they were coming up to Italy and coming through Eastern Europe. So he had access to all these languages. And so one element of him is he's really critiquing the Roman Catholic Church, which many of the reformers picked up on. But he also believed in being loyal to the Roman Catholic Church. So he held together gracious criticism, but criticism. And he did it in a variety of ways through prose, through children's stories, through almost Aesop's fables types things, but also surrogates exegesis and theology. But he wouldn't go as far as Luther and of course later Calvin or the Anabaptists, Sleightheim's confession, he believed yes criticism, but loyalty and always doing in an ironical and peaceful manner. And so he transcends the tribalism of that left, right, or in this case, obviously the Roman Catholic or the Protestant traditions. And in that sense, he's an interesting comparison with Peterson who transcends. Now, I think Peterson more like Luther at times, he can come out with both a fist swinging. That's more Luther, you know. And so in that sense, the Erasmus side of, in that sense, Peterson would be attempting to transcend the tribes of the clans that get frozen into ideologies in that sense. Yeah. But I think Peterson would be more like Luther in the sense that, you know, he said he, every egg shell he stepped on, he broke. Or it says, you know, Erasmus could walk on egg shells and not break them. Nimbleness and nuance in Erasmus that he would raise the same critical questions that he knew how to move around the terrain in a much more nuanced and refined manner. Whereas Luther and Peterson at times will come with their in the ring and both this swinging in that sense. And so I find in Peterson, he waffles back and forth between, you know, deeply sensitive to suffering, to struggle, and to his own part on the journey and not sure where he's going. And there's doubt and ambiguity. That's more Eras, and you get drawn to that side. And then the other side, he'll come out, you know, he's got his shorts on and he's, whoever's coming his way, he's going at them quicker than we're going to come at him. That's the Luther side. It's like any complex human being, you know, they've got two sides. Yep. Yep. Now, part of what I've been thinking a lot about lately, you know, Charles Taylor's question that he opens a secular age with, the secular age in terms of why here, you know, in the 21st century, religious belief is so problematic, whereas in the 16th century, religious belief was so axiomatic and how we've taken this transition. And I found Peterson to be interesting, not necessarily even so much Peterson himself, but the impact that Peterson is having on people in terms of their openness, once again, to becoming religious and often Christian, often Orthodox, sometimes more Eastern strains, people will be interested in Peterson. And so as I've been digging into this over the last year and a half now, the, you know, a lot of my attention has gone back to the Reformation and the ideas that the, you know, Erasmus and the reformers were wrestling with in terms of, you know, how to know the world. You had this, you had this at that point, both with Erasmus and Luther, Calvin, you had this back to the sources movement where texts will be our guides. And obviously in the course of the Reformation, Luther elevates the text above the institution of the church, whereas, you know, the traditional Roman Catholic understanding that the church is the steward of the texts and the tradition, but it's the institution that maintains this. So then you get that duality. And then of course, after the Reformation, when we get, you know, another century or so, now you have the enlightenment where instead of, you know, I'm working off some Philip Carey stuff, instead of, if you want to learn physics, you look to Aristotle, you know, that's back to the texts. Now with Newton and a number of these individuals, if you want to learn physics, you turn to the natural world and you do experiments and you study. And so in a sense, the empirical world is your text, not this page with writing, all of which has history. And of course, now we're very aware of it, history and contextuality, and it's embedded in culture, so on and so forth. And so when I began to look at, as I've continued to dig into Peterson and my motivating question hasn't so much been Peterson himself, but rather, why is Peterson, you know, and I've used this term before, bread pill, in terms of turning people on to Christianity. Why is Peterson breadpilling people? And we talked about a little bit about this before, and often one name that comes up in this is Francis Schaeffer, because now Francis Schaeffer, back in the 70s, in many ways had, I think, a smaller, it's hard to know just how big an impact Jordan Peterson will have, let's say if we look back on him 20 years from now. But Francis Schaeffer, especially in the American scene, had a pretty dramatic impact on certain high status individuals, for example, like Chuck Colson, who Chuck Colson, you know, he's one of Nixon's henchmen, he's his hatchet man, he winds up going to prison, but part of the reason he goes to prison, if you read Colson's, you know, kind of coming out Christian book, Born Again, you know, is very much tied into this, he becomes kind of this Anglican, mainline, secularist Christian, and via Francis Schaeffer, via evangelicalism, then becomes this evangelical Christian, who now has something similar to, let's say, the tradition I was raised in, this world in light, this Calvinist, Neo-Caipirian, world in life view, and off he goes. So, I mean, I can use all these things with you, because I've got a fair degree, a fair amount of certainty, you know all this crazy language I'm talking, which to me is all this insular, Dutch Calvinist, Calvin college language, and so then Peterson comes on the stage, and I see all of these people, and every day I get letters from them, that say things like, I was big into Sam Harris, either I was raised with no religion, or I was raised kind of with some religion, I became, when I became a teenager, or when I was in college, I looked at all this stuff, and I looked at science, and said the Bible is a bunch of hooey, now I listen to Jordan Peterson, and I think, oh, maybe it isn't hooey, and it's in fact for many of these people, it was his biblical lectures, that when they listened to him, suddenly he gave the Bible credibility, while Josh McDowell, Lee Strobel, William Lane Craig, all these modernistic, all these modernistic apologists, who are out there, you know, doing their thing, they didn't get any audience at all, Jordan Peterson comes up, and says, boy, you know, the tree in the garden, and the snake, well that snake is, you know, we had developed pattern recognition, so he kind of uses Darwin, and the Bible creates sort of a new synthesis, and thousands of people listen to this, and say, gosh, I should turn back and look at this text, and I think, huh, isn't that interesting, what on earth is happening, so I don't know, any thoughts on that, I just dumped a whole bunch of stuff on you. No, there, I mean, the points you're raising, I think, are quite significant in that, what happened, obviously, with elements of the right wing of the Enlightenment, anyway, not the centrist or romantic wing, the humanist and romantic were still open to religion, and they were trying to synthesize religion and science, so whether in Germany, Goethe or Hegel or Kant, or you had the romantic wing in England, it was only in the right wing of the Enlightenment that a certain, a narrow view of science, not a more nuanced view of science, came to dominate, what that did is that more right wing of the Enlightenment tended to repress or dismiss religion, or the claims of religion, because it couldn't be verified and falsified through a certain very narrow methodology, either inductive, deductive, logical, empirical, you name it, and so we went, and that came to dominate of the three wings of the Enlightenment, it was that right wing, antistatic, it wasn't even good, it came to dominate, and in marginalizing religion, the implications of that was that why would thoughtful people, as we move into the future, be interested in religion, because the new religion is science, and scientists are the new priests, and Stanford is the new Vatican, as it were, and so whether it's psychology, or whether it's biology, chemistry, physics, or mathematics, these became the new sources of authority, but what science can't answer is the deeper longings of the human heart for meaning and for purpose, either in a transcendent sense, or what that means in an eminent, you know, our journey through time, but what happened in the biblical element is you had two directions were taken, and I think this is where Peterson is carving a very significant path, which actually it's very classical in what he's doing, but the right wing of the Enlightenment, those who followed certain elements of say biblical criticism, and those who went even further down that road, they essentially just dismissed the text as irrelevant to us, a collection of tales of people from another period of time that was absolutely irrelevant for our time, a scientific world, a rational world, a thoughtful world, and then there was elements within the reformed tradition, whether Calvinist, Luther, elements, other traditions that said, well, the way to approach the Bible is in a literal, historical, grammatical way, and so it lost the contemplative, the mythical element in which the patristic thinkers of the East and the West, whether in Augustine or Ambrose or Gregory of Nice or Chrysostom, in which they were asking, as you say, so what's these myths mean? Now, if you say myth for someone from a, you know, a reformed or an evangelical tradition, what do you mean the Bible is myth? And they think myth equals illusion, or you want to have hard empirical evidence just like science, because you want to compete with science on its terms. I mean, Peterson can do that. He's a scientist trained in the sciences of the human soul, but he also realized the limitations of science, and he recognizes very clearly where myth can speak to people. So he'll take, you know, he'll take the various myths or story from Genesis, and he's not going to be hung up on the historic, historicity of them. His question is almost what a spiritual director would ask. So what does the story mean for you on your journey in terms of the shadow, the dark side, the, you know, maybe the serpent in you that you're listening to, or the angel of light that you're being deceived by, and all of a sudden people can say, oh, this speaks to me on my journey. So the text becomes personally relevant when exegeted in a different way, because with the fathers and the mothers of the church, there were six levels of interpretation, and the lowest was the literal grammatical historical, which serves its place, and it's not to be tossed out, but there's also more nuanced and layered levels of interpreting the text. And I think the appeal of Peterson is that he's saying, listen, these, and this is why he gets large turnouts, both at University, or Toronto, where he's giving the lectures on the Bible, but also his many, you know, lectures that are videoed as well, is he's pointing out the perennial relevance of the stories of the Bible to today's setting and context, and saying the genius of the Bible is it transcends, it transcends time and history and speaks to the human soul, cross time and history. So the very myths or the stories told in Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, or the historic books, or the prophetic books, they're as relevant for us today as then. Don't get hooked up or fighting about little unnecessary historic details, you know, did the ark land on a rare arach? And can we find pieces of the wood that can verify the Bibles, or is the earth 6,000 years old because it's day, day, day? No, for him, that's not even the perfect, a friend of mine has just finished a book he teaches at Trinity, on Trinity Western, up in Langley here. It's looking at the, how the fathers approached Genesis. And of course, they never approached it in a literal, a literal manner in terms of, they were always looking at the allegorical, the anagogical, typological, the mystical, the ecclesial ways, the christological ways of interpreting the text, the anthropological ways. And that's what Peterson's appeal. And so, as you were mentioning, I've had many students who, one, have had no background in Christianity, or grew up in some form of a reformed or conservative, evangelical, or charismatic, and these are all being brought to Christianity through Peterson's very, I won't say new, it's really just an old approach to exegeting the text that speaks to people on their all-too-human journey. And in that sense, he's drawing a lot of people in both his honesty and doubting way, as he's feeling his way forward, but also his interpreting the text in a way that speaks to people in the depths of who they are and the questions that they're asking on their life journey or faith journey. Does that make sense? Oh yeah. Why do you think he's been so much more effective than the thousands of preachers like me? And now you've got preachers on both sides, because in some ways, he's, you know, so you've got, say, evangelical preachers who want to be effective in terms of increasing their tribe and conversion and all that, but you've got plenty of mainliners out there that in some ways have been working similar things. They don't care that much about the historicity, but they want to work the, you know, what is the meaning, what does the snake say to me, so on and so forth. And neither the mainline nor the evangelicals, now of course I'm not going to say that the evangelicals haven't been effective in their own ways, but Peterson has managed to reach a group of people that in my experience have been highly resistant to evangelical appeals. And so that was obvious to me, but also a group of people that if they would wander into a mainline church would probably just kind of shrug and wander back out again, whereas Peterson for some reason grabs their attention. Is it his scientific credibility that you think grabbed on to especially some of those who had been attractive to the light of Sam Harris, let's say, and the new atheists? Well, I think, yeah, I think there's a variety of ways by which people are approaching Peterson, and I think long before he was doing the biblical studies, he was engaging the larger political issues of political correctness in which people were feeling a sense that something isn't quite right here. I feel an unease or what Taylor would say, a certain malaise or what George Grant would call intimations of betrayal. And so his first appearance on the public, because he really wasn't known in any significant way until C-16 came out. And so the initial introduction for many, well, here's someone who's speaking almost prophetically in some ways of saying there are standards higher than these three tribes that I mentioned earlier, and you need not buy into one of the three. And so I think for many, this was, oh, here's someone with integrity, and they're paying the price publicly for speaking with integrity. And people are looking for that. I think any honest person is looking for someone who, first of all, is aware that there are these contradictory tensions in our culture intellectually, and that you get people saluting or genuflecting at different tribes, but none of these positions are intellectually coherent or convincing. And someone comes along and says, the emperor has no clothes on, essentially. And so I think this was the initial storefront that drew a lot of people. And he was someone who was willing to pay the price. He was beat up a lot by the liberal Sanhedrin. They would attack him constantly. But he would also say, I'm not a part of the alt-right. And as much as you think, just because I critique the left doesn't mean I simplistically am devoted to the alt-right either. So where you have people saying, I'm looking for a better, a higher vision, he was feeling his way towards that, and he continues to do so. And he feels the slings and arrows of that. And it was, I think, from people initially being drawn into that, and also he has the background, obviously. He can talk with Sam Harris, the new atheist. Do you want to do science? I'm a scientist. We want to play that game. I can point out to you very clearly both the appeal of science, as understood in different ways, and the limitations of science. What it reveals, what it conceals. So the scientific way of knowing must also be balanced by the wisdom way of knowing, the insight way of knowing. This is where myth and story and narrative. But I think the initial attraction was someone who was willing to come on the public front stage and face the ire of oppositions for saying the emperor has no clothes on. Then it was as they began to trust him in his journey, and then he starts going into biblical studies. What he's doing in biblical studies is not new, but I think he's earned a certain pedigree for the price he has paid for being publicly responsible with difficult issues. And people said, well, this is a guy with integrity. Now he's doing the Bible. Now why is someone with integrity turning to the Bible? Well, I'm going to follow him. I want one. Okay, so let's go down that yellow brick road and see where it goes. And he's giving a read of the Bible for some of them either who know nothing about it, or have turned to Eastern religions, or have a literal grammatical historic read that they've grown up on, but it doesn't speak to them. And he's saying, here's a way of reading the text that makes it perennially relevant. They say, aha, Eureka! And then they're drawn into it. And then the Bible then takes on a whole new vigor and vitality and dynamism for them on their life or faith pilgrimage that some of the other exegetes can be either too dry, too academic, or a simplistic read of the text that doesn't speak to people, or a devotional approach that it's not appealing to their mind. So he's bringing together heart and head, imagination and mind, myth and history. It's quite a synthesis that he's bringing together. So I think the, let me just sort of reframe this. I think it's his initial coming on the stage, people trusting him, then he goes on to, and then also the people he'll touch in philosophy, you know, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Kierkegaard, many of these. So again, this guy's, he's not only just sort of a public figure, he's also read good works of philosophy and literature. And now, because people like that surely read the Bible. I mean, that's something that, you know, your fundamentalists do, or your conservatives, but all of a sudden now he's doing the Bible. And so you can read Dostoevsky and Tolstoy, and you can know Nietzsche, and you can be a clinical psychologist, you can be at the center of the culture wars, you still read the Bible. Okay, so I think it's this breadth to him that he catches different people at different points of their questioning. And then he draws them and says, listen, there's a deeper well from which I'm dropping my bucket, and there's life-giving waters. And this text, the Bible, has waters that are pretty fresh and pretty nourishing, that's like the thirst of the human spirit and soul for meaning. Yeah. So where do you think, what do you think's going to happen to this group? That's been a big interest of mine too, because so you watch a video and you listen to Peterson, and it's a fascinating idea that people begin to trust him. One of the things if you go to what I call his evangelistic crusade, which is this thing that masks as a book tour, which seems to be how he's making, writing his second book, as he said in a recent interview, if you go to the VIP event afterwards, what you see is usually about 150 people who will line up to get their picture, shake his hand, so on and so forth. And so when I did this, I kind of sat close so I could be nosy and over, because I'm obviously a nosy person to do what I do, I wanted to hear what kind of things people were saying to him. And it's exactly as he says they are, and that people are coming up to him and they've said, you know, I read your book, I've listened to all of your lectures, I've cleaned my room, I'm trying to stop lying or at least tell the truth, I'm fixing up my relationships with the significant people around me, and you've made my life demonstrably better. And this for Peterson is obviously a big part of his motivation whenever he gets asked questions about this. It's clearly, this for him is part of, I mean, if you had to have Jordan Peterson sit down and write a life mission statement, it would be to help individuals have a better life. So there's his heart as a clinical psychologist. So he's having this impact, people are cleaning their room, I've been running meetups, I continue to find people who are saying his work was incredibly helpful to me. You know, now this is obviously being conveyed not via an institution like a church, where you have a regular community of people with all of the upsides and downsides of that real life, but you just have it via this social media platform of YouTube and a book to a certain degree, which is obviously kind of an older social media. But what are these people going to do? They've got their room clean, they've patched up things with their father, they're doing less porn, they're drinking less, they're looking for a job. I mean, all these things are good things, and I think all of us can celebrate this kind of initiative on the individual level. My concern as a pastor was I watched this and I think, yeah, long term, you work with someone long term and you have this phase, this initial phase, you know, they start, they drink less, they clean their room, they straighten out their relationships, but that's like the initial phase. And as a pastor, I know you're going to have to sustain this, and there are going to be bumps in the road that come up and stumbles, there's going to be cancer and divorce and unemployment and you know, all these things come in term of the long term picture. So I see all of these people sort of reawakening with Peterson and my concern has been, where are these people going to go? Or will this just be the little Peterson episode of their lives? So any thoughts on that? Because you're dealing with students, and for students, obviously, you see them in this little niche of their university education and off they go into the world. So thoughts on that? Yeah, very good point. And I think those questions are absolutely valid and vital to ask. And in that sense, Peterson is good at getting the key in the ignition for many people, getting them into first gear, but inevitably you have to translate the personal, the individual, either into the communal, into the ecclesial, into the corporate. And this is where you run into people that are different from yourself, they see things differently, temperamentally the different, as you mentioned, there are seasons in life of, you know, the hatch match dispatch in terms of people's journey, as it were, the births, the weddings, and the deaths, ideological clashes. And that's the nature of the transition from the personal, the personal and the individual into the corporate, the communal, or in a Christian sense, the ecclesial sense. And then of course, there's the public dimensions of faith, it's always the triple chord of anyone as they're trying to make sense of the journey. His strength, I think, is, as you rightly comment, and I think as many people are finding helpful, he's assisting them to get out of a morass of which they don't even know how to navigate, and in terms of identity and their own future and direction, when often they feel debilitated and beat down. And in terms of the larger cultural issues, almost silenced by daring to raise substantive questions about certain movements, and he's saying, he's saying, wake up, grow up, step into the north wind, you're going to become a different person. But in stepping into it, then there's the movement towards, so what's this look like when you shift into second, third, fourth, and fifth year in your life, in your life journey? And in that sense, reminds me a lot of, one of my favorite authors you may have read to me was very popular in the 50s, 60s, 70s, won the Nobel Prize in 46 for literature, Hermann Hesse. His great work is The Glass Bead Game. Some know for smaller works, but The Glass Bead Game is, it's really the story of these sophisticated intellectuals, the Castellians, who synthesized all sorts of ideas and brought them together, the best that had been thought and said, and they lived in these mountaintop villages, and the train in the finest of schools and bringing together philosophy and theology, the arts, music, culture, literature throughout time and history. But the big question that I was asked is them was, so what's the relationship of that to the valley, where you have to go from the mountain peak, the mountain ridges and translate this? And what Hesse very much is aware, acutely aware of this dilemma, it's one thing to be energized, to be challenged to think more deeply about one's own personal journey and engage in the task of changing our life direction in some sense. It's quite another thing to say, so what's the relationship to that when I bump heads with someone in a community or my work environment or in a church context or a parish or a congregation? And then what's this mean for faithful commitment to public political life in the hot button issues? I think Peterson's appeal is he's good on the first set of questions, whether he develops in his own thinking to say, okay, my next book is not just about telling stories and getting off your bed and, you know, as it were, moving out into the world, facing your shadow, your demons, but moving this and what's this mean corporately? I mean, any good book, if he builds on it, his next book should be on the corporate element, the communal element, depending where he goes with the Ecclesia, because you can't read the Bible and not eventually translate obviously in the Jewish context, the nation, and certainly in the Hebrew and the Old Testament and certainly in the New Testament, the church. So a part of that quest, if you separate a Christology or an exegesis from an ecclesiology, it's cherry picking with the myths you're using. And so he has to be very careful that in using a text, he's not so cherry picking that he's reducing the fullness of the text or the catholicity of the text to just private interpretations and personal transformation, but not corporate, communal or ecclesiastical, and also then where that leads into public discourse in the larger political, economic, social, environmental, so I don't know what degree and if he will make that. If he doesn't, he'll be going what Rilke says round and round in the smallest circle turns and people will be drawn into that, but people are asking bigger questions of saying, okay, I'm sort of with you on what you're trying to do up to this point. I may have some questions about how you're doing it, but I'm generally with you in that you're asking people to face into the storm of life, both internally and the bigger issues, and stop using excuses or slipping into cynicism or skepticism because you don't like this party or that person or that community and it's not because often when the perfect becomes the enemy of the good, people then slip into paralyzed cynicism and he's saying that's a cop out, that's an indulgence and so he calls people to break free from the shackles of cynicism and skepticism. He points out how they might do that personally, but how do you do that corporately when actually it's more than just interior resistance, but now you have people who are opposing you or questioning how do you then deal with that and to the degree he makes that transition in terms of the question you're asking will determine whether he becomes a more significant public person or whether he'll appeal to people who are concerned with the personal and the individual and the private and to the degree he does that he'll eventually fade off just as you may remember the men's movement in the 90s, you know Robert Bly, Iron John, you know it had about a 10 year period, it was all about the personal and me facing the wild man and you know versus the sanitized, the bourgeois person and in that sense Peterson could just become the Robert Bly of the first decade or the second decade of the 21st century if he doesn't move beyond that. So yes, so the question you're asking about the corporate and the public they're absolutely essential and if he doesn't move that way he'll, his audience will soon be exhausted and then people then move on to asking deeper questions about so what's this mean for the Castellans as we have to move from thinking stitching together ideas to translating it into life in the valley and if we can't do that so what this is another just what TSL you would talk about being distracted by distraction through distractions in the four quartets and so yeah no absolutely absolutely pertinent and I would say imperative questions in terms of and if he doesn't move it as I mentioned he'd be like Robert Bly you know 10 rules for life it's just iron john in the 21st century garments that's all. And many the people listening to this have no idea who Robert Bly is because and that which is exactly your point that it's just kind of gone away one of the a little aphorism that I think comes from Oz Guinness he makes the point that without individuals nothing changes but without institutions nothing lasts and I've been thinking that again and again during this Peterson chapter and one name that comes up often when at least amongst reformed conservative reform circles when we talk about Peterson is he reminds a number of people of Francis Schaeffer and again I mentioned Francis Schaeffer's connection with then Chuck Colson and that whole chapter and Colson was a significant you know had a significant impact longitudinally in some certain segments of the American church and in American politics to a degree. Now you had a little bit of experience but one of the things that Francis Schaeffer did with his temporary fame but he did establish an institution and one of the things that I hadn't thought about Francis Schaeffer since I remember my father reading his books in the 70s until I started getting notes from a guy in Brazil who was saying I'm coming to Sacramento because I'm going to be at McGeorge Law School for a little while and can you help me find an apartment I'm thinking why is this guy from Brazil writing me and eventually things kind of worked out and he got here and I learned well I've been very tightly connected with Lebrie in Brazil and suddenly Lebrie and I thought is that still around but apparently it is and now and then when I was talking to you a little bit you shared that you're a little bit older than I am and you had a little bit of experience with Lebrie and and Schaeffer and and you want to you know and do you think there's any when you think about Jordan Peterson and Francis Schaeffer how do those two characters sit in your head? Well as you say I lived at Lebrie from 1973 to 1974 I lived right beside Oz Guinness. Oh really? Yes yeah so Oz and I used to go down and down into Interlochen or we'd go to the Zermatt and go book hunting on weekends and uh yeah so his book Dust of Death had just come out at that point and that would have been 19 I think probably 73, 74 yeah Timothy Leary was up there, Maharishi Mahash, Yogi Bob Dylan was up I mean it was all the countercultural types and the so Lebrie really emerged in the late 50s throughout the 60s 70s and and of course as Francis Schaeffer was diagnosed with cancer by the early 80s it had lost its substantive momentum either in Switzerland, Holland, England we have a Lebrie out here in Bowen Island who actually just moved onto the Vancouver Island but as an institution yes it still exists but certainly not with the prominence it once did. I would say that what I mean obviously the similarities between Francis Schaeffer and Eugene Peterson is there both? Jordan Peterson. Yeah who'd I say? Eugene Peterson who's a whole other you and I know who he is a lot of people who listen to me don't know who Eugene Peterson is. Yeah my wife studied with Eugene Peterson actually brought uh first time Eugene Peterson met Jim Wallace I brought them together. Oh really? Yes that was about probably 20 years ago. Oh interesting. We never met Jim Wallace and uh Jim was wanting to meet Eugene they were both here on the west coast so I said well let's do a lunch together so it was fascinating because Eugene comes from that more centrist evangelical and more with the sojourners the soft left anarchist but back to Francis Schaeffer yeah so where Francis Schaeffer what he shares with Eugene Peterson is both were really speaking to the questions of their time and both had an interdisciplinary breadth so Francis Schaeffer whether it's was the you know whether it was art to say art with the Rookmacher up in Holland music I also lived so Oz Guinness lived on one side of where I was and Betty Smith and the musicians lived just the other chalet down so in Waymo and then the Schaeffers began in Waymo and then moved up to to Villar which was just the next I was actually the only person ever baptized in their bathtub he'd taken people through a bit of a catechism and he said well um you know I'll sprinkle you with water here and I said you know I love sort of the image or the metaphor of immersion he says I'm not taking you out in a frozen winter going into a lake and says that's just a no-no he says I'll tell you I'll bring all the Labrie community up we'll put on a big dinner at our chalet in Villar I'll fill the tub halfway up and then we'll put you under would that be all right I think that's great that'll do it that's a great story yeah so so I think so in terms of Francis Schaeffer and um Jordan Peterson they both address some of the deeper questions and longings that their generation or elements of their generation are asking they do it from an interdisciplinary perspective where they differ was obviously with with um because I come from near states who would be an episcopal but in Canada or the Anglo-Canadian it's an Anglican um which is not we have the Calvinist reformed wing but it's more of a wing it's not the core of that tradition no Francis Schaeffer came from in one sense as he moved through his life increasingly um confessionally reformed and increasing a narrower approach to that and once you got through once you got through the um sort of the storefront in terms of the appeal of this broad multicultural interdisciplinary wide reading Schaeffer was not particularly a deep reader but back of it all was a reformed confessional theology which was highly problematic for many people so you'd be drawn be drawn to one element because there were not a lot of Christians in the 50s 60s 70s that were as widely interested in the richness of historic culture and and how Christians you know were making sense of that or interpreting it in terms of sex dox you know all of this um uh now Peterson isn't reformed in that sense and he has a breadth to him that Schaeffer doesn't and I think one of his appeals as a Castilian in that sense uh he will appeal to a generation that is asking far deeper broader questions that Schaeffer wouldn't have been able to address with a reformed perspective and he's more classical he's inching towards classical thinking he's not there he doesn't substantively understand it but he's hiking down that trail and in that sense there's a there's a an invitational fullness to Peterson that that um that she now Schaeffer at his best was a gentler soul because he'd seen some terrible um ecclesiotheological wars that had damaged a lot of people and so at his best he wasn't as punchy as Peterson and so I don't know how Peterson will go with that as he faces his own demon of punchiness you know and when he's cornered can he come back graciously and kindly and say I beg to differ with you but you know we we need not put our boxing gloves on and pull out our pistols and shoot another yeah yeah well it's interesting to me because I so I grew up kind of in the CRC left wing so I was very much the Calvin College reform journal that tribe and so Schaeffer and Colson because of our politics they were persona non grottos now through this thing everybody's saying Schaeffer Schaeffer Schaeffer so I've I've tried to read some Schaeffer and every time I read Schaeffer I have very much the same what you described I he's whereas I'm comfortable with a well obviously I'm comfortable with the conserve conservative reformed confessional posture this is the tribe I've grown up with I'm not afraid or reactive to that at all because that's the people I come from at the same time I read Schaeffer and I just don't see a lot there there whereas I've had I've found Peterson far more interesting not so much necessarily from partly from Peterson himself but one of the things that I think Peterson has really done is open up a lot of classical material and interesting conversation for people that there was no platform or opportunity really to dig into these things and so he's been a popularizer of a lot of the classics for a good number of people and yeah I think that's another good point you made he's Peterson like Schaeffer were they're popularizers yeah and some people more sophisticated academically say well this is paper thin and in a sense yes but you have everyone has to start somewhere and if you want to get into the richness of Kierkegaard or Dufstaiski or Nietzsche you know or Heidegger that's you're not going to have someone doing a public lecture on the nuanced approach of Nietzsche or you know I'm teaching a course on or stuff on Nietzsche this semester and you know if you're to ask Peterson Peterson you know well you know flesh this out deeper and further in a you know short little clip that's not the place for it and so merely to pick on someone because they've taken a couple of lines from a text in a public lecture that's missing the point the the public form is not a place when you're doing something more popular way to go into sophisticated exegesis that puts people to sleep it's to give them a taste to to enrich their palate to give them give them a hunger for something and so people sometimes when they come after him and say well you're not giving an ori when he does you know Siddhartha or Buddha in his journey well if certain buddhas come well that's you know a misread of Siddhartha you know so you're missing the point he's a he's giving people a taste he's pointing he's he's addressing a hunger if you want the sophisticated stuff Peterson's not the person to go but for people who are casting about in a in an era in a place where meaning has been deprived and religion has been caricatured um then he's trying to say there is there's a mother load here uh and this is the pathway to it there's a well here there's ancient wells here uh don't deny they exist or there are implications for the health of the soul yes yes well and it's interesting too because you know Francis Schaefer because he came at this as a confessional Christian a bunch of even though he's baptized he's baptizing you in his tub there there still is this tradition of the body the corporate body that I I can I can think amazing thoughts I can have a transcendent experience but this this will fundamentally be uh transitory unless I can transcend my own individualism and become part of a corporate body and and that then because of Francis Schaefer's connection to the broader tradition of a church even if in protestant fashion oh we have the idea of a church we're gonna make up our own which of course the Catholics and the Orthodox look at it say oh great you know you can't reproduce this but that's what Protestants are obviously always doing here me and me and my pals on the beach we'll we'll have communion just us and you know that's that's the Protestant spirit so but at least Schaefer had that so then he leaves in his wake an institutional thing one of the things I've been watching for Peterson is while he's now especially with the death of Patreon been kind of upping his attempt to remake the university which I hear and I always think well that's very Protestant of you because that's how the Catholics look at the church you know remake this thing good luck buddy um but at the same time in terms of Peterson and the church someone who very famously doesn't go to church doesn't identify as a Christian in any confessional sense and and so that that again for me just actually part of the reason I started doing the YouTube thing was I said where are these people going to go because I just imagined somebody who a university student hears about Peterson gets excited cleans his room cuts down in his drinking decides to make a permanent commitment to a to a partner you know takes the initial steps and then shows up in a church somewhere wow and and because the pretty it says to the preacher yeah I've been listening to Jordan Peterson and the preacher says you mean Eugene Peterson no Jordan Peterson well who's that now obviously with Peterson's heightened heightened visibility more people will say yeah but you go into an evangelical church and they'll say yeah Peterson he believes in Darwin you go into a mainline church and they'll say yeah Peterson is the custodian of the patriarchy well there you've got an entire who knows how big cohort within a generation saying I want to start going deeper but how can I do this who will help me that's right because we have a lot of immature shepherds in the church who have been uh sadly so taking the Kool-Aid in their seminary or bible school and they don't know how to think out of a fairly narrow approach to how you engage culture or how you encourage parishioners to I mean if faith is about light you know yeast engaging culture then people of faith should be bilingual in that sense they should know the language of their own heritage but they need to know the language of their their culture and to speak and Peterson has the ability to do that Schaeffer had the ability to do that they were bilingual and that takes some work it takes a lot of homework it takes a lot of reading it takes a lot of thinking it takes a lot of soul searching but that's what another thing I would think Schaeffer and Peterson would share was that bilingualism and sometimes as you say when people will come to a church from really being smitten by Schaeffer or or I mean I would when I came back in the early 70s you know and spending you know 1973-1974 at Lebrie you know many of the parishioners never read any of this stuff they lived in a fairly insulated ghetto-ish ecclesial community even though Anglican is supposed to be a magisterial tradition as is the reformed tradition engaging the world that you live in but many have turned aside from that and so it becomes for people like Schaeffer and Peterson they become the canaries sort of in the mineshaft you know that says something's not wrong there's toxins coming up and and they often pay the price for doing so and so but yeah so you then people go into a church and it's well that what's this got to do with Schaeffer what's this got to do with Peterson and so when you you have shepherds or pastors or priests or ministers or whatever that are not fully equipped and trained to be bilingual and they can only speak the speech of their congregation or denomination it leaves them inept and impotent in teams of dealing with the big questions younger people are asking and those who they respect as their shepherds so in that sense Peterson is a pastor yeah and a shepherd to people and hopefully he can be a bit of a bridge between two worlds yeah history will reveal that whether that's the case or not i was going to say one thing about Schaeffer which is in many ways some people have missed his his early environmental work so for example pollution and the death of man that was one of the first books out that went after Lynn White and whom was blaming Christianity for our environmental intentions and Schaeffer saw very clearly that that one there was a whole intellectual school of people who were blaming Christianity for the environmental crisis and Schaeffer said no no no it's not Christianity there's there's forces that work in terms of secularization and a certain understanding of science and technology which emerges from that and it's it's Christians who when they understand genesis and other texts properly they're the stewards of creation he was writing this long before you know the environmental issue has become front stage in the way it has today and so sometimes back of you know i mean his endpoint was elements of reformed reformed theology in a in a bit of a narrower confessional way but there was there was much good in him that anticipated some of the big issues that we face today perhaps he didn't have the depth just because he didn't have the reading experience and at labray they were so busy but again he translated things to this is not an individual thing yeah it's not community in terms of intuition it's living community yeah you know so we would half a day we'd be chopping wood we'd be working together cutting lawns half a day you'd be studying half a day the end of the day there'd be public lectures people would be coming all over and then there'd be the tapes and so it was almost a form of a classical liturgical educational context which you didn't find in seminaries you didn't find in universities you didn't find in churches it was this highly creative approach to to community to thinking to physical exercise to contributing to the life of the community through three or four hours a day of work so there was a sit so i mean peterson has never made that jump no no he's too much on the big lecture circuit and bake making big money and uh the chafers were there was a there was a humility a communal sense uh working with the difficult questions drug addicts and all sorts of stuff would turn up all sorts of counterculture pay he needed patiently there os guinness was doing he just married his woman she was a former model from new york at the time um they were they had an understanding of the relationship of personhood and community and then public and schaeffer couldn't be reduced to right or left either because near the end it was the abortion but he's also you also had all the counterculture anti-vietnam war people the ecological issues well that's usually seen as on the left portion is seen as on the right he transcended that tribalism and in that sense he would share that with peterson but i would say yeah the weakness of peterson as you've rightly mentioned is a lack of substantive communal thinking and uh much will hinge on whether he sees the next stage of this educational direction he may be going as his understanding of cuny but if it's so that's still not community that's still castellans playing with ideas yeah yeah the task of any mature person is how you bring together theory and praxis yes and how that's done not individually but communally and then publicly yes and it's that triple cord of of the theory and practice at a personal a communal and a public way that is the mark of a mature thinker either theologically or exegetically philosophically pleasily and then larger as i mentioned earlier economic social ecological war and peace issues yeah so so it'll be interesting to see where he goes or whether as i mentioned earlier he's just like robert bligh he has his his season his moment in the sun five ten years or 15 years from now no one will ever have heard of him no more than they know robert bligh or the men's movement of the 1990s yeah yeah well i i brown this has been this has been terrific and we've touched on a bunch of things anything in particular that you wanted to touch on that i didn't lead us into oh no i think that why i think we we rambled and galloped across all sorts of terrain i sat on your saddle and you sat on my saddle i think it was great well good well good well well thank you so much ron for for taking the time to do this and i'll post this i'll post this this afternoon almost because i i thought this was a very i i thought this was a very helpful conversation and i think a lot of the people who are listening to my channel will will will find this helpful so i think again if um you can look up ron on the internet he's got some really good conversations it's where i first heard about ron conversations with brad ger how do you say ger sack or brad ger sack yeah we started the clarion journal um probably 20 years ago with the former archbishop of the canadian orthodox church and so clarion journal we have a lot of a lot of articles from people from diverse denominational theological backgrounds but yeah brad i supervised brad's phd uh okay that he did in bangor and wales on george grant very well-known canadian political philosopher and simon bhai who was sort of diatema of sort yeah brian uh brad lives in abbotsford where i do oh okay put that copy with them last week yeah okay well that's that's wonderful and and it's it's very interesting because you've had a you've had your own very interesting journey with a bunch of who's who's of the of the the late 20th and now early 21st centuries with in some of these areas that's fascinating yeah no it's it's been a privilege to you know in my late teens early 20s reading a lot of the schaeffer material corresponded with a lot of the beats like alan ginsberg and um and some of those people were at lebrie uh when i was there and uh yeah and then doing um graduate studies i regent college in the late 70s early 80s had some of the key people there some no jim packer for example who sort of an elder statesman of the calvinist tradition and then regent was moving in a very its other element was a strong catholic dimension so i did my work on patristics this is where when peterson does his work on layered exegesis that's i mean i was in my 20s i was doing all that can you know hans borzma comes from uh yeah a little bit i've i've he just won the top yeah he just won the top theological award in 218 for his book um you know from christianity today but he's in our parish too okay and so hans and linda but he grew up in the a narrower form of the canadian reformed in canada which is a little more narrow can reformed so there's a movement today in terms of which i think peterson um peterson is addressing or pointing to but someone like hans and others are have explored in much more depth in detail in terms of patristic exegesis and its its relevance for people is in terms of the contemplative tradition the meditative tradition and ways of approaching the bible that honors the authority of the bible but doesn't reduce exegesis to a literal grammatical historical but it doesn't negate it on the other hand yeah it is it's the it's it it is a step of many steps in terms of um often the fathers would compare it to i don't know if you ever christmas here my wife's german and i come from an english background so at christmas we not only do you have the christmas story but the english side would be dickens christmas carol the germans is the nutcracker tradition from hoffman and um yeah one of the key things in the nutcracker is the nutcracker it cracks the nuts and so the the uh at the heart of that in approaching the text or any sacred text there's the there's the layered element but you've got to break through one level to get to the nut uh and so the outer layer or the shell of the literal grammatical historical if you want to get to the mystical you've got it's like the nutcracker is the exegetical person who cracks the nut to get or cracks the shells to get to the nut or other images often like the rind of an orange okay so there's the outer there's the outer layer then there's the sweetness of the inner exegesis and so this is what there's quite a movement to you which peterson is pointing to but people like haunt and i mentioned craig allert earlier who's looked at the patristic approach to janice's which is not literal grammatical and so there's there's sociologically which we maybe do some maybe do another thing sometime is there's fascinating shifts in terms of the sociology of of faith happening right now from the rise of neo-kelvinism from the piper keller carston this whole gospel coalition to its alternate a catholic of much more of a catholic approach and and what comes in and peterson is interestingly enough he's in the middle of that with i don't know how astutely or acutely he is aware right of of socio sociologically what's happening but what he's doing biblically he's he's right in the center of it that's that's what i see so one of the things so i came to sacramento in 97 and i immediately got involved in i i pastor the oldest of the christian form churches in sacramento and i immediately got involved in church planting because we were planting new churches in the late 90s and when we began you know the first church plant in sacramento was kind of seeker emphasis a willow creek model the second church was kind of a cell a cell model and they've they migrated in a variety of different ways but the churches we tend to plant now are all this kind of reformed catholic approach where where they're not reading 17th century reformers they're reading calvin and via calvin they jumped more to the patristics because calvin paid a lot of attention to church fathers oh yes yeah and and so and so it's just very and here in california say unlike the midwest where they continue to plant more seeker emphasis churches which are much more modernistic here on the coast in california you've got weekly communion you've got you know remembering your baptism and well is that holy water or why is that font there and how do we relate to it so you're exactly right that in terms of so now i'm the oldest i'm one of the older of the groups most of the church planters planters are younger they're dealing with questions of how is the table fenced what is the language we use around liturgy and and actually within our own conversations we're back to a rather vigorous conversation about sacraments what is the host when jesus says this is my body what is it so now we're we're i i'm finding that we're right back into all these reformational struggles and now unlike say the 1970s when there was a strong element of anti-catholicism still within the christian reform church that in many ways i think because of the culture war has receded catholics are seen as allies now of evangelicals rather than adversaries and so right now in terms of the church there's a real fascination with orthodox churches and iconography and how do the arts play in and how do sacraments fit in and all of this so yeah so peterson comes along and it's like whoosh he does i don't think he knows any of this stuff but it's like he's germane to all of it in terms of the kinds of issues he's raising he does he's a he's a he's an entry-level thinker for people who are not aware of the bigger issues but he points to the bigger issues if people go further than him yeah and in that sense he's rated he's he's a key figure on the stage of the larger sort of aesthetic liturgical theological cultural issues that are swirling about at the present time and so beyond his issues in terms of post-modernism neo-marxism and these issues which interests some people publicly in terms of what goes on at universities he's also at the thick of some very important christian cross-currents that are at work and over the next five to ten years it's going to be very interesting that drama yep no that's very true well thank you thank you again ron and i i will post this this afternoon so you can find it and share it with whomever you like but i thought this has been this has been a tremendously helpful conversation and and we'll have to do this again and maybe next time i i could bring in i could bring in one of my church planters and i think we could have a very interesting conversation about a number of these other issues which in the church right now are very are very hot but again i don't think peterson knows because he doesn't go to church it doesn't know he doesn't know how he's monkeying with people's lives lives no there's a whole there's a whole world that is take that is unfolding that he would be unaware of particularly for people who are translating the individual into the communal but what's the communal look like liturgically sacramentally all of these significant questions of soul formation or virtue ethics yeah and so yes and and so that's where we could do something in sociology of religion and all the uh the landscape presently that's uh how it's uh the actors and actresses on that uh landscape yeah and what it may look like and how do we train people in the future to actually be prepared for what's coming their way because they're not prepared bilingually then they become irrelevant and when people become irrelevant they react they slip into ghettos they retreat from the public freight and then that just is that's the death of of christianity when people um just retreat from hard questions whereas peterson schaeffer any great thinker doesn't do that and that's what makes them fascinating relevant and uh in that sense to set peterson in terms of this larger play that's being worked out uh you know on the stage of of intellectual university public life it's very significant and do send me yeah do send your interview and i'll get it posted on clarion right away because we get we get uh we get hundreds of hits a day on clarion so wonderful i know people would love i know they enjoyed the last one we did so i'm sure they'll doubly enjoy this one good wonderful well thank you ron and uh we'll be in touch okay wonderful thank you take care bye bye