https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mOgyJS621nE

 Okay, Tim you and I met when I was in Melbourne and we hung out a bit at Warren's place and Yep, why don't you why don't you go ahead and and remind me? Tell me a little bit about yourself and we'll just start start with that Okay so when I was younger I my parents split up when I was about 10 years old and then My mum met my stepdad and He sort of well my mum picked up everything and moved us to like rural New South Wales Which is like which was right on the border of the like the Murray River I don't know if you you knew about the the Murray River It's it's the the line that divides Victoria, which is where you were and New South Wales So it was a very remote rural area near Swan Hill and He was He was an abusive partner, you know, he abused my mum and Dad yeah Stepdad he was a he was a very volatile. He was a volatile tyrant, you know, and He was like Like a like he had the mind of a teenager, you know He he openly said like he had a baby from a different Marriage and he openly said oh, you know, I don't like kids because that they take the attention away from me You know like and he like boasted about that. Wow So yeah, he's like, I mean anyone that met him was just like what what the hell what's wrong with this guy? But I think my mum Clung on to him for stability, you know She didn't know what she was gonna do like she wasn't skilled or anything, you know So she stayed with him because she saw as stability You know, and she just tried to make it work, but he was psychologically and Physically abusive to to me and to her he didn't hit my hit my sisters But he hit me and he hit my mom. My mom had a black eye on the wedding day that she married him, you know, and Like it's funny because at the time I didn't actually think that much of it because I was used to waking up and hearing them scream in that and I didn't think that much of it until recently when When my sisters gave My partner my mum's jewelry because my mum's passed away and They and I was like, why don't you? Why don't you want it and they're like don't you remember that's what he bought her When he hit her or you know when he bashed her on on the night of the marriage That was like the makeup present and I was like, oh shit. I didn't I didn't know that Yes, that's what that life was like for me there and you know, it was you constantly living in fear and So it was ten years old were you Then together with them until you were 17 or 18 No, I am so it's sort of I constantly butted heads with him because I'm not somebody that sort of takes things lying down, you know, like or You know, I'm very argumentative and it's amazing that I lasted as long as I did really when I think about now But I was with him at the end of like four years, you know after You know one time my friend came over and you know, he started hitting me when my friend was there and you know, I I came out to my friend and Like my friend was just like paralyzed with fear, you know, and I was like and I was like what's wrong? You know, and I didn't even that and that made me sort of think you know, oh shit. This this is a normal, you know and You know, there were things where like because I told my teachers at school sort of after that and They did get like a social worker in but um, it it was so bad the way it happened like they called my stepdad and my mom into the the school And they made me sit like in the office and where he came Like he had to walk past me to get to the office and when he walked past me All right is like you're finished, you know, and I was just like, oh my god, you know This has just made everything worse, you know and I Probably stayed with them for like another Nine months maybe a year and in that time, you know, my mom kept saying like oh if he keeps going like this I'm gonna leave him, you know, but I don't think she ever built up the courage to ever do that and Anyway, he came to her and he said He basically put an ultimatum to her and said look, you know, you got to choose me or him, you know, and My mom sort of came out and sort of spoke to me about it and I was kind of like Don't worry mom. Just stay here. I'll go, you know, I don't want You know, I understand the ramifications for it and I feel like that Even though I was only like about 14 at the time You know, I Sort of I sort of was able to understand it, you know and and realized that it was sort of best for everybody Although it wasn't really the best the best would have been if she had a left him. Yeah, but um Anyway, I went my mom organized for me to go and live in Melbourne with her mom my grandma and You know, I went and lived there and but I wasn't allowed to One of the conditions was I wasn't allowed to speak to my mom and you know, I wasn't allowed to know where they lived because they even moved house and you know, he wasn't he wouldn't let me come there or speak to my mom or anything and So I just sort of Sometimes I was able to Call mom if I called at a certain time in the morning But it just became too awkward and I just basically lost touch with my mom And uh, you know, just sort of cut them out of my life completely, you know and Really like my friends became like my family my peers, you know And after sort of living with my mom Um And after sort of living with my grandma for like a couple of years, um It's probably yeah, probably about two years. I She couldn't discipline me, you know, I wouldn't listen You know, like I thought I knew better, you know, it's like stereotypical teenager that thinks he knows everything, you know, and uh You know my partner at the time was actually moving out into a government house Um Which I was thinking about that Yesterday when I was writing it down, I thought she should have never been given that government house, you know They the government just gave her a house So because she was rebelling against her parents who were the most middle-class supportive parents you could ever meet But you know, this is the the this the social workers and the you know These sort of leftist social workers, you know, they just oh the the kid knows best, you know, and You know thinking about now it's it's ridiculous. You know, she got a house to move out. So she'd gone smoke drugs That's what it was for basically you know and um I was like, oh cool. I want to be in that, you know, so I moved out of my grandma's house, you know And uh, I told myself at the time because my grandma was planning on uh, subdividing her property You know knocking their house down and then like building two dwellings on it and she'd live in the back one And I told myself that time. Oh, yeah, I moved out because of that But now that I look back on it with some honesty You know, it was just an excuse to get out there and and do what I wanted take drugs basically um, and uh You know, um Just you know live however I wanted um I sort of skipped over, you know, I fell in with a crowd You know that was taking drugs, you know, and that was the thing to do You know, I remember at my school and I went to like by Morris High which is like one of the most affluent suburbs in Melbourne, you know one of the um, you know, there's politicians and and people on tv that live there and that you know, this is where my Girlfriend of the time that's where her supportive middle-class parents were from, you know Um And I remember at school like the teacher said oh who? How many people here have smoked pot and like? 98% of the class put their hands up, you know, this this was like the normal thing to do uh In that age group in that era, you know um And so yeah, I sort of fell in um with doing that and uh You know sort of having my peers As like the people that I sought for guidance and stuff like that, you know Even though I wasn't consciously thinking oh, yeah, i'm gonna get guidance from them You know, that's really what was happening, you know, and they all came to to my government house So that they could get away from their parents And do whatever they wanted, you know, um, and so I just went along with that, you know, and uh, You know, I was a willing participant, you know, I wasn't doing anything You know, I I thought You know, I went along with it, you know, and um the it really um It just spiraled Like it was just one massive downward spiral and uh, you know about Five or six years of like moving from government houses and and um dropping out of school and And uh, you know just progressing further and further into the the drug world Um, you know going to raves and stuff like that and getting into drug dealing, you know, not working just living off the um, you know the funds that you make from selling drugs, um, and You know I ended up Uh, I got onto like real harder drugs, you know, like speed and then and heroin um, you know and Once I stopped once I got onto heroin it um, you know, it wasn't long You know a couple years after getting onto it. I was uh Of living on the streets begging for money and doing crime to to pay for that habit And it's like you said, you know, nobody lives in the moment Like a heroin addict living on the streets and that so true. I've lived it. I can tell you that's what it's all about You know, um And one of the the good things about that was I did meet my partner who i'm with now, you know so who i've been with for um Almost 15 years, you know Yeah, so that that's one silver lining to it. Well I shouldn't say that because really it sort of made me who I am today. But um, You know, it wasn't fun and Like I ended up From being in crime and uh, you know living on the streets and that I ended up in jail when I was 27 so, um I ended up in jail and in a way, it was a great blessing because It really woke me up. You know, I uh, I got into jail and um I um I just realized you know all of these people that are around me That's that's not who I am You know, that's that's not what I I want to be like I was my partner says, you know I remember when I met you back then you you were trying to be like all these other you know criminals and you know, you romanticize the um The criminal lifestyle, you know and uh, Live by this criminal code and it's all romantic and I mean, I don't know if you know about ned kelly's a um australian bush ranger outlaw that um You know is he is popularized in australia. It's like a an australian folk folklore hero, you know um And and yeah, so I that sort of Ties in I guess with you know, how I was living at the time, you know, it's this romantic criminal lifestyle. I also had um You know an uncle that lived with my grandma who was kind of like a shamanic dude like um He he's like a vegan and he's a really intelligent guy But he's very extremist in in like, you know His views and his identity is totally tied up in rejecting christianity you know and um I didn't say my grandma was a catholic, you know So I did have that catholic sort of influence from my grandma from a young age, you know Going to church with her and stuff like that but um That influence of my uncle who was kind of like a father figure for me during those that time when I was at my grandma's and uh, you know when I sort of moved to melbourne, um He In a lot of ways was really good. But The way he he romanticized taking drugs You know, you know and he said to me like, you know if you You need to take hallucinogens to open your mind, you know to the world you know and You know a lot of that sort of stuff might be true But now that I look back on it and i'm about to have my own child That's such an irresponsible message to tell to somebody You know who clearly? Couldn't control their addictions, you know, and you know had the wrong personality, you know, I look back at it now um and his rejection of christianity and you know, he tried to he filled my head with all this stuff about His ideas of christianity, right and and how it was basically just a system designed to restrict people from enjoying themselves, you know and Really and I find this with a lot of baby boomers of that generation and the you know, the hippies and the the you know, the Sexual revolution and all that, you know their rejection of christianity seems to just be based on Them feeling Constricted by it and wanting to do whatever they want, you know, and they sort of see it as um part of You know, it was it was part of that Dump overbearing dominant conservative culture of the time, you know, they can't separate christianity from that culture but so That was sort of the influence that I was having and I reckon now that I look back that that sort of really um Pushed me along that path, you know of drug taking, you know, I got into like the beat riders I don't know if you know like william s burrows jack kuruak. Yeah Yeah Yeah Uh and like hunter s thompson, you know because to me they validated my existence I was like, you know as a kid I was like well as a young man. I was like You know, they can take drugs and look they've lived a successful life, you know, and that's that's what I told myself and Really You know, obviously their circumstances Were totally different, you know, they were like they like won the lottery sort of thing, you know That's not what happens to most people that take drugs um But that's that's what I was holding on to is that romantic side of it, you know, and uh, it was It was all bullshit, you know Um And so anyway, I ended up in in jail and and I realized, you know, this isn't me um, you know I've got to make some changes, you know, and I slowly started to um, they weren't massive changes, um, you know, but I I started to like look for work and um You know, I I sort of I actually split up with my partner at that time the partner that i'm with now And um You know, I started looking for work Uh trying to work. Um and trying to keep a roof over my head, which was pretty difficult, um Trying to keep a roof over your head. You know, I was um After having government housing when I was younger Uh when I got kicked out when I got released from jail You know, I didn't have any housing. It was just rooming houses and stuff, you know And when you're going through that and you got no support nobody It's uh, it's really difficult, you know, and you got no guidance um You know and you just got to sort of make up whatever you do from whatever you can think which is Severely distorted because you're taking drugs You know, it's it's pretty difficult and I actually waited on the housing list. Um For like 15 years, you know Wow so When you're a child, they'll give you a house like Like you'll be at the top of the list, but you know as an adult male Being behind like pregnant women and and women with children that you're like on the bottom of the list um And so yeah, like I slowly I got out of jail when I was 27. I started making little changes Um, but not really big ones. I still took drugs You know, but I just sort of tried to regulate it, you know, like i'll be responsible. I'll be a responsible drug taker, you know Really it's just like Yeah, I was just trying to fool myself, you know that this was uh You know, you could live like this because I couldn't really you know, I would um You know, I ended up just like couch surfing basically um and I ended up getting back with my partner and she'd sort of had a uh, like she sort of found christ and um Although she wasn't She wasn't as adamant about it as she is now. Um, and so she was like a Stabling sort of influence on me and this this is when I was about I think it was about like 31 or 32 um and you know, I started to get a job and um like work full time and Actually sort of take on the role of you know, trying to have like a family um and Did she know? No, no, she didn't have just the two of you. Yeah, just the two of us and um But I just sort of felt like you know with her Uh, it gave me more purpose, you know um and um then I I went Because I was like, oh what can I do? I'm 30 years old. I haven't got any skills, you know Ideally, I would have wanted to go to university, you know, um Because I actually did pretty well at school. Um But You know, it just wasn't really an option. I didn't know how to go about it, you know, like I just I had no idea you know and Um, you know I had My mate ian who you've had a conversation. Yeah. Yeah ian was like the one good influence i've had in my life from You know, I met him when I was about 22 or 23. You know, he came and visited me in jail um It's like the only person that did that um, and you know, I often You know attribute My turning around of my life to my partner and to ian, you know, um not so much that he like Did like You know gave me like heaps of money or anything like that but just because he was there and he provided me with the It made me see that you know people can live lives without Being on drugs um, and They're happy, you know, this is like the the other delusion with because That's the other thing is that um People in that lifestyle they don't have um People that they know that live differently, you know All the people I grew up with in that lifestyle that are still in that lifestyle today Their parents Did that they were in and out of jail? You know, um And so they can't see a way out, you know um, and then they don't know like some of them don't know one person that um, You know because they grow up in these commission houses which become like ghettos, you know, and they they don't see A way out and that's what ian was for me, you know, like I could see a way out through him, you know And you know, i've said it to him lots, but I don't think But you know, he really gets how Was you know? um And he was like the first person I knew that had read like nature, you know, and and he was like I always had this thirst for like This philosophy and and religion and stuff, but I didn't I didn't know how to articulate it. I didn't know I didn't even know what it was. You know, I just knew that when I met ian and he Spoke about this sort of stuff that I liked talking about it with him, you know And uh, he took me out to I remember when When I first met him, he took me out to a conference or a talk with bishop Spong I think his name is do you know? I know who he is. Yeah. Yeah, um, and you know that He took me out to he took me to the existentialist society um, and there was a few other talks we went to you know, and uh, That was um You know, that was my sort of first Look into a whole different world, you know, and I was like, oh maybe You know, but although at the time I didn't I still couldn't see How that could be part of my life, you know, I just thought it was like oh, yeah, I enjoyed talking to ian and uh, you know that that's good and um, you know sort of Actively trying to make that part of my life and who I am didn't come to a much much later, you know So back to when I I met back up with my partner when I was like 31 32 I decided that you know, the best option really was to get into construction Um, you know, i've been doing laboring work and stuff like that. Um, and I figured you know that For somebody that's unskilled, you know and can't go to university. That was probably my best option, you know so I went to like taif which is Um, I don't know what the equivalent is in america taif schools like it's tertiary education Um, you know where it's not university Community college. Oh, okay. Yeah, you call it. Yeah, that's what it's called in the states. Yeah Yeah, um, so I went to like taif to do what they call like a pre-apprenticeship um, which is something that'll get like sort of Get you familiar with the apprenticeship that you want to do. Um, so I wanted to do like a carpentry apprenticeship um and I I went and did that and um You know, i'd lined up a an apprenticeship through a guy I'd gone and done work for him and he was happy and he was going to take me on and um I'm at that stage. I was on like the methadone program you know because When you're on heroin you can't um You can't just stop taking it, you know um and I thought well, you know now's time. Um, i'd actually gotten like stable accommodation at that time, you know, and uh I thought you know now's a good time to get off all of the drugs, you know and get clean um and so I thought you know, i'll get clean and then i'll start an apprenticeship, you know, and this would be like my new life and um so I went through like the withdrawal which You know, it was like The worst thing like I just I can't describe how bad it is, you know People just have no idea how bad it really is, you know, I um It was three months Of just absolute torture, you know, I was awake writhing in pain Uh like not peterson not sleeping like literally not sleeping for two weeks You know, I I didn't sleep one wink and I was writhing in absolute pain um and For three months, you know, I went through that and uh You know, it was like It was so so so bad. It's scarred me. It scares me today to just think about it um and I got through that and then I went uh and started my apprenticeship, you know, and I did that for um About two and a half months and I started getting like um Like a back like a pain in my back And I was like, you know, I told my boss and he's like, oh you're just green You know, you're just getting the working hard and all that and I stopped being able to sleep as well Like I was getting I was only getting like two or three hours sleep at night because of the pain in my back and it was really weird like when I would Uh get up and move it hurt less But when I laid down It killed me, you know and uh Yeah And I was just like oh i've i've hurt my back, you know, and uh, I told my boss And he's like, oh you're just green. So I was like, all right, I kept coming back to work and I'm barely getting any work done because I was in such pain. I couldn't pick anything up um And my boss is like, oh you you're right, you know, you go home you're useless, you know, you can't You're not doing anything here. So I went home and uh You know my my partner was getting like really worried and I was just like oh, it's it's all right I've just got to sort back. I just got to take a couple of days off, you know and um You know at first she's like she bought that you know, and then after like two or three days She's like she cracks she cracked the shits, you know, and she's like i'm taking you to hospital because we'd been to um Like two or three different doctors and that and the doctors as soon as they found out that I was like an ex-methadone patient They thought I was doctor shopping trying to get like, yeah. Yeah and um I wasn't you know, like I went to like three or four different doctors and they wouldn't believe me and uh, you know It took my partner, you know, i'm i'm taking you to hospital, you know, she forced me out to go to hospital so I um I went to hospital and uh, you know within Like usually in Australia because they're all public hospitals here, you know, you usually go into emergency and you have to wait hours, you know But um, they they took me straight through, you know, they they assessed me and they said oh no You've got to go straight through and they started doing tests and they realized like I had like a pot belly at the time And I just thought I was drinking too much beer but they're like they said no that that's all fluid in your stomach and um We have to drain that fluid. So they started to drain that fluid and they were doing tests at the time um, and um They they put like a tube in me to to drain all the fluid Um, so I was in hospital drained fluid and we weren't really sure of what it was. The doctor said to me that Uh, you know because of my past they said you might have liver cancer um, and I was like I didn't believe it. I was like no, I don't think i've got liver cancer and uh, they went and did the tests the blood tests and scans and all that and uh, They came back the next day and they said well, you know, you've you've 100 got cancer wow I didn't believe him. I was like, no, no, I don't have cancer, but they were like no you've got uh, you've got stage four non-hodgkin diploma and I was like Oh my god, I I didn't believe it, you know, um and I was just sort of very nonchalant about it. Um and But they said to me this is the best cancer to get you know, because non-hodgkin's lymphoma is very treatable You know, but they said you probably had it for about two years and you didn't know Wow So yeah, I um That happened, you know, like I got got clean and then Uh, you know, I was starting my new life and then I got diagnosed with stage four cancer and uh, You know it it did get pretty bad, you know at um At one point they told my partner. Um You know You need to call a priest. Um, you know, he's not going to live um You know and they had me they put me into icu, which is the intensive care unit um, and I was in the icu for like two weeks um when they started like Uh heavy doses of chemo like pretty much straight away. Um, unfortunately, I responded really well to the chemo um and Um, yeah, I I mean I was sick From the chemo but it was um It wasn't it wasn't too bad really. Um The withdrawal I would rather have Um I'd rather have cancer than go through those, uh Methadone withdrawals a hunt like every single day of the week. It was You know The cancer was a walk in the park Like seriously it was so much easier, you know, because I really all I had to do was lay there and be sick um, and My partner was really the one that it was you know, put a lot of stress on you know, because We don't we didn't have any family support or anything. You know, she was the only one working Uh, she actually got sacked from her job for taking too much time off Because just come and see me in hospital You know and So um At that time, you know the people that supported us the most was st. Vincent de Paul You know, which is a catholic, you know, um charity, you know run by like volunteers, you know, they gave us food They gave us like a vacuum cleaner, you know, they helped my partner with payments on rent You know if it wasn't for them, we probably would have been out on the street, you know, um With with nothing you know, my partner was paying off her car loan, you know, and she almost lost her car loan um And you know, so that was really where The worst part about it was the stress that put on her, you know, she had to work Plus she had to look after me Plus, you know, she had to clean the house and all that sort of thing So, you know and really I see it if if she wasn't there when I had that back pain I wouldn't have gone to hospital. Yeah Yeah, you know, I would have thought um Um, you know just being a man, you know, like I've just I've just got a back pain and I probably would have Laid on the couch for another couple of weeks and died. Yep. Yep. Yep She literally saved my life and that was um and I mean, you know, so it was good that I beat the cancer but the bad part about it was um when You know to deal with the pain in my back They gave me opiates And when I first came to hospital, I was like I refused to touch them, you know, because I just passed through that detox because their history Yeah, and I and I said to them Like I I made a promise to myself, you know, I said i'm never gonna touch Opiates ever again like not even like a panadine 4 which is like a panadol with codeine in it um, and You know, I said i'm never gonna touch opiates ever again Even if it's just an analgesic or whatever i'm never gonna touch it and I said unless My life depended on it, you know thinking that there was never A situation like that that could ever happen, you know But you know when I was in hospital and I started to refuse the opiates the doctors Were saying I refuted it for the first few days and I wasn't sleeping because of like because of the pain in my back and You know They they they got to a point where they're like tim you have to take it Otherwise, you're not going to sleep And you're not your body's not going to be able to fight the cancer You know, so I begrudgingly took it and uh, you know, one of the nurses told me, you know If if you take opiates for pain You're you can't get addicted And I stupidly believed them, you know, even though I knew In my heart that that wasn't true, you know um and you know I found out now that there there's probably other Pain meds they probably could have given me back then but for whatever reason that didn't happen. And so now i'm still When I finished the chemo the last thing I wanted to do was go through an opiate withdrawal The You know the bills and the rent were piling up So I made this decision that you know, I had to get on the program again and just get back to work as quickly as I could So, you know that that's the worst part about Having cancer in in my view was that you know, i'm back on the the program, you know, and uh, yeah I mean, it's not ideal but I really I didn't have much I didn't have much choice. Um and to to get I would love to to be able to get off it, but um, That means i'd have to take three months off from work and life, you know, and uh Life just doesn't stop when you want it to you know, it's it's gonna go on and um you know, I um At the moment really the only hope is that I can save up enough money so that um, I can Save up enough money and enough holidays to to take three months off and and then I can sort of Deal with that problem when it when it comes up But um After after beating the cancer and that you know and uh, things Started to get better. You know, everything sort of settled down and um, You know, I went back to work. Um, I got into like the industry the job that i'm in now which is uh Corking Um, I don't know if you you know, but like you know in in the wet areas of your house where it's all tiled You know the silicon that joins the tiles. Yeah, that's that's what I do. I um, I put the the silicon in on all the new houses that are being built out in in Australia in the area that I live in um and Like the area that I live in it's like one of the fastest growing Areas in Australia now the construction industry is just Blowing up, you know, it's it's amazing. I've got so much work Which is really good um, but it's uh the perfect job to listen to A crappy day at work, you know listening to you and uh, Your listeners and uh, you know It's it's really good for that, you know, because it's Sort of how'd you find my show? um I the youtube algorithm You know, it's it's it found you after I sort of discovered peterson. Um, you know, it just it came up with uh one of your videos and it was one of your videos you I think is one One of the first in that sort of uh after the peterson thing, um, and it was talking about um nature I think Nature you had a nature book and I was like, oh wow this dude's You know Because I was sort of looking into um christianity because of the the bible lectures, you know um And I was sort of just going down that rabbit hole and then I saw you and you were talking about nature and I saw like there was like a marriage of of those two worlds of um, You know that philosophy world that I I was really intrigued by and christianity, you know and Before I heard peterson and you i'd never heard of that Before you know, I never knew uh, I never knew anything about augustin or Uh, you know, I I didn't know that like that history within christianity, you know was uh, You know that it basically that philosophy philosophy and that sort of grew out of that You know, I didn't I didn't know anything about that. And so yeah, I saw your Video and I was like god this dude looks like he knows what he's talking about, you know Like oh i've got to show ian my mate, you know, because he he's a nature so um You know, I sort of when I find things I sort of Run it past ian to see like because I know he knows way more than I do Um, he's not smarter than me, you know So I just run it past him and and see what his view on it is You know, and if he likes it then I should go well, it can't be too bad, you know Well, and I had a wonderful conversation with ian I know there's some reasons why he didn't want me to post it So I actually took it down when I was in australia But I had a wonderful conversation with ian and it was so much fun meeting the two of you when when I was down there Yeah. Yeah, that was uh, that was fantastic. That's a A great privilege that I will cherish forever, especially going back to warren's house. Yeah I would have talked with you and uh, you know Having warren host up warren and his wife host us, you know, I was so I'm so gracious for that. You know, that was uh, that was really that was one of the best nights of my life It was a wonderful evening it was that that whole trip for me was just It was just I never thought in my life. I'd do anything like that But it was it was just you know, just a pastor of a small church. That's all I am. Yeah, and No, it was a you know, a wonderful conference and once once we get all the videos over we'll We'll you know, i'll post them on my channel Yeah, yeah, that would be good. Um, I I think i've talked ian into releasing the video, you know, he um You know because I because I actually heard it remember because yeah, yeah, yeah got to take it down off the podcast Off the podcast stream. That's right. Yeah Um And and I heard it and i'm so glad I heard it because I was at I had to work on a sunday And um, I was having the worst day, you know, and and your podcast was on like auto queue And and then it came on, you know, and it just brightened my whole day It really got me through that that terrible work day that I had um So, yeah, i've been working on a and telling him, you know, you got to release it man like You know, you're you're being too worried about it. It's not Is it's it's all good. Just just release it and he he actually has agreed he's gonna do it He was gonna edit it, but I said just leave it. It's fine, man, you know, pastor paul wouldn't release it if he thought you know Anything bad was gonna come of it, you know, so And I said, you know trust trust in god, man, it'll it'll be all right um, but Yeah, so I think i've i've convinced him to to release that And yeah, I think that'd be good. I think people will enjoy that because he's a very smart guy He is and he's got a lot of experience and he he's got a very interesting story himself and I thought he told it well Yeah You know, he shared a lot of other opinions that he's got and I know, you know Everybody's got opinions and some not everybody agrees with everybody else's opinion. That's what it means to be human, but it's okay Yeah, so I thought it was a lovely conversation and and yeah Yeah, it was good. It was good. And so you went to church this morning So you I know you and I have been trying to find a time that works for both of us We got this crazy time difference between australia and california You know, it's like seven hours like seven hours one day ahead but seven hours, you know earlier so Yeah Yeah, it's difficult with uh work, you know during the week. Yeah for me and uh You know, obviously the weekends are probably really full for you So, you know, i'm really grateful that you know, you've made this time for me So I really appreciate it well I and I you know, I love your story and I love your story Because on one hand it's so It's unique. Of course, you know everybody's story is unique, but it's also so very common You know, I grew up I grew up in paterson and one of the big things going on in paterson at the time was heroin was going through the u.s when I was growing up and so my you know my father worked with other people and they had a You know, they had It was called the addicts rehabilitation center And of course, I was a kid. I didn't know anything about heroin or Just growing up there's just just steady stream of men, you know through that program and what you what you said during your talk here was Something that i'd hear often because some you know These guys would get clean and then they'd get their lives together and they'd get a job and then they'd get a family And then some of them would would stay it would stay, you know in my father's church And of course growing up as a kid i'd get to know these guys and they were you know, they were these were street These were street wise guys and they were cool And so I'd look up to them and and then I remember we'd go on these memorial day camping trips with there was it was the church campout, you know very It's all I knew growing up But I remember one of them would always say, you know, I just don't I just had no idea that You know, you could have fun without getting high or drunk because that was his whole life was That's the only kind of fun. They knew fun was getting drunk and here there are people just enjoying camping and this this one guy he he died young but um, his name was homes and he was a You know his he married a woman in the church and had three daughters who were Like little sisters to me growing up and he was it was just so much fun. So tragic when he died But he you know He had gotten a second life basically Yeah, listen to your story. That's what I hear. I mean, yeah, I heard you of You know your your stepfather and I mean you just didn't as a kid. You just didn't have a chance Um, and and you got sent down a bad road and you know again ironic And and but it's very true that a lot there. I know many people who have stories like yours They got they went to prison and then it's like Okay, what do I want to do because in prison you see very clearly what what road looks like? Yes, and you say, okay if I don't want to go down that road You have to learn an entirely new way to live and that's so hard but yeah, you know bit by bit by bit You did it and it wasn't you know, it wasn't bang a night and day experience It was you know, it's every day and then and then another struggle comes up and another challenge and You know and there'll be more challenges for you because there always are because life is full of them But you know I I I praise god that at what you know, he's done in your life and yeah and How far you've been able to make it so far. It's it's really beautiful Yeah, it is. Oh, yeah I was saying to a friend that I met at at the conference that you did in melbourne um I went and spoke with him and I said, you know I was thinking the other morning that I might be the luckiest person alive You know like that's how grateful I feel at the moment. I mean I haven't told you Because I had the chemo The doctors told me that it was impossible for me and my partner to have children and We really wanted children, you know, it felt like Um, you know life sort of just felt like it was missing something, you know and um we started doing ivf and We started the process and we actually um Stopped doing the ivf because the timing was a little bit out. It wasn't like As convenient as it could be with work and all that sort of stuff. Yeah, so we stopped the process and uh, You know, we just started going back to church then you know, um Back to the catholic church and uh you know We started to pray You know to for god to bless us with children like to actively like pray like we've always thought it you know, but we'd never sort of gotten down on our knees and uh and prayed and uh, you know and done that and we so we started to do that and uh, you know, uh, like The week after the second week back at work. We found out that she was pregnant Wow Congratulations. Thank you. It's uh it really and I just it feels so amazing. It really sometimes i'm worried About talking about it because it feels too good to be true And I feel like I find that people that have gone through a lot of trauma, you know, they always Are worried about enjoying Things because they feel like something bad is going to happen. Yep You know, yeah No, I sort of realized now that a lot of that was due to me not taking responsibility in the past And you know, obviously now I try to I try to do that whenever I can, you know, um and And and things are getting better. You know, i'm starting to be able to trust myself And like, you know enjoy the pregnancy, you know, um without sitting there Stressing oh my god, something's going to go wrong, you know And really I mean it's just a real testament to You know god helps those who help themselves, you know it really now that We're going to church We've got stable Routine You know god seems to be rewarding us, you know and giving us the things that that we've asked for and Um, you know the things that maybe we even deserve You know, i'm not i'm still Not confident about saying that I I deserve it, you know, I still feel like I don't Deserve it, you know, like it's too good You know, i'm still a bit iffy about about that. Um, you know first the first 20 weeks of the pregnancy I was like, oh my gosh, she's gonna have a miscarriage, you know First time i've actually said it out loud As well, you know, um Because I was too scared to even say it out loud, you know Um, because it's a common thing for women and my partner, you know, we're not spring chickens on 37 and uh, she's 39, you know, so um you know the the problems that are associated with uh Older pregnancies and stuff, you know, she's actually considered a geriatric Pregnancy Everybody over the age of 35 is considered a geriatric pregnancy Um, you know and so there's a lot of uh extra things that they They do for us that they probably wouldn't do for younger parents um but it's um Yeah, it's it's unbelievable. I like I said, I feel like a luckiest person alive I'm i'm so happy for you tim. I'm so happy for you Thank you It's yours is such a good story. It's such a good story I'm so glad you I mean you were pretty persistent because like oh sign up and he's like I can't I can't get that those Don't work with my work hours. So when are we going to meet? So maybe when you're in australia, but that got busy and so I said well After I meet you then it's you know, and there's just a little bit more incentives like okay Well, let's let's find the time I usually don't do it on weekends because I try to preserve that family time on weekends saturdays are sort of family days Yeah, you know honeydew days errand days. So I usually don't do And you try to not to do any work on saturdays, but yeah Yeah, like okay sunday saturday, but that might work Yeah Oh, well, yeah, i'm glad that you uh, you did, you know, it's uh, I really appreciate it You know, it's like when I was talking to you you're like, oh what what time do you want to make it? I was like, oh, I feel like i'm inconveniencing you so Are you set the time and i'll just i'll work around you, you know, because I realized that you know, it's uh You know you do so much, you know, and um It's you know, I was very wary of you know You being yourself, you know No it's it's it's good and again just listening to your story just You know, this is why I do this This this is this is why I do this. This is this is just so good and if you Why I love doing this on my youtube channel because Stories like yours. I mean you are a lottery winner And it is special But the thing is most of the time You don't get stories from regular people On a channel where you know a few thousand people can see it Yeah, and just and just you know, here's the story and and Because the thing is for There are there are a lot of people out there who are at different places They've had, you know, maybe not the exact same situation as you Yeah, I i've talked to you know, i've talked to a number of people who Whose videos we haven't put on because you got it Often you can't tell a story like yours until you're in a place of enough security where you can Yeah, and And so But but the the struggles that you had, you know abusive abusive families Not that uncommon drugs Not uncommon and and the problem is that these things then pile up in a person's life Yeah and and and again, it's It's hard for people to understand that You know the government programs can be wonderful they can help so i'm not one who says the government shouldn't do anything No, I think the government should try But government programs themselves won't help. I mean you had to you had to come to the place You had to come to the place where you decided to do this and you decided to look for better role models And you decided to take Hard decisions and follow them through and then and then again, you know I see this often, you know And then you get you get all this way and you get clean and then cancer bang And then you know, okay, you got to take these drugs and bang you're back on opioids and But you're but you know, you haven't let it stop you and you're still moving forward and Now you're gonna have a child and that's you know for you and your partner That's going to take you to whole new levels in your life Yeah now I mean I was just sitting down with a friend of mine who just had his first child with his wife and You know, they'd had struggles in their marriage and all kinds of things again as a pastor I sit down and You know what i'm doing right now. I know for people on my channel. They're like, oh you do this with your channel for me It's never felt odd because I do this in real life you sit down with someone and they tell you their story and I would like this job if I didn't love hearing people's stories and your story is beautiful. Yeah You know, thank you And and when you have the child then suddenly your life's gonna shift again because now it's like okay Well, I gotta I gotta keep it working between me and my partner now It's gonna be both of you are gonna be focused on oh man. We gotta we gotta take care of this kid We want this we want this kid to have a better life than you know And we had coming up and and we want to we want we want to live right because in many ways The most important thing you can give your child is an example Of of what it means You know to to live and yeah, so but but at the same time You know, it's all this all the studies say well the most unhappy years of a relationship or the years with a small child Because it's stress it's tough So all you know the sobriety all the stuff that you've won it'll all be tested in this but I think you know You'll also be given the strength to to go forward. So yeah Yeah, I just want to I just want to encourage you and congratulate you and thank you because It's good. It's good. Yeah, it is good And and me my partner aren't Um Naive about those challenges, you know, we we are trying to prepare for and it's something that I wanted to ask you you know, um What books would you suggest that have? That aren't inconsistent with a christian You know upbringing for for a child like is there anything that you would suggest that um, you know, I could read For becoming a parent a christian parent Well, that's a good question there are There What's what's so good about your question is for people like myself You don't realize that the first draft Of of christian parenting is what I grew up with with learning from my christian parents. So Yeah And so I I actually don't even have a book off the top of my head But I I am sure there are a lot out there and so I would i'm because there's tons of mommy blogs and Yeah, you know um It's just hard because like I find that um when Because we have read Books, uh, you know parenting books and stuff Um, but I find with the corruption of the social sciences From the left, you know, it's very hard to Wade through it, you know and and uh, you know take what you need, you know and to find books that aren't Um, you know laced with that sort of left wing uh, you know stuff that's anti-christian as well But at the same time me and my partner I was saying to my partner, you know, I was thinking You know, my partner's like all excited about we're having a boy by the way. Oh, wow Congratulations, and we're going to name him juda as well. Um, oh You know my my partner's all Excited about having this child and that and i'm thinking about how I was When I was a child, you know, and i'm like I said to her you don't know what you're in for Oh, I feel sorry for you, you know, um that You know if he if he takes after me then it's gonna be rough, you know, um And you had a difficult time going up though. So it might not be I mean it might sure sure you'll have some of the genetics and some of your traits But some of your temperament probably probably but with I I would recommend looking for you know, looking for Christian groups of young parents who are then you'll get a lot of good feedback and i'm sure in the comment section people will You know people yeah, give recommendations Yeah, but the the thing is if it does take after me Um I'm worried that he will rebel against whatever we tell him, you know, because that's what I would have done You know, I thought I knew everything, you know, and if if somebody tried to Uh enforce a worldview on me, even if it was right I would rebel against it just to prove that I knew more, you know, and um So i've already said to my partner, you know, I don't want to Force feed christianity to them to him. I think that we need to we need to be very um Considerate about how we go about it, you know, um And maybe just present it, you know and and lead let him like, you know, just dangle it There and let him come to it on his own um I I generally speaking especially when they're young because so what happens naturally is is usually if you just raise your child in the church You know along with the church programings teach them bible stories when they're young Yeah, yeah When they get when they get into their teenage years, there'll be some differentiation where they will You know where they will, you know, usually at late, you know late grade school They'll they'll be very loyal and then they get into the teen years and they'll start to differentiate from you They'll do their own rebelling naturally You know, you don't have to but but the best thing is just when they're young just Because they're just going to follow and do what you do If you pray you will pray if you read the bible, they'll read the bible just teach them bible stories You know, you don't have to be oppressive or tyrannical just have it be a natural part of Education and when they get into the teenage years and they begin to have their own ideas about things They will naturally start to make their own choices and in this world, which is You know our cultures which Are all this, you know, I believe in myself that you don't even know what a self is You know when you're 15, you're still just acting out of your head. So I I wouldn't even worry about that whole issue Just just just you know have family devotions teach them the bible And the thing is even if they in their teen years decide to walk away from the church and walk away from it All that stuff will be in there and yeah, and and in fact a lot of the a lot of the formation that they see, you know, and when they get old enough, they'll begin to They'll begin to understand parts of your story and parts of your past and so I you know, the main thing is The the main thing piece of advice I would give you is be the person you want your son to become That is the most important thing Yeah, and you know just you know the little bit I know you in terms of being honest in terms of being loving In terms of the battles that you've won I I think your child is going to be okay and You know the best that you can in terms of you and your partner have a solid relationship I don't know if you're married yet, but I'd advise you to to to get married Yeah, and and be You know because the the best thing for a child is to have two parents who love each other and are committed to each other Because that helps the child feel secure and yeah Once the child feels secure The irony is that a child who feels secure can actually rebel and push against boundaries in all the most appropriate ways Because they feel safe enough to push it boundaries Yeah, so, you know you can I mean you can get a lot of advice, but the truth is child will the child will Grow to become who you are in many ways And so the best work that you can do for the child Is the work that you do on yourself and your relationship with your partner well, we we did read brain rules for baby and uh, you know the um It sounds a bit weird, but it was actually a good book. It's written by a jewish psychologist. I think and uh, you know the main message that he That we got and he went on about was that the better that mine and my partner's relationship is You know the better the child will be, you know emotionally and uh, you know, so we've gone into um couples counseling and stuff like that You know not because of the specific problems that we have or anything but because we want to build a solid foundation For our child, you know And it is really important to us that they don't experience the things that that we did when we were younger, you know um, and I always in terms of the rebellion, I always remember, uh, cs lewis's um thing when he said, you know the holy spirit first Really entered me the day that I started to reject the church when I was a teenager Right and uh, because that was the path that ended up leading him back, you know, the you know so Yeah, I guess that And you raise a good point really like the rebelling and that is is so far down the track, you know I'll probably have my hands full with uh, you know lots of other things before then You certainly will Yeah, I was just I just had a bit of pity for my my partner, you know thinking About if it takes after me, you know, it's like In a way, I guess that's you know, um You know my karma or or whatever coming back on me. You never know. I have five kids All of them are different You know, and when you have multiple kids you very quickly realize they have different temperaments So my youngest son and my oldest son are kind of the most alike in some ways But they're also different in other ways because you got birth order. So It's you just don't you know, it's forest gump life is like a box of chocolates You never know what you're gonna get and so But it's you know, i'd say, you know keep you know make you know work with your partner on on building a marriage Stick with the church find, you know Relationships within the church and that that are helpful to you peer groups Mother's groups or father's groups, what have you? There's usually resources to get passed around there that'll they'll you know, people will find helpful and appropriate But yeah, the main thing is, you know be Be who you want your child to become that's the that's the best thing you can do and And that's generally what'll you know, in many ways i've become You know that become my father in some ways even when I didn't want to didn't want to do that but That's funny. You should say that because that brings up touches on something else. I wanted to ask you Um, i've watched me my partner watched this intelligence square debate Uh recently, uh, do I don't know if you know the intelligence? I think that's biggest in the zone. Wasn't it? About the monk debates, but um intelligence is very similar to it Yeah, um, but the the topic was um Uh, it was the name was parenting doesn't matter And then in brackets or not as much as you think it does and it was about um like they had a geneticists, uh on one side and uh, like Psychologists and that on the other like the as females versus males and the females were arguing Well, yes parenting is like the you know, the overarching influence in everybody's life and the geneticists were saying no Genetics make up 80 percent of who you are and I thought that ties in with the kelvinism, you know that You know pre-destination and all that sort of thing and and the thing that you said before about becoming your Father that's what happens with your genetics because your genetics They don't come out All at once like, you know, you said before about Um when you're younger, you've got to rebel and push back against the world And so, you know your genetics are being formed in that and when you start to become like your parents that's like your genetics sort of settling in you know, and uh, You're becoming who you are sort of thing and uh, you've got those same genetics as your your father Yeah, well he had more hair than I do But but but parenting matters a lot to your kid and it'll make his his passage much easier and I You know on one hand, you know, i've got my father's genetics, obviously, but then also some half from my mother, but you know, my parents were my parents were wonderful parents and and I You know, I um, I often reflect on how blessed I am That they raised me in the church that they were good examples of what it meant to be serious thinking Christians who are also committed to live out what they preached and You know that that kind of that kind of gift you can give to your children There's you know, there's no greater gift. You know, my parents didn't have much money. It was a pastor of a little Poor small church Yeah, but as a kid, you don't know and you know, we had a roof over our head We had food on the table like clothes on our back there was and So, you know they they yeah, so you'll I think you'll be I think you'll be I think you'll be a good father and I do I think you'll be a good father and Because of the the hard it's i'm so glad you're having a child now and not 15 years ago Well, yeah, it's funny you say that because you know me and my partner often reflect on how uh you know it is everything is for the best, you know and god, you know, he Knows better because Yeah, even though we might have wanted a child earlier that would have been horrible, you know, that would have been a disaster and uh, you know we often reflect and and um And and feel grateful that you know, it has happened. It's it's like I was saying I feel like the luckiest person alive. It feels so perfect. It feels like a story, you know, like with a happy ending and uh, you know, it was all written and planned and yeah, um, you know, it's Sound like a calvinist Well tim I should I should let you go and spend a little time with my family but yeah But thank you so much for being persistent and Your story and if you know if you want to talk again, there'll be more bumps in the road There always are but um, I i'm glad that you know You shared this with me and i'll send it to you and yeah you tell ian you you tell ian to you know, you should Really should really release that talk and then maybe two of these talks will be on my channel and I think people will be inspired and encouraged by your story Because you are you are someone who for whom? You know your hard work has paid off and no it's not easy You got to get up every day and you got to go to work and You know caulking isn't easy work. It's you're on your hands and your knees and yeah, you're not getting any younger And I and now you're gonna have a kid so all the financial pressure is going to be greater. But It's yours is still a beautiful story Yeah, um, I just just wanted to thank you and your Guests, you know because you know that it really does help when you know, i'm having a bad day um, and You know, I can listen to somebody else's story and and learn from that story and uh, you know, so I just wanted to thank them for So giving me that and uh, you know and you as well. So Yeah, it's i'm I I too feel mightily blessed and the This crazy thing that is my youtube channel I'm i'm so blessed by it. And again, I I I was saying this in the video. I just released the other day I think it's just an amazing thing that I can just kind of have a open invitation for random people out there to come on and share their story and and what a beautiful You know what a beautiful list of Stories it is and so i'm i'm just indebted to all of you for being willing to share yourselves in this really public way Yeah, it's uh It's it's amazing really. Um, you know, I was speaking to my friend and you know, he was talking about how What you're doing is it's really of the people, you know, and there's something really special about that and uh, You know, yeah, thanks That's awesome My pleasure. Well, you have a you have a wonderful sunday All right, you too. All right. Thank you. Take care. Oh, you have a good saturday. So I will So long, yeah