https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=iIKz2AXCicI

 Very good. Thank you. How are you? I'm doing very well. What a treat. Yeah, I can't actually believe it's happening. I mean, it's so cool to see yourself, you know, next to you having watched hundreds of people, you know, being next to you. And now it's my face. It's so unreal. Wow. Wow. I know it's kind of a weird experience, but I'm glad. Glad you found a slot. And then I read the little the little thing that you wrote. So I think this will be fun. That's great. So I'm happy that you've read it because I try to provide you, you know, a certain context so you know what probably which direction will will go and you know, give you some hints, you know, towards the Dutchness of it all. And I hope you're interested. I am I am well why don't you why don't you start by by telling, you know, those who haven't had a chance to read what you wrote a little bit about yourself. So I'm speaking to you from Germany, from the west of Germany actually close to cologne where I'm part of a church that is in the Russian Mennonite tradition. And those Russian Mennonites they are mostly descendants of Dutch and a Baptist who came over from around the 70s and 80s of the last of the 20th century, back to their homeland basically to to Germany and formed their own congregations here and found their home. You'll find a lot of them also on the west coast in the United States. I'm sure you're familiar with them as well. Right. So sometimes they're Baptists, sometimes they're non denominational. Oh, wow. Well, that's interesting because there's a slew of them in Sacramento. And Oh, because because you know so after the Cold War, I mean I didn't move to Sacramento till 97, then you find all of these Russian evangelicals and there's a significant number of them around here. And it's like, how did that happen. So this is fascinating. Yeah, it's it's it is fascinating actually like it's really you you'll find them in Canada, you'll find them in even in South America. And in Europe really mostly in Germany because that's their, their homeland basically you know where they really long to come to some of them, you know, move to Germany for a couple of years and then moved on to Canada, or to the states, but most of them state and especially in the, in the, in the west of Germany. And the interesting thing about that is that, you know, I came to, you know, this church as rather an outsider you know as I wrote to you I was, we were part of a Russian Orthodox Church since I was a little boy in the Soviet Union, which today would be Kazakhstan and the territory that will be today's Kazakhstan but when I was born was still the Soviet Union and I remember that, you know, pretty vividly you know serving as an altar boy since I was around for you, four years of age until I was seven. And when I was seven we moved to Germany with my parents I'm an only child so only the three of us, none of my family because my father was the one who was and who was a, the German you could say, because he was a descendant of vulgar Germans right, the people who came from Germany. Yeah, they were recruited by Catherine the great in like, I think it was the 18th century, and they moved to to Russia. It was the south southeastern part of Russia, and live there, I mean they colonized the vulgar river, they really had their kept their German culture the language especially. They were actually great salesmen, you know, from from what I what I heard. And they had their sweet little life you know when that was all up ended, obviously by the revolution in 1917, and they were displaced. And most of them, like, in the entire Soviet Union. And that's how my grandfather ended up in the area where basically my father was born and I was born like in Kazakhstan so quite far from, from the region where the vulgar Germans were living right. And from what I know about my grandfather, it's a great, you know, it's a great shame that I didn't get to know him really that much because he died when I was three years old. He, they were culturally Catholics, but they really didn't, you know, had a deep connection to the church or anything so my father was really a Catholic in that sense and obviously both my parents went to the Orthodox Church that I went to the, my parents were musicians up until today. And so they were singing in a choir and me as an altar boy. But then we left right in 1995 we left just my parents and I, and it was quite you know, it was a time of where we, you know, suddenly didn't go to church anymore. And so my father suddenly didn't, you know, serve as an altar boy. But you know when you're 70 years old you don't really think about that. Sure. And then, and, you know, started to go to school you know start to learn the language because you know I was just thrown into cold water of school, you know, not speaking any German, but I don't know somehow I just felt drawn to all the Germans, like not to the to the Russian speaking children I don't know why you know can explain that to you so after like one year I was fluid, you know it was actually a great blessing you know looking back. Yeah, and kids language very fast. Oh, oh yeah, I mean it was, I don't know it's just unreal you can't explain that right as a child so you just watch other children now. And, and so we, we had friends in that church that I'm talking about. And my mom had a pretty dramatic experience. And years later, spiritual experience where she really like it hit her on the head that she either she's going to live her, give her life to Jesus or she's gonna like it's gonna all just be a mess for her and her family that's what she was saying and so she became a born Christian, you know, and a pretty evangelical understanding of the rooted basically in the tradition of the of the Mennonite church which is, you know, socially, very conservative, we have, they have the, the way of addressing the church, it's not you know the for American listeners is also very confusing right if you hear Mennonite you know you think like semi semi Amish. Right. So, it's really you should, for the listeners you really should think of, you know, Southern Baptists. And those are really the people who we are theologically probably aligned to most, and they, they do some, you know, work here as well, especially Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, you know, they have connections here to certain seminaries. And so they do invest in the culture here. And so there is a certain connection right across the ocean here. And if you would ask me, I don't know, 15 years ago, I think at one time I was doing like one of those, one of those. What theology do you hold right test. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I was like, I was like 100% Southern Baptist was like now 3040 years ago right. And so, yeah, you know I move forward. And so, I basically followed my mom and that you know at friends in the church. And I never had a problem with the whole you know believing in God thing right there was no question to me it was, I never wrestled with it was it was rooted in me, you know, the And so, you know, the teacher doesn't, doesn't talk the same way about God, then that the evangelicals do right right but it was never a question to me so making the commitment to Jesus was the thing that I realized as a teenager, I needed to do, you know, to be basically your friends do the stupid things that you that you're doing and so that became basically my foundation, you know, and Yeah, I went to Australia after after doing my, my, my high school for a year, work there in missions in Sydney, came back, went to law school. And it was quite successful in the beginning, it went great. I found my wife in the church you know we we got married or still married today. And then I had a pretty deep crisis, you know, psychological crisis, and it was all around like 2015 16, where I just you know I just lost it I just lost all direction that I had I didn't knew where to go I didn't know what I was doing the the law school for I didn't know what I wanted from I didn't know what I wanted from life, right. So, why I was doing the things that was doing in church I just like it was just such a confusion my wife, and from time to time she tried to address certain subjects right like our family, what plans we have what we want to do, like it was just a breakdown, everything and my my studies went downhill anything went downhill we didn't have kids at that time and so it was just, you know, basically, between the two of us which was looking back on it, quite a blessing, you know that you know you don't have kids and that at that stage of your life. Yeah. And you know, I catch the whole Jordan Peterson thing. Right from the beginning, when the C 16 stuff happened because I was, I was plugged in into the conservative commentary from the states right so you know folks like Andrew Clayburn and Shapiro, they jumped onto Peterson quite early you know obviously because the conservatives they say have a nose for stuff like that and it was fascinating because you could see from the very beginning that there was something was building up right and Peterson was was this very strange guy I mean he just didn't fit at all. But it was it was weird. And it was at the same time I basically had a crisis and not really my faith I didn't really struggle but but I saw that you know there was no point to anything I was doing. And the whole Peterson story was happening. Just a couple of just some time after I got myself into apologetics, and the people who were quite influential on me were Robbie Zacharias and William Lane Craig and Zacharias was interesting because, you know, he had this way of talking, you know, he had this way of, you know, combining theology and philosophy that I was missing I mean I was just missing it completely in in in everything that you're reading in terms of theological books or what you were hearing in church I mean nobody was talking about con, nobody was talking about existentialism right nobody was talking about Socrates nobody was talking about any of that nobody was talking about Lewis, I mean nobody was talking about it was just all this, you know, very, you know, biblical literacy focused theology, I mean, basically, so we've stopped with with revelation, and anything in in spiritual intellectual history they came afterwards was somehow like the worldly stuff. And so that, you know, when I remember when I was listening to Zacharias first, I had this thought in my mind that this was the preacher I was, you know, waiting for my entire life. And so when you when you think about that when Peterson came along and he started his biblical series, and I was at that stage in my life where you know I wasn't that crisis I just realized that, man, that there is a way of talking for an hour about the, about just the framework of Genesis right the whole, you know, introduction to the idea of God for for for two and a half hours or whatever. And it was just unbelievable I mean he wasn't even a guy who we would call a Christian, right, or he wouldn't call himself a Christian. And a couple of months later I just realized okay this guy is the biggest deconverter of atheists in the entire world. And he's, I mean he's getting Sam Harris there and the people are coming to those events because of Peterson obviously most of them. And it was just wild and at that point I realized that the whole, you know, atheist, theist story was not the real deal, right, so that was not even the disagreement that that that was, that was the, that was, that was the whole thing and. And I, what I basically was doing in my personal life I just, I stopped with a law school, you know, I just put it on hold. I went into manufacturing and I tried to follow. Basically what I can't shut from Peters and just try to be the best person that you can every day, try to be the best worker that you can. And I just found that, and the transformation was, I mean, you could just see in front of your own eyes if you look in the mirror it was incredible it was just incredible. And it was also weird because that was also from the you know it wasn't from the Bible, it wasn't from the theology books that you're reading it wasn't from the spiritual input that we're getting, it was just this very practical self help, psychological stuff from a guy who also talks about Yeah, and so I mean it transformed me and you know if you, if you, if we go forward a little bit. I, you know, worked for two years in manufacturing, I decided I had to go back into law school. I finished law school. We have two kids right now. And I'm listening to you since two and a half years or two years. And it was a great blessing actually when I was working in manufacturing. They didn't care about the earbuds in your, in your, in your ears right so I was listening for podcasts for eight hours straight. I actually love to go to work because of that. I mean, it was a great blessing at that time right so yeah and remember your, the video that you did and I'm also listening to podcasts of yours because because it wasn't work. And where you've played the whole this this video of Paul Maxwell right the the history of philosophy. Yeah, it was very helpful for me at that time because you know started getting into it and you know this can have it having this general framework where you could, you know, plug and play as he was saying that right. And, you know, and then I watched the church at that time I talked to people in my church who came from that tradition from the Mennonite tradition and they were all saying that you know what this whole Mennonite thing you know why are we even calling ourselves that I mean it's basically idol worship and it's just you know we just have to believe in Jesus I mean we just have to be Christians and, you know, it's funny when when all of those traditional churches are very much connected to this whole seeker movement. Yeah, you know, to Hillsong and to, and to, to Willow Creek, because they feel that it's the same thing because it's, you know, basically they believe the same thing that we do but they're just you know more ever cool. Right. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, exactly. Right, so that it was basically the whole, the whole thing like, you know, they're cool. They start dressed differently and they obviously was listening to Peugeot at that time as well. Right, so, and then I realized that there was this deep deep loss of tradition in, you know, the tradition that I am just part of because I'm in the church but I'm not, I don't have this multi generational history going back right like those people in the church really like mother and father came from that background. And I started to worry about that. And you know then this whole rift of, you know, modernity and what you were talking about that modernity coming to an end really hit me very hard because I saw the basically you know as you probably did the seeker movement basically going down right now because the, the offer that they have made to the world in the 70s and 80s was probably, you know, a good try back then, but we now realize that it was, there was just no foundation to it really, it wasn't built to last. Yeah, like it was. Who was you know the founding pastor of our church. Well, he's still the pastor of our church you know what I mean. Yeah, like, there was nothing to go back. Yeah, and, and I'm basically now you know fighting with with myself about and struggling with this, trying to reconcile, you know, my own history, you know, because I realized that all of the things from childhood that you didn't think about, I'm now 32. Okay, and so, you know, it, you just didn't you weren't thinking about all of that for 20 years for 23 years as an altar boy and anything and you you know you were born again and all of that and now it all comes back, like it all hits you. And you think to yourself, well, how am I going to do that and you go into your church building which is a, you know, a beautiful church but it's empty. Yep. Yep. Right, so you know you look at those, and it's empty. There are no pictures. Yeah, and you go into in Cologne you know we have this dough I don't know if you've probably heard of it you know 750 years old it's quite famous famous Cathedral in Cologne yeah yes, and you go in there and you you realize that you know that that it touches you like it touches myself. And that's because it touches something that was placed inside of me at a very young age, and now it's coming back and you know I'm working on that. And on the other hand I'm working on the young people in in our circles you know, and trying to convince them that there is value in the tradition right because that that connects them to the, to the sacrifice that their great grandfather said and they were killed in the Soviet Union right on their faith and, and, and they suffered and just basically giving that a lot for just you know we just have to believe in Jesus and all you know, let us all unite. And it's not not the right way to go. And so I'm, you know, you can probably see the, the, the struggle in me right so to try to see both of that and and and but but but the struggle is very different one right because on the other hand you, you, you're trying to keep a post tradition alive. And on the other hand you're struggling with the reformation itself right because obviously having this Orthodox instinct and being in a reformational church is something that that yeah it's quite, quite, quite a challenge intellectually. Wow, this, this is really good. Because, so, you know, I want to reach, I want to reach back to young's observation as a young doctor as an intern in the psych ward that the story out there and the story in here are deeply connected and that's really true in your book because I mean all the elements, even of, you know, the, the vulgar Germans with Catherine the great, and then to Kazakhstan and then back to Germany and Catholicism I mean your, your ancestors were likely German Roman Catholics I mean even though Germany is the reformation, a lot of people don't really. People in America don't necessarily recognize that Germany retained a huge Catholic you know Catholic presence there that continues and and goes on today. So then your childhood in the Russian Orthodox. And so, in your case really the stories out there and the story in here are all coming together and and those, you know, whereas of course you're an instantiation of all of those stories, amidst astounding curiosity and particularity. The, you know, I can very much here and imagine how you're, you are working through these stories inside of you because all of the decisions you make have to deal with. Okay, how am I going to worship. How, how does Jesus impact all of my life. How, how does. Oh wow, you, and you told your story very well too. Huh. So, so what, what are you doing. What are you doing. Well, how old are your children. The first one is two years and four months and the second one is just five months. Yeah, so they're very young. So yeah, they're very young and did you see now you've got an anti Baptist tradition. Obviously, if, if you know in the, in the Catholic the Roman Catholic or the Russian Orthodox Church, your children would have been christened. Have you done that. No, I haven't done that. I mean I was Christian obviously so see that's the whole thing right so even even even even raising the question I mean all your, all your social, you know, life, and all your family life are in are invested in the church right so you, you have your family there you have your, your, your mother and father there and you have your children go growing up there. I'm not going to turn around tomorrow right and say, because I have this understanding of it. I mean, it's, isn't it funny that, you know, that that that itself would be a very modernist move right to say that I understand that that way. And so I have to go back to the old production I'm going to take all my family with me and my wife, and she doesn't even know I mean she knows but she, she, she grew up in that church. Yeah, so that's, that's her part. And I always remember Peugeot you know who was he always stressed this thing and like we're given a history, right. We have to live in the, he actually said that in that essay about Peterson. I'm sure you know right the one he wrote for the Bishop Barron journal, where I love that so much because he said we have to live in the story. And that is deep stuff. Yeah. And that's also very hard regard, like, in my case right so yeah, you, I mean you're so grateful to the people in the church here and the Russian men and I church because you. And I think that's a really to the, to the to to to to faith, like, believing in God or not. We've stated that right so it's it's not the real question. Right. But, you know, coming to to to a relationship with Jesus as we say, right, and really putting that path where everything revolves around the one question you know how am I going to live right for God, and also something that Peterson was like stressing in this introduction to the idea of God thing where he said, well, you know, the question, how we're going to live our life like everything revolves around that and so I'm not going to turn around and say that's, you know, that's my story so I have to go away. But you know the internal struggle is not going away by declaring that right so right. Yeah. You know, I don't know if you saw Sally Joe's conversation with me on orthodoxy and Protestants and. But this reminds me of that because, you know, in a sense, this, this, I love your story and I love how it all comes together because, you know, obviously you're, you're, you're, you're trying to. You're trying to integrate all of the elements of your story together and there are pieces of your story that are just not going to be easily integrated. And, you know, that was Sally's conversation with me to that I thought was a deeply moving and honest and open conversation where she, you know, she gets to a point, she was very frustrated that the Orthodox Church near her had demanded masks and she wasn't having it and so she plunked herself down on her lawn with her orthodox study Bible and realized I'm being a Protestant. And, and, and this is, you know, my conversation with my conversation with Roman Catholics in the United States that are deeply frustrated with what they see as you know some of this, you know who Rod Rear is. Who are deeply frustrated with the sense of accommodation that they find from their church because that of course was Rod Rear story that they're deeply frustrated with their church and the hierarchy of the church because of a sense of accommodation. But they, and so they push back against that. And of course the, the hierarchy of the church says you know we have a name for you, it's called Protestants. And so it's this ongoing dynamic of, you know, of the church through conflict. And, and I think that they're trying to struggle forward in faithfulness to Christ and I think, you know, part of what I, I saw in Tom Holland's work was, even though he sort of outside of the church and outside of the faith, recognize that this, this ongoing conflict Jesus built this into the church, where it's always reforming and always refining and always struggling and, and, and, you know, that has this. And sometimes when I read the new, when I read the Gospels, and I read Jesus doing something. And of course he's getting his, some of his biggest pushback from the group that you know the group was closest to him which is the Pharisees in many ways, and all of this push back because Jesus will say these, you know, he will heal on the Sabbath, and he will, you know, so this week I'm working on the text where he's going through the field and his disciples on the Sabbath are picking up kernels and eating them, and Jesus you know, and then the Pharisees complain and Jesus hits him with David and the showbread, and it's like, Jesus got this thing started he really did. And, and so here you are. And you want to be faithful to Jesus, and you've got on one hand Russian Methodists that are your people, and you know, people in the channel are often like you know, well, what's Paul going to convert to Catholicism or orthodoxy? How long will the beard grow? And I tell them I'm, I'm not leaving, I have no plans to leave the Christian Reformed Church and I want to see, I want to do what I can within the Christian Reformed Church to see it, you know, obviously, reform and revitalize and, and come into new chapters. But, you know, what about, what about John seven, you know, what about Jesus prayer and John 17 that we would be one? Yeah. And what does that unity look like? And how, how will that make sense for my particular life? And I just love the way that you told your story because all the elements are there. And it's, and it's deep in, you know, for Americans, you know, the, it sounds strange, but these things do take time. I mean, the, the, the fall of the Iron Curtain and the fall of the Berlin Wall, these, you know, the, the social and religious ramifications for those huge changes are, are just, you know, just coming in and, and you and your generation embody that change because I mean, here I'm talking to you and your English is flawless. And of course you learn German as a boy and I'm sure, you know, was it, was it Russian that you were speaking in the whole? Yeah. You know, still speaking Russian to my parents. Yeah. And, you know, so, and for me, you know, growing up that the most of the Russians I knew were Jews. And then moving to Sacramento, my son who went to his high school, you know, he was, but my second son had, has dark had dark long hair in high school. And in, in the school here in Sacramento, they, he was labeled as white, not Russian, because, you know, and in that school there were a lot of Asian kids, there were African American kids, there were Hispanic kids. And there were, and, and, but you had to somehow delineate between the white, not Russian and the Russians. And of course, Russian here in Sacramento might not be Russian at all. They might be Ukrainian, that some somewhere from, you might, they might be Polish somewhere from that Soviet block that have made their way to Sacramento. And then here in Sacramento, a few years ago, with some of the culture war stuff, it was that it was the Russian, Russian isn't even the right word because it's Ukrainian often, but it was it was the former Eastern block Baptists who were really digging in hard against the same sex marriage thing in 2008 that whole campaign, they came out very strong. And they got pushed back hard lately with COVID and the masks, they said, you know, we're not gonna, you know, the state isn't going to push us around. And given their history, you could totally understand. But, you know, all of the, all of the, how to describe it, all of the bending over backwards to accommodate minorities, somehow didn't pertain to them. They were immigrants. They were a minority, but but because why because of the color of their skin, but I don't think that was it. I think the majority thing was they were in opposition to this new regime, this new more regime that you know the, they just got clobbered in the media and I mean, so much for being kind and gentle to the mind to the to the to the immigrant minority. Not you. And so, and these are these are narrative strains that are not being picked up by almost anybody in the news, because they it just doesn't fit in terms of the other narratives going on. But again, as you told your story, and as you laid it out, it's, it's, it's dramatic, and it's obvious, and you're living in Germany, which has its own, you know, political, social, cultural stuff going on, and that I don't know very well, but with some of the conversations with some of the other Germans that that I've had so and then to see it all sort of. Okay, here you're the father of two very small shot children. You're, you met your wife in this church. You had a rather significant transition period, a few years ago and you know it was a it was a transformation in you. And so, I'm, I'm very interested to see where this is going to go because all of these things elements of the story out there are all instantiated in you. And so, yeah, you're going to be working them through. So, well, let's talk a little bit about from the transition from manufacturing to law. What's, what's, what's, I mean, obviously their status and I'm sure I mean, I don't know how it is in Germany but if in the United States you're working manufacturing. You probably aren't going to be able to support a family very well you know law would probably afford more. I mean, what's what's going on with that in that aspect of your life. That was, that was actually, I'm sure, 20 years from now, looking back on that, I'm not even going to realize how crazy that was because I really, you know, I was straight from, from the faculty from from law school, like, leaving you know the library to, to the other day, just you know going to, to this, you know, into the dirt and oil in the in the company, because I, you know, was sitting in the lecture, and it was quite at the end of my studies like it was just, I basically had to take a couple of months just, yeah, over half a year, let's say 10 months to prepare for the final exam, it's quite extensive and it's quite hard but you know it would have taken some time but as I said I had no energy nothing in me right there was nothing that was that was that was here like I couldn't do anything. You know, it just hit me like it really hit me that you just need to stop and do something completely different. And the funny thing is a couple of months before I was, I was you know, I've done my own authoring, like I wrote, I wrote down a terrible scenario catastrophic scenario for my life and I wrote down a positive like good scenario for my life, and it just left it like I didn't even, you know, I didn't even check that I just left it on my computer. And somehow it that just, you know, started it like a couple of months later I was sitting there, I went, I went to a company asked them for a job I said well I could do shifts I don't care I do whatever you want me I just want to work. I just want to feel that you know somebody needs my, you know, my, my work, you know, I don't want to sit on a table, reading through, you know, books of whatever it professor I just want to, I just want to do something like for my wife you know I want to feel a certain worth, you know, started to do it. I hadn't had an injury on my arm I broke my arm, five, five weeks into the job right. And they had to, they had to, you know, I had to do it quite with an emergency operation, you know, and I spent a couple of, like I said, I think two weeks in a hospital, and I went back to work five, five weeks later, and I even forgot about that episode because it just, it didn't even stop me right so it wasn't even such a bad thing. And I loved it I loved it at work because, and people asked me you know who were in the company for a couple of years they looked at me and they knew that, you know, I was like this lawsuit and was working full time. And some, once I'm a senior in the company asked me, why are you smiling when I when I pass like why are you always smiling. And, you know, I didn't even realize that I told him, I don't know I just feel like it. I like, I never feel bad when I'm in here. And it was really like dirty work like in the oil in the dirt at a machine. And I was just happy it just transformed me and you know I, I didn't I brushed my teeth in the morning put on the working clothes and and it just, I was working, and it wasn't it was anything fancy with law on it, you know, and it just, I was 10 months away from doing the exam, I just didn't want I wanted to be in the dirt. Right. And then, like, we actually we went to the West Coast in 2018 with my wife, to California, and that was at the beginning of 2018 it was just a couple months before I started, you know, watching and listen to your podcasts. And then it was a great time like and we just we basically got our first boy in the summer of 2018. And then like, at the end of the beginning of 2019 I really realized that, you know, that it's great, I really enjoy it. But you have to go back to law school because that's the way that you were on and that was the right way but you had to stop, you had to do this physical dirty stuff that was really at the bottom of the of the social ladder. Yeah, yeah. On the, on the payment ladder. Right. So, yeah, it was enough to support family I mean it was fine German manufacturers, quite, quite robust I mean it's a good market it's, it's paid relatively well. But I mean it's nothing compared to, you know, especially the position that I was in because I didn't have any knowledge of some, you know, sophisticated technological things. Yeah. So it was just rudimentary work. And then yeah, I decided to go back and I went back last year you know when COVID hit I was started to, to, to, to study full time again. And then I finished it like I finished law school and looking back on that now, the those two and a half years in manufacturing, were, it was one of the best things ever, really, because it gave me my, my self worth right back to me. And now being being in that position finishing law school and going now to be a clerkship is like you know, I have the same goal that I had when I was, when I started the, with law school, which is, you know, I want to become a jurist, I want to become a lawyer. But everything else you know your, your selfishness your, you know, your understanding of your status or your, your, your, your, your, your, you know, your longings for, for, for having status in your know in, in your social circus in your In your church, you know, people look to you, we don't have many people who go to university even now, although there are more thankfully but- In your church? Yeah, there is not one like lawyer or anything, there are, and most of them have technical jobs right so they are very technically minded which is the complete opposite of what I am. And, and, and, and all of that is gone, right, because, like, God has really transformed my, my understanding of, of myself, you know, the, of, of, of the way I look, look on what, what, what my, my time is, is even worth, right, like, and what I want from life, and what I want other people to think about me and that's all gone and that, and it is such a, such a, such a great position to be in, because you just don't follow your selfish rotten desires. And I'm very glad about it, I'm very happy about it. I mean, I could have finished, you know, law school after four or five years, and I would have been a mess, right? So, and then you finished it after twice the time, and you feel that you're, you're the, you're closer to the person that God wants you to be, right? Yeah. And that's a much better position to be in. Absolutely, absolutely. So, what comes, you know, to do, I don't know, we've only got about 15 minutes left so if there's somewhere you want to take the conversation, take it there now. Otherwise, I'll keep pestering you with questions but... No, you can keep going. That's fine. We're not going to switch to, you know, IDW Weinstein now, that's not okay. Okay, okay. We should go to. Okay. Well, you know, listening to you talk I think, okay, what do you want ahead of you? What do, what do you want to do in your life now you've, you've, you've, you've got some accomplishments behind you, you've, you've, you've, you've got some accomplishments behind you, you've, you've, you've, you've found a wife, you have a faith, you have a couple of children, you've completed, you know, some education, you're on a track. And obviously, life takes surprising turns and always does and you know that better than most because yours already has. So, so what are, what are some of your dreams, where, where do you want to, where do you, what do you want to do, where do you want to go? You know, it's funny now when you, when you, when you have your exam, and when you have your, your, your diploma in your hands right you know your mind starts to go to different places and they're very superficial you know it's very interesting it's, first of all, you think that, oh well I thought I would be more happy about that, that I'm now right so it's funny. And then you think to yourself, well, now, now I'll probably have a job where I can afford a house, right, and I can afford a bigger car, or we get a third child, hopefully and, and all of that and then probably I could even buy a house for, for vacation in Ireland, the country that I love so much with my wife like, and then you think to yourself what, what is that all about? Like, what thoughts are, that's ridiculous. That is, that is so stupid. Because even if you have none of that, you're going to survive, you're going to be happy, and that's not what it's about. So, you know, I, I really, I wish to have an even bigger family, right, so because I'm an only child, right, I have, I want to have more kids. I mean that's, that's for sure. I really like there is, I'm not gonna, I'm not going to be able to do it, like under three, it's like, as an only child and my wife having a family of six, seeing the contrast is dramatic. And my parents, they, they are happy of having two grandsons, right, so I have only one son and having two grandsons, and I see their happiness and that's a beautiful thing. And I see the value of that and I'm really like looking on to my older son, you know, seeing him, you know, starting talking, starting understanding all of, you know, the stuff around him. And I really think to myself that, oh man, I hope I can, you know, give something to him that, that he's not going to be the idiot that I was when I was 20, so that he's going to have more, you know, capabilities of, you know, figuring himself out if we're going to use that Peter Sonian term, right? So figuring himself out if he's in a crisis in his 20s or even later than I had, right, because I didn't have that. I didn't, I really didn't have that. And I hope to be able to provide him with, you know, an understanding that, that I have now and I hopefully have later and really grow in that. What really, what, you know, obviously the struggle that we were talking about in me is quite central to what I'm thinking about, you know. I mean, you know, I'm going to, I'm going to have a job, you know, whatever, and I'm going to work and I'm going to work 100% because I've made the experience how valuable that is, you know, and as Peter said, you know, you're going to hit some roadblocks if you do that. I mean, it's not going to be like, oh, okay, I'm doing my best, you know, there are going to be people who are going to be angry about that. And I've realized that in the company, you know, there's this race to the bottom, please don't work so fast, because that's going to shine a bad light on us and all of that. And it's not going to be different in the other work environment, but I don't worry about that, right? So you can go to work, work, you know, as best as you can, and then go home and continue and continue. I don't worry about that. But I do somehow worry. I don't know if that's the right word, but somehow it's interesting and it's frightening to think about the fact that you also stress on that. We cannot learn what we have learned. Yeah, right. How am I going to reconcile my, my skepticism towards the reformation with my personal service in the church, you know, and I don't I want to be the last person who, you know, is going to speak, you know, in an arrogant way to people who have their own tradition and have their own understanding, the way they live, the faith and I don't want to be somebody who, oh, no, no, I'm going to bring you a different perspective, which is going to transform anything that you had and anything because I mean, you're not going to get that in a congregation of 400 people, right? I want to, I want to do that in a way that is that is respectful to them. But I still have to go my way and that's probably really something that that I think about more than the rest because I really don't worry now about, you know, the future what I'm going to do. You know what I mean? I really don't worry about that. Because if you have gone through what I've went through in my 20s, it's like a midlife crisis that came way too early. Yeah. Yeah. So probably I'm gonna you know, I'm gonna be spared with the real midlife crisis. Who knows? Who knows? You never know, right? I probably don't, but that's how I view that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Internal struggle is really something that that is more real to me than that. What, you know, comes in my career or what comes with, you know, the the the financial opportunities that we'll have of my family. You know, I mean, you, you learn to live with with with with few fewer stuff than than than before. If in your 20s, all your friends around you, you know, we didn't go to university who do manufacturing, who work with their hands, have built their houses, right? Yeah. Yeah. And you being a lost student don't have anything. Right. So you learn to to to, you know, to just, you know, be be thankful for what you have. So don't worry about the future. Yeah, but I do. But I am quite quite anxious about, you know, the internal struggle. Yeah, yeah. Well, it's got a very interesting story. And and well, God will be with you. You know, and I, you can, I mean, I mean, you can see that already in your story that crisis, you know, a personal crisis like you had the transformations that that you underwent the changes that you made. They were significant, but they weren't destructive. They were productive. And I know that you will be a better man for having been a machinist and not just a lawyer. And And you will be a better Christian for the the orthodox roots, even if you're in a Mennonite church. And, you know, I know that because as a pastor, I haven't been in I haven't I haven't pastored a lot of churches. I mean, there's a trade off that you make. My father pastored two churches formally for, you know, two more in retirement in terms of interim work. But you do get around as in a denomination and you do get to visit with other churches and get a get a get a look into other churches usually when there's something going on. But you do notice that it's it's the the people in church that have had experience in other traditions are really valuable to those churches because we have this one in the many thing with You know, and it isn't we focus on the Protestant Reformation, but it's that's it's that was one. I mean, the church has been having these split offs and healings and split offs and healings all the way from the beginning with the Judaizers and the Apostle Paul. I mean, it's been the you can just if you just walk through church history, you just see this continual process. And and you you have a capacity to know both sides and to be able to be faithful and participate in the Mennonites without having to without having to despise the other traditions. That's really important and powerful in this and and that sort of integration, which is in your own heart and life will be really important moving forward as your children begin to develop their faith and who knows what they will find. I mean, it's it's very difficult for us to imagine what life will be like 10 or 15 years from now with the rise of AI globalization. You know, we've had a relatively stable relatively stable few decades in some ways, but Europe, Europe has a history of just Europe is a blender. And you're and that's built into your story to, you know, over to Russia, down to Kazakhstan, back to Germany, the Russian Revolution, the, you know, the the Second World War, the, you know, the the EU, the end of the Cold War. I mean, it's it's these things just keep coming. And the, you know, the migration from Africa to Europe, the migration from the the Near East to Europe, Islamization. Hang on, boys and girls. And and on the religious level, you know, the in a sense, the, you know, the American invasions of Europe, the Southern Baptists, the evangelicals, the, you know, the the Australians coming with the hill songification of the church, which which sort of is an echo of the secret church. So yeah, boy, boy, I got to get over to Europe and shake your hand at some point after covid. I hope that happens. I'm so close to to to Frisia, right? So, you know, you have to come here. I actually been in Frisia just in the June of last year when we had this couple this break from covid. Like, you know, the when we're all those those reformationists have been the city of Harlingen, Leward, you know, and it's funny. It's like you it's 500 years ago, right? But it's still you can probably hear them walking just, you know, behind you when you when you're there in the evening. It's very interesting. It's fascinating. Yeah, how it all developed and how it really went around the world. Right. So it's yeah, it's quite something. It's quite the next guy in the queue is a Frisian. Really? A real Frisian. Wow. So I'll talk to him in five minutes, but that that fits. Thank you. Thank you for this. I will send you I will send you a copy of this and you can let me know if this is something you'd like to share. I'm sure many of the other Germans who watch my channel would be, you know, very interested to hear your story. I'm I'm fascinated by your story. It's it's such a world. Yeah, no, it's I'm happy that that I you know, it's someone came together in the beginning when it was when it was when I was telling it. Right. So because you never know how you go. Like if you if you don't have a scripted so I'm happy, you know, probably the next time we talk one day, we probably get more into the deeper stuff. But, you know, getting an understanding, you know, the whole framework of your personality is, you know, my case is probably take some time. Right. Yeah, it does. Yeah, I'm so happy came together and we could talk and it's really it's really a pleasure Paul and me too. I really enjoy listening to you and yeah hope we can probably, you know, in some time, you know, repeated and then go deeper. That sounds that sounds good to me. Thank you, Igor. Take care. Have a good day.