https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=l5Xoqtg3k8k

 Hi, this is Paul. No group got slammed harder during the years of the Trump presidency than moderate evangelicals, especially someone like Russell Moore, who in his newsletter just wrote a rather touching piece about the Gallup poll noting that less than half of Americans are now members of a church. Hi, this is Paul. There's a group that politically lost a ton of status during the Trump presidency. It's probably moderate evangelicals who didn't want to get on the Trump bandwagon, and the left saw them as insufficiently, basically saw them as hypocrites. In many ways, this group was really spent the last four years in the wilderness. Well on one of my listservs today, someone posted this newsletter from Russell Moore, and I found it to be a good newsletter, and I'll read some or all of it. Almost everyone in the world of American religion has spent the last couple of weeks thinking about the Gallup, thinking through what Gallup just revealed, that for the first time they've been surveying the topic, less than half of the country belongs to a church of any kind. My first thought was grief. What came after that was a strange sort of almost survivor's guilt. When I was 15 years old, I considered suicide, and it was because I didn't want to lose my religion. As I've written about elsewhere, I went through a prolonged spiritual crisis where because of what I was seeing all around me in Bible Belt Christianity, not only were televangelist scandals all over the news, but also I knew that this wasn't half of it. Just as those political journalists have long known how to interpret Senator Smith has decided to spend more time with his family, I knew how to interpret the Lord has called Brother Jones from the pastorate into itinerant evangelism. I knew of Christian people who were beating their children for listening to secular music. I knew of Christian people who denounced the vulgarity of the culture while seething with racism. I heard prediction after prediction, tying current events to biblical prophecy that was all just about to happen. But nobody ever said, remember when I said Gog and Magog of the Bible was the Soviet Union? I was wrong about that. Or Mikhail Gorbachev, I told you was probably the Antichrist. But my bad, now that I'm also using these supermarket scanners, maybe they're not the mark of the beast after all. You know, I'm probably about the same age as Russell Moore, so listening to this, even though I really didn't grow up in Bible Belt Christianity, I mean, it was all just there. This was even more the case with politics. Even as a teenager, I could see that the voting guides that showed up in Bible Belt America were kind of like horoscopes one could find in the newspaper. The horoscope would say, today you will find a surprising new opportunity. And the certain sort of credulous person would be amazed at how this just happened to be true, whatever, thinking about the fact that this is true for virtually every human being at virtually every moment, if one just pays attention to it. Likewise, the voter guides lined up in Christian view from the Antichrist view on a list of items that just happened to line up with the favored party's political platform. Somehow the Bible suddenly gave us a Christian view on a balanced budget amendment or the line item veto. And again, I remember these causes. Things like the European Common Market was a sign of the last days, where we're never noticed in the text until the favored politician started emphasizing such things. And along with all of that came apocalyptic warning that if these candidates weren't elected or these politicians weren't policies weren't enacted, we would lose our entire culture. When those candidates lost, no one headed for the bunkers. The culture didn't fall, at least not any more than it had before. I started to wonder whether religion itself, or at least the kind of Christianity that showed up in slogans around me, might really be about something else, southern culture or politics. If so, I thought it would mean that Jesus was not the way, the truth, and the life, but a means to an end, and that it would mean the gospel is not, you must be born again, but you must be one of us. All of this was terrifying to me because I really believe that Jesus was the Son of the living God. I really believe that Jesus loved me, for the Bible told me so. And if the gospel I had been given was really about finding ways to get voters back to party bosses or fund prostitutes and cocaine for some preachers on TV, then that would mean more than just an adolescent cynical awakening. It would mean that the universe was a random meaningless void, red in tooth and claw. It would mean that the preacher who beat his daughter for dancing wasn't an aberration, but was instead the way the cosmos is, right down to the core, and that was a horrible thought. Obviously, since this isn't the horoscope coming to you far beyond the grave, I came through this teenage crisis, and obviously, since I'm an evangelical Christian, I came through it with my faith not just intact, but deepened. That's due ultimately, of course, to the grace of God, but in terms of secondary causes, it's true to the fact that I found a copy of C.S. Lewis's Mere Christianity on the bookstore and having read it to the point of memorization, the Chronicles of Narnia as a child, I recognized the name. It's due to the fact that after listening to Christian music led me to a Christian bookstore where I found, amidst all the kitsch, a copy of Christianity Today magazine where I found columns by Philip Yancey and J.I. Packer and John Stott and Chuck Colson. These people seemed to take the reader seriously as someone who could think. Think about that with respect to the Jordan Peterson stuff, and that's true. I remember these authors, too. I mean, Philip Yancey was an extremely popular author, John Stott, Chuck Colson. But what I recognized as the fruit of the Spirit, peace, joy, love, kindness, gentleness, self-control, etc., there seemed to be something that bore witness to a Jesus who was not a means to an end, but who was the Alpha and Omega of everything. But my 15-year-old self haunts me. I know that the reason I went looking for C.S. Lewis and the others is because I had been taught the Bible in a good, loving church. I had seen genuine love and community and authenticity there, week by week in Sunday school and in training union and worship services and vacation Bible school, to know that it could exist and what it would look like when I found it. I wonder what would have happened to 15-year-old Russell Moore had I been born in 2001 instead of 1971. I guess he is a little younger than I am. Would things I saw have even prompted a crisis at all? Or would I have just walked away altogether? Would I have ended up as the sort of atheist or agnostic or deconstructing ex-vangelical that I find myself counseling almost every day now? But I think about that literally every day now and maybe more this week, back to the Gallup poll. And it talks about numbers of Americans. In recent years, even some of those less apocalyptic about the prospects of evangelical Christianity because of the growth of the global south and because of the cyclical nature of revivals and awakenings have grown more foreboding about the prospects of evangelical Christianity in the 21st century. Referring to the nuns, those claiming no religious affiliation, sociologist Philip Jenkins contends the future of the USA is none. Indeed, the most reliable studies available show us that as little as 8% of white millennials identify as evangelicals, as compared to 26% of senior adults. That's a huge difference. With Generation Z, the numbers are even more jarring, with 34% identifying as religiously unaffiliated and that number is growing. What's more, the culture war narrative of this secularization is increasingly demonstrated to be false, at least in the way presented by and to American evangelicals over the last 50 years. The disaffiliation, to be sure, is due to liberalizing cultural norms, decreasing fertility and increasing mobility. But the evidence is mounting that a significant amount of secularization is accelerated and driven not by the secular culture but by evangelicalism itself. Many of us have observed anecdotally a hemorrhaging of younger evangelicals from church and institutions in recent years. What seems different about this quiet exodus is that the departures are heightened not among the peripheries of the church, those nominal or cultural Christians who grow up to rebel against their parents' belief, but instead those who are most committed to what they were previously thought to be the hardest aspects of Christian religion in modernity, belief in the supernatural, the rigorous demands of discipleship, a longing for community and accountability in a multi-generational church with ancient roots and transcendent authority. When a de-churched, to use an anachronistic term, ex-vangelical, to use another, in the early 1920s was likely to have walked away due to the fact that she found the virgin birth of the bodily resurrection to be outdated, see my video about Pope Joe, and superstitious or because she found moral libertinism to be more attractive than the outmoded strict moral code of his past or because she wanted to escape the stifling bounds of home church for an autonomous individualism. Now we see a markedly different and jarring model of disillusioned evangelical. We now see young evangelicals walking away from evangelicalism not because they do not believe what the church teaches, so I would kind of argue with that, but because they believe the church itself does not believe that the church cheesed, what the church teases, and I think he's right on that point. The presenting issue is that secularization is not scientism and hedonism, but disillusionment and cynicism. Many have pointed to the compelling data from Robert Putman and David Campbell and countless other sociologists, political scientists, and demographers showing that the polarization of American religion is a key driver of people away from religious affiliation. Some would point to the fact that most of those leaving would identify politically as somewhere from moderate to progressive to suggest that such people are better off outside the church in the first place. Let's assume for the sake of argument that such is true, which comes first here, the demand to line up politically in order to follow Jesus or the decision to reject the politics of those making such demands. Moreover, it seems to me that the controversy is not actually even over the specific political planks or ideas or personalities as the fact that many have come to believe that the religion itself is a vehicle for the politics and the cultural grievances and not the other way around. I think that actually swings both ways because that's certainly true of the push back against, let's say, wokeism. I think he makes some points here, but I think you really have to go a little bit deeper. Most of the people that I talk to and that we talk to, there's a fundamental crisis that I think there's an expectation of what one's church relationship, one's religious commitment, one's devotions to discipleship should achieve in a person's life, and when it doesn't, they look for something that's going to work for them. And that is also on the bigger canvas of the country. And I'm going to get to some of those issues a little bit later in this video. It's not difficult to see why. I watched 20 years ago as people suggested that those waving away a president's sexual behavior is irrelevant to his public office were the result of liberal forms of Baptist theology, and then they lived long enough to watch the same people suggest those who did not wave away such behavior from another president might not be real Christians. People can change their mind, of course. I certainly have done so many times, but as with the prophecy charts a generation ago, there's no talk of minds changing, just certainties in one direction and the certainties of the opposite direction and the only difference between the tribal affiliations of the leaders under discussion. Now, of course, he's talking about Bill Clinton and Donald Trump. And this article, I'm still not totally used to this, this article, Does It Matter? in post-Calvin, really hit that. And as he said, many of these people are deep into, they are not sort of the people on the fringe that don't go to church much or sort of have other signs in their life of nominality. They are the people that, let's say, in my generation when I went to college in the early 80s, these are the people that would have been going to Bible study. These are the people that would have been leading Bible studies. These are the people that would have been going to chapel. And so there's quite a big transformation and change going on in this. Trends in secularization seem that people do not need the church in order to see themselves as Americans or as good people or even as spiritual. And I think that's a really important sentence because, you know, one of my issues with Jesus and John Wayne, and I haven't yet done a full review of that book, is that the book is not terribly respectful or generous towards its adversaries. And it more is sort of a scoff of how evil and stupid those Trump voters should, those Trump voters were. And one has to be careful with that. You know, I always say that people have a right to their politics and their religious ideas. Let them have it. They're going to have it. There are real reasons why someone's politics and someone's nationalism are probably going to line up. It's not an unreasonable thing to happen. And people sort of have to construct a unified worldview. And, you know, in the United States, you've got to figure out who to vote for. If you vote majority parties, you've got one of two choices. So and they certainly do not need the church in order to carry out their political affiliations, even when those political affiliations are those preferred by the church. If evangelicalism is politics, people can get their politics somewhere else and fight and fornicate and get drunk too if they want. A religion that calls people away from Western modernity will have to say with credibility, take up your cross and follow me, not come with us and we'll own the libs. We can do the latter on YouTube and no one needn't give up a Sunday morning. And this is where we get into the question of platforms. And we'll get into that a little bit later. Almost every survey of disaffiliating people has also emphasized the scandals within the church, most notably the sexual abuse coverups and the predatory behaviors. This is about more than just standard trope of don't judge the church by the hypocrites in it. He talks about J.R.R. talking a little bit. We might assure ourselves that we see the proliferating nuns among the youth that the reason they are leaving is because they want to run their own lives and pursue the sexual hedonism the church rightly forbids. Some of that is no doubt the case, but if one believes the Bible, no one is wanting to run one's own life, that one knows that wanting to run one's own life is not a new development with modernity. And you know, again, when I look at people leaving, it isn't often abject rebellion. Many of those who deconstruct do so as young Russell Moore with a lot of regret. They don't want to deconstruct. They want to stay in the church, leaving the church, especially if you grew up in a Christian family and your parents remain in the church. There's a heavy relational cost that for many it would simply be easier to simply stay in church. And so, you know, if we're going to be generous to our adversaries, and I think we should, because it doesn't really help your argument to be dismissive. It helps your argument to steel man the other side. And I would say that many leave the church because they're simply not compelled by the vision, the capacity of the church to be an integral part of the good life that they wish to pursue. In other words, it's not necessarily individual rebellion. They're actually choosing another. They're choosing another religion, really, to pursue. And so, you know, in the last video I did about, you know, Pope Joe and sort of deconstructed her little resurrection, her little Easter sermon, there's definitely a vision she is pursuing and that runs through almost all of the deconstruction things that you see. And then he goes on to talk about how the church will survive, yada, yada, yada. But even if I look at something like, let's see if this pulls it up correctly, something like this post-Christian article, again, this was written in 2020 during the Trump election. I don't remember the details of the conversation. I wish I did. I've turned it over and over and over in my mind. But it's the genre, but it's in the genre folks raised in Christian communities will recognize the faith and works debate. In my case, it was a conversation about elderly congregants in a rural Midwest church and about faithfulness. One person said something like, but they know their Bible so well, they're prayer warriors. And the other asked, does it matter? Does it matter when we memorize the Heidelberg catechism? Now we're speaking about some CRC type things here. That they can recite all 150 Psalms, that they spend hours in silence in front of an open Bible every morning. If they're trying to prevent refugee families from settling in their community, if they keep telling everyone Barack Obama is a Kenyan Muslim, if they've cut a gay grandchild out of their will, or in 2020 they're spreading vicious and nonsensical QAnon theories on Facebook defending the guy who murdered two people who were protesting the police shooting of Jacob Blake on and on and on. I am really angry every single day, this person says, and goes on and on. And again, this is a person that would be at the heart of what the Christian Reformed Church would imagine would be central to their future. And basically the article says she's hanging by a thread. And almost everything in this issue are social political issues that she feels the church has lined up on the wrong side of. Now if there's anything clear, churches just deciding, oh we'll keep her so let's line up on the right side of these issues, the right side of these issues according to her, isn't necessarily going to keep her in the church either. She may be a generation, but her children are going to be like, what kind of weird growing up did you have that this was somehow important to you because, again, up to the top of her argument. So what if you go to church and you do all these things in church, what really matters is politics. So many are sort of lighting out for the territories, and just recently I found this YouTube channel God is Gray. And as I mentioned in my video about the little Easter sermon from Pope Joe, I keep my eye on these and I watch these kinds of things because I genuinely want to know what their worldview is. I genuinely want to know how their religion works. I genuinely want to know their image of the future and the details of what make up that future. And well, the initial stage of let's say lighting out for the territories is usually, well, whatever I know it isn't that and so I'm going to go out and I'm going to make things up as I go along. And this is where we get into the platforms because church has a platform for many people. It's very in real life, it's sort of 360 degrees in terms of one's view of someone if there's a thick sense of community. But in comparison with the power of YouTube and TikTok and Instagram and Facebook and Twitter and Netflix and television and print media and I mean this constant bombardment we have from a commercial world, well, the church doesn't stand a chance in many cases and I've spoken about that before. And this is especially true of people who have been immersed in this world from a very early age. You know, those who watch my channel and I think about this often, I've seen more hours of me a week than you see your pastor or your priest if you have one. Is that a good thing? No, I don't know. Is it? And you know, I'm often not sure how I feel about that but it's just true because you know it's hardly right for me to point a finger at God is gray when I'm sort of running the same schtick, aren't I? And this gets into a video that I never really finally pulled off but I want to treat here because a big part of the church's sex crisis isn't really about sex at all. And I don't necessarily agree with Russell Moore that you know the church doesn't believe it, the church doesn't live it. That came through so clearly in Jordan Peterson's conversation with Jonathan Pigeot. And you know, Christianity wants to bear witness to the fullness of life but the inability to live its own sexual ethic up and down the hierarchy causes deep dissonance and I think provokes deconstruction. And 15-year-old Russell Moore wrestled with that and people wrestle with it now but again I don't think it's just simply that there are hypocrites in the church. It's that one would imagine if you have the truth then why would you go for these other things? Why would you be tempted by all of the things that people are tempted with? And so I think especially in American evangelicalism that attempted to compete with the commercial That is just enormously amplified now by Instagram and TikTok and YouTube and Facebook and all of this. The church tries to bill itself as well you're going to find the fullness of life here and especially in the days of the seeker church you would see a lot of that. I mean if there was any moniker that seeker churches would use it would be you know come here and you'll find life and life abundant and I remember in the 80s when I was an elder at Madison Square in Grand Rapids a young man started coming to church and I was an elder and so then he came before the council to join the church and you get to know the guy and he was about my age maybe a few years older and so I asked him why did you join the church? He said because I'd drive by here on Sunday and I'd look over here and everybody leaving church looked happy and so I decided I wanted to be happy and so I decided to join the church. Well guess what? Didn't last. Surprise surprise. Church didn't make him happy. It wasn't a happy pill. So I don't know that these crises necessarily are just about hypocrisy. It goes much much deeper than that. It's a fundamental skepticism as to whether church or Christianity can actually make good on the promises it even implicitly creates. Now having said that let's be equally critical to our new platforms. As many have noted with Facebook and Instagram and YouTube you become the product. We're all influencers. We're selling ourselves and you know the more you can like and subscribe the more you can run up your YouTube channel you know the more money that you can bring in the more merch you can sell the more ads that you know Google will be able to sell on your channel and again I'm participating in the same thing but social media I mean one of Jonathan Peugeot's comments you know here on YouTube I'm a being of light. Social media presents beings of light and so you know you watch God is gray and she was a model and so she's you know very physically attractive and she's clever and so it used to be that these were you know you look at again women's magazines in the news in the in the grocery store checkout aisle now I'm dating myself. Women's men why do women's magazines always have pictures of beautiful women on the cover. You would think well that would be for men's magazines and then there's you know few men's magazines like Men's Health that have pictures of men on the cover and why because what are we doing where we're looking we're looking at this image and wanting to participate in that image and so these are the platforms these are our guides it's a fabricated image to selectively project a particular vision of a preferred a preferred participatory reality and future it's deeply religious it's deeply religious and like I said these platforms very much compete with the church and churches of course have gotten into the act and churches have all sorts of you know just look at look at how seeker churches sold themselves in the 90s the 80s 90s and aughts you know do you want life abundant come here and well Instagram and Procter and Gamble and YouTube know that this is it's all the same business it's an easier sell it's an easier seduction and it's an easier con you know it's very difficult for in real life relationships to compete with this and you know people often say things like well you know Paul if I lived in Sacramento I'd go to your church and I think odds are no because in real life you know I'm here in this little corner of my office but the rest of my office is a mess and you know whatever we're doing in this quirky little church probably wouldn't suit you and you know well if I went to Living Stones me and Paul would be best friends well maybe maybe not I can't tell I don't know but on YouTube here I am face to face eyeball to eyeball here we are it's an easy sell it's an easy seduction it's an easy con but in real life real life is messy and so now we've got far more stars to navigate our life by now part of the reason I keep an eye on these outlets is because I think it's a natural evolutionary development that propositional statements almost religious confessions will emerge because you know everybody's talking in the moment everybody's responding everybody's projecting everybody's doing all these things at some point there's the desire to systematize it why because when it becomes propositional when it becomes out there when you have a list of rules when you have all of these things now suddenly you can form community and one of the things that much of this you know it was so interesting watching some of those God is great the God is great community and it's like you know we're you know even even just it's been fascinating watching the evolution and development of the bridges of meaning discord and it's I think it's been a rather successful discord but there's a high turnover rate you know I look at I there's some commenters Anselman who's been with us all along and and Vixen Dixon and you know some of you Jacob Harris some of you have been here the whole time maybe right from the start and that's a cool thing but there's churn in YouTube land and there's churn in discord and there's churn in Instagram world because at some point this crazy bearded dude becomes map territory and there's all these patterns that Vanderklay is doing he always comes back to his own hobby horses and it gets boring and there's a there's a new youtuber out there to watch and of course YouTube knows this which is you got to keep the new things coming because what they're really care about is that you watch YouTube that's what they care about and so in other words I'm the product YouTube is the platform so propositional statements emerge and that's part of the reason that I spent time exegeting the you know Pope Joe's little Easter sermon on Twitter because hey you're writing some things well that's helpful so because it's always easy to light out for the territories and say well churches don't do it well okay what does well my YouTube channel really I kind of doubt it you can't you know you can get propagandized a lot by a YouTube channel but it's not really enough of a life to live within and this is where you know this is where some of the some of the reality of churches and families and in real life relationships they're far stickier in that sense and you can you can obviously inhabit them to such a greater degree and and so we develop these propositional statements in order to fix ourselves relative to the changing and chaotic world and that's where we take on these labels so the deconstructed or the woke or the anti woke or the the fandom of this or the are of that and and we use words and vows and commitments and propositions to try to find fixed points to navigate by and to establish community within so this is sort of a natural process now one of the people that I follow on Twitter for a number of reasons Mike the therapist good morning my tweeps and to you Timothy Keller New York City self-appointed expert on sexuality Timothy Keller lately has been talking about sexuality quite a bit and well those you know Tim Keller is sort of in that even though the PCA is a pretty conservative denomination Tim Keller is sort of in that moderate space and evangelicalism and sort of people to his right are upset because he's he seems too comfortable with wokeness and people to his left well he belonged to the PCA so Presbyterian Church in America which is pretty conservative denomination so you know he's gonna get shellacked from both sides and you know I know many of you have told me about Tim Keller what you like and don't like about him yada yada yada the point is not him but Mike the therapist was a conservative pastor for 35 years it's part of the reason I follow him because he very much has gone towards the progressive post evangelical side of things and you know I caught I he caught my attention once when he was basically tweeting he was looking for a a good church in Sacramento and somebody who knew me recommended me and I thought I'm not sure you're gonna like what you find here at Living Stones and that's because most people don't necessarily like what they find at Living Stones because in some ways we're catering to a really tiny demographic and so we have a really tiny church and it's a it's a you know it's a church that I dearly love and it fits me perfectly but here it is so and and so now this guy has a seminary education he's got years under his years of therapy doing therapy under his belt and if you follow him on Twitter at sack writer you'll you'll get a very much an idea about what he thinks about human sexuality and it's pretty contemporary and if you're a conservative Christian you're not gonna go there but he actually wrote a blog post about a sexual ethical system and I thought okay well we're uh we're we're gonna do something here now now this little disclaimer at the top is new update so many people read the few paragraphs and assumed I'm building a case for polyamory I'm not this is because people aren't reading to see my key point which is further on if you're going to read the article to discover my proposal for a new sexual ethical system for Christians please read all of it before reacting now again I really appreciate this kind of effort because it's easy to poke holes at someone else's system it's much more difficult to develop your own system and so but again I think this is a natural part of the the development of this is a natural part of development what does the Bible say about polyamory so he talks about Bible stuff a little bit he argues that the only restriction in the Bible record regarding any form of open marriage is first Timothy 3 admonishing and overseer not to be a polygamist it never expands on the the concept of forbidding others to have multiple wives in short the biblical ether ethic regarding open marriage is not is non-consistent now is a very big discussion and actually next week I'm going to have a discussion with a high-status pastor in the Christian Reformed Church who has ideas different from my own and but he's a friend of John Van Donk he writes for the banner he now is retired and so does pulpit supply in different places and we're gonna talk about this question because there's a conservative report coming to Senate now 2022 got pushed back two years because of cove it a conservative report about Christian sexuality and it's a conservative report and I've spoken about that in some of my other videos and so we'll talk about that in that report but you get into the question of well how does the Bible speak and it's often the case that people look for the Bible and just sort of look for the rules and lift the rules up from the Bible and say well these are the Bible rules and that's sort of against the backdrop of I made this comment when I talked to the Friends of Abe the other night that's not on YouTube that's over on Twitch I don't have a twitch channel but that's over on their twitch channel people often assume that the way the Bible works is it's a list of rules and if you follow those rules then God will bless you or reward you with heaven and if you break those rules then God will punish you in this life or the next life and that's sort of the implicit filter that people sort of bring to the Bible and so you you sort of sift the rules out of the Bible and hold them up and if you do that you get sort of strange answers and this goes back to my point about I don't think we're so much looking for rules I think we as human beings navigate much more by images and visions of life and I did a video a while ago I should probably pick up that series again did a video a while while ago about the sex lives of the patriarchs and I should say do one about the Mosaic Code it's kind of helpful when I do these things if they sort of align with my Sunday preaching because then I don't have to do a whole lot of exegetical work for a video and a lot of exegetical work for the sermon it's nice when they sort of come together so I can do one exegetical work and then from it do a video and do a sermon you know I'm always looking for ways to sort of streamline and co-generate between the sermon and the videos but I would argue that well I would argue that the Bible that a sexual ethical systems that emerge within Christianity certainly do so in conversation with the Bible but usually also in conversation with a whole bunch of other things going on and it's an enormously complex thing everyone has an ethic but not everyone has an ethical system and I think is a belief in how one should act and again should towards one end should towards this vision of a happy and fulfilling a good life let's say you can have an ethic that allows you to tell the truth one day and then not tell the truth the next day but because this is not a consistent ethic we would say it's not an ethical system I think I'm not sure about that I think it's more an ethical system usually tells you when you can tell the truth and when you can lie so in other words it's it's you should tell the truth generally but if the Nazis come to your house asking if you are hiding Jews and this is actually a not uncommon debate in the Christian from church earlier on because Dutchman hate Jews during the war I define an ethical system as a series of beliefs regarding a particular behaviors that are consistent with themselves okay that's sort of a system therefore if you have an ethical system about telling the truth that system should apply to all situations or at least the the system should be able to delineate situations according to the rule let me give an example of a difference between an ethic and an ethical system I might believe that it's wrong to kill that's an ethic I would not and do not kill anybody but I widely but how widely do I apply the ethics and I'm not really I don't really agree with his ethical while he describes an ethical system here that's the problem with most ethical systems most systems of behavior are internally inconsistent at least from a logical philosophical point of view why is it wrong to kill people some people but not others and again that's sort of the ethical system to delineate when killing is correct and when killing is not right and again for many of these things most of the time it's not right but under circum certain consist certain situations it's justified why is it wrong to have sex one day and then it's not wrong a day later in case of someone who might be single and then gets married most people will see to justify the complexity and variations of their ethical systems by explaining the exceptions we will never be free from doing this not even those who believe in so-called biblical sexual ethic can I get away with it let me show you how this happens the first paragraph I noted the question of polyamory the idea that all sex should be between one husband male and one wife female is the standard teaching of much of the church for much of the church's existence that's right and part probably when I talk to these CRC preachers again it's it's easy to say this rule and it's a very simple rule which actually has a lot in its favor this standard now again standards are often aspirational people often fail them and in the system you understand what to do with failure and how to approach them and so on and so forth but but one of the benefit of traditional Christian sexual ethic is that the rule itself is quite simple that's a real benefit for the rule and when I look at people who are trying to create other systems and now systematize it I say okay if you want to advocate for another rule you're going to have to show me how that rule is superior all right and not just well the Christian sexual ethic is difficult yeah I get that the Christian sexual ethic is aspirational and many people fail it yeah we've already known that but the Christian sexual ethic should be discarded okay what is the new ethic what is the new rule or they're gonna be multiple rules well let's see there are many examples of prominent men in the Bible who married more than one woman yep that's right and in addition several bill Bible characters had sex with sanctioned sex slaves that's right we talked about the the sex lives of the patriarchs before when David raped Bathsheba that's an interesting use of the word there because he can make a really good argument that Bathsheba was not and there was a there was a power imbalance there a pretty significant one so that Bathsheba really couldn't say no maybe we don't know that so rape is a little strong and and had her husband killed yes God sent prophet to confront David and in that confrontation this is what Nathan says then Nathan said to David you are that man this is what the Lord your God of Israel says I anointed you king over Israel and delivered you from the hands of Saul I gave you your master's house to you and your master's wives into your arms I gave you all Israel and Judah and all of this had been too little I would have given you more in other words David could have had more wives but and this is where you get into the complexity of ethics and biblical narrative because a lot of what the biblical narrative often does is well these things are permissible but then it shows the consequence of them in other words if you say well the Bible just says well having multiple wives and you know say marrying two sisters which later the Mosaic cold code prohibits and then using slaves in order to get more children which again happens in the case of Jacob and Leah and Rachel the Bible is condoning this no it's not really condoning it because the Bible also shows that there are negative consequences along these lines and any reading of Jacob's family is that it's an unhappy family and if you go back to James my friend when we're doing the the generational handoff video whose brother is a missionary in Africa who noted that many times he has men come to him and they're just you know polygamy is a curse they they took on more wives and now none of these wives are happy and yeah you know if it's hard enough to keep one wife happy two is way harder than it's just it's way more than double so this is where you can't just sort of shake out the Bible and get a bunch of rules and paste them on the board and say okay this these are the rules doesn't really work that way what can we say about all this simply that the Bible does not present a consistent or relevant ethical system regarding sexuality and I think I would debate that that I would say that if you don't just sift out all the rules but sort of look at the narrative there are I'd say the elements of a sexual ethic and over time that distilled basically into this rule of a this very small rule one man one woman for life there are the boundaries it's it's a over time the rule emerged and of course now the question is well maybe that's a bad rule all right patriarchy everyone believed in patriarchy again these would all make interesting conversations ancient Near East focus on sexuality virginity did not focus virginity did not focus on sex it focused on inheritance misogyny women were hated in the days the Bible was written that's a little broad but they were also loved some men were hated too where they all were all women hated because they were they were hated every time a daughter was born did did did the family hate that daughter I mean that's just really too broad the writers of scripture not only had a very low opinion of women they hated anyone in the LGBT community you're pretty much projecting what you conceive of as a community back there they hadn't they didn't have those categories so okay so how do we build an ethical system well good question because you've thrown all that stuff out so why even and and this is where I find many of these people very interesting because they don't want to give up sort of the Christian thing and I think part of that goes to Tom Holland because they have a I think they have an intuitive sense that they are deriving an ethic from the Bible but they're not really able to connect this general ethic of let's say love of neighbor and care for the dispossessed all of that and be able to connect it then down to human sexuality or maybe that's exactly what they're doing with their system Christians have seen the problem with applying the Bible to many of our ethical systems money power marriage reproduction government criminal justice human interactions etc there have been many proposals to the centuries on how to build an ethical system which keeps some of the good teachings of the Bible but does not lean too heavily on them okay how are we judging what the good teachings of the Bible are so in other words we've got the Bible here and then we've got this idea of goodness over here and we're using that to critique the Bible and at some point you might ask well why would you keep the Bible at all you already have your idea of good now again Tom Holland will say well that's kind of came from the Bible and if you sort of lose the roots of it you might lose the flower as well but that sort of haunts this kind of project one of the most profound attempts at this came from John Wesley he spent years seeking to apply biblical truths to modern-day ethical problems mid-modernity is a little while ago now his use on holiness required required that our faith be be lived out ethically and consistently what's also interesting in these movements are that the the roots and even different aspects of tradition still work their way through the Anabaptists still look like Anabaptists the reforms still look like reform the the Wesleyan still look like Wesleyan it's very interesting how this thing works but he found that many in his day had widely differing views on what the Bible said about just any topic so while keeping the Bible principle centrally added three sources of revelation and building an ethical system tradition experience and logic by tradition he meant traditions of the faith community one finds themselves in by experience he meant the experience a Christian the the experiences a Christian has which line up with the Bible and by logic he's referring to the mind which has been enlightened by the Holy Spirit to grasp excuse me deeper truths thus even with these four sources of input to build an ethic Wesley still saw all of them revolving around the Bible and biblical truths and here's obviously something he means a lot of because he's got it in bold I contend that this isn't going to work with sexual ethics you certainly you can certainly hold if you like but the church's history with strange teaching on sexuality and moral purity lead me in a slightly different direction okay so a a a departure now now again let's be fair here churches have departed from things before the New Testament departs from the from the from the practice of circumcision and from dietary practices and and again I'm not saying this in the sense that you shake the Bible and you pick out the laws and you put them on your your white board which is often again how people argue with these things but circumcision was a fairly big deal and you know in the Protestant Reformation there's a fairly big transition too in in many of these cases I think we can still have four sources of input for an ethical system including the Bible and here's how I fashion it this is interesting it's interesting that he keeps the Bible and and and one might ask how exactly because again if there's anything we know about biblical interpretation biblical interpretation itself has a tremendously long history polysemy allegorical interpretation you know symbolic interpretation now Jonathan Pajot stuff so but he wants to keep the Bible okay so we can use the Bible as a source of ethics and sexuality if we strip away patriarchy homophobia misogyny and virginity okay not sure why those but okay and again I don't I'm not trying to be critical here because what he's trying to do is very difficult and unlike most people who are just sort of lighting out for the territory and making up stuff as they go he's actually trying to systematize something which again is an important step of development if you want to create a community and a community of understanding so let's not be too critical if you don't agree with him but it's fair also to weigh it tradition in the sense that we rely on a trusted community of people whose practices of sexuality are consistent and respectful so there's a couple more values consistency and respect I think again it's consistency that drives us to try to develop an ethical system we can certainly we can use certain traditions we trust okay why do we trust them experience by this I mean collected experience of all humans all humans with regard to sexuality in our day we are much more refined as a society on what should and should not be allowed in sexual relationships the me too movement did not start the discussion on sexual assault consent and misogyny it certainly sought to apply emerging community standards worldwide to everyone okay in many of the things we're dealing with here here pluralism is the big deal this is another viability for a video but the the critical drinker had a I thought a really good video on why canon matters and I might do a much fuller treatment on that video but I highlighted it on twitter this morning because when critical drinker not only sums up the state of western not only sums up the state of western religiosity as wrestling through canon now in his case canon in terms of star trek and star wars and but also a nice little explanation about much of the history of religion the answer the answer now I did a conversation with Andrea with the bangs and Jonathan Peugeot which will be coming out quite soon I talked a little bit more about this then the answer to why those who wish to adapt the canon never really just come up with new franchises is in Peugeot's parasitic storytelling and like after the wars of the Protestant Reformation philosophers tried to outflank the renaissance return to the text with enlightenment empiricism and rationalism the reason behind the rise of Jordan Peterson has to do with the search for foundations and so this attempt to come up with a new sexual ethic is is very much a search for foundations so you've got the bible tradition experience and logic reason by which I mean that ethical standards need to make sense in a faith community and have and be reasonable to apply I think probably when you're talking rationality here you're talking more consistency if the faith community is one part is a part of if the faith community one is a part of does not apply logic or reason to sexual ethics one might find a difficult a different faith community okay it should be obvious that this opens the door to many different ethical systems regarding sexuality I'm not sure how many there really are and so you know one of the things that I think about with Peugeot's parasitic processing is and especially with Jordan Peterson's work you might look at you might find tremendous diversity in the world regarding sexual systems and ethical systems but I don't know that there are necessarily that many systems there are a lot of variations but you look at for example the enduring nature of marriage and I don't think we're going to do away with marriage I think it's just simply too functional and and even Christianity does an adaptation of marriage okay or you could turn around and say well marriage is in the Garden of Eden so the world does a an adaptation of of original marriage if if that's if that's the way you'd rather look at it but if you think about it that's where we currently are the even this is even true within the Church of Jesus Christ there are elements of acceptance of LGBTQ community and other groups which do not accept LGBTQ as valid again there's a lot of short short handing here some faith groups allow for prematosexual expression others do not and again it's interesting that we call it sexual expression instead of sexual behavior and that might also be in jeopardy I was watching a video that someone posted on the discord server and it was from an Israeli therapist and it was a pretty dark view of the world in terms of what he sees happening but there's widespread acceptance of the following well widespread within his little bubble consent must be applied to all sexual relationships true honesty and integrity are vital to sexual healthy sexuality and healthy you know healthy is one of these words that points to an ideal but again true the practice of safe sex is paramount for everyone safe within what parameters you mean physically safe you mean avoiding pregnancy avoiding STDs do you mean emotional safety sexuality with minors is always wrong now historically see and I think I think actually we're seeing the seeds of losing the fourth and I think it's well it's when we get to talking about consent because actually I think all of these are in jeopardy by the collapsing of the system in other words it could be that this very simple rule regarding marriage and sexuality actually creates these four rather than the other way around that's just an inkling I have most of these conclusions do not come directly from the bible but rather from experience logic and dialogue of interested communities to which I apply my central idea the bible itself is only marginally helpful in creating a complete ethical system for sexuality I think that's rather strong given the rest of the piece I because I don't know that you find these four in the bible I'm not saying the four are wrong but I'm not and and this is you know one of the big atheist arguments about the bible you know I'm just saying that's that that seems true we should stop trying to make it the corner piece of such a system okay now we're getting into Protestantism because obviously in a Roman Catholic context the corner piece you know the bible functions differently in that tradition than it does in Protestantism so again in many ways this is a this is a Protestant this is a Protestant crisis and so then he has this little outtake that you can tweet if you want to pass this around let's talk a little bit about consent because actually I don't think consent is anywhere near the bulwark that we think it is and I think actually we are very quickly eroding what we would imagine consent to be any act of consent is nested within it has nested within it an implied commitment to the future for that consent okay let's say I'm single and let's say I am not a Christian and I'm on a date with a young woman and she's attractive that's why I asked her out and she bought a lobster dinner we'll play with some tropes here and I ask her to come back to my apartment and I want to have sex with her and let's say you know we can go back to that New York Times piece about ghosting and maybe I should bring that in she agrees and you know we do the deed and then the next day she has misgivings or let's say I have misgivings this is what I wanted this is what I pursued and the next day I'm unhappy I did it in other words well I sort of signed a contract and implicit in that contract is I'm not going to renege and this obviously has been a big deal in terms of college campuses with respect to drinking with respect to all kinds of things and even with buying a new car you know when you buy a new car in California say there's no cooling off period in California which means once you sign on the line the car is yours now there's a lot of slipperiness with respect to sexuality so here's this piece that I had read before he asked permission to touch but not to ghost and and this gets into the fact that you know actually a lot of what we do is in fact tied to things that aren't terribly time conscious you know I think about this with respect to all the conversations I have you have a good conversation with someone and you both find it satisfying you sort of want another conversation you have another conversation you sort of want a friendship and then you have a friendship and well now you know maybe you're going to be buddies and you know this is that is completely outside the realm of sexuality perhaps but but let's think about let's think about sexuality so let's say you find someone attractive and you find them attractive you want to be with them you want to be in their presence you want to talk to them and as long as things keep developing along that line you don't sort of hit a snag they say something it's like I don't want to talk to you anymore you go your separate ways things seem to be progressing and then well then there's more desired intimacy and then there's touching and then there's hugging and then there's kissing and then there's you know there's a all of these things are are building anticipation of a future because there's there's something out there that we desire to grasp and attain to and there's a permanence to it you know again I haven't watched I kind of got fed up with the bachelor but you watch the bachelor and the bachelorette and and it's just it's just endless dialogue about finding the one and the one will be forever and our love will last and come what may and and on and on and on and on and on and and it's like wow you sure are you sure are expecting this relationship to carry a lot of freight having been married over 30 years I can tell you when the relationship has to carry a lot of freight it means you're going to put a lot on your back because you're going to have to do a lot of forgiving and you're going to have to do a lot of self asking for forgiveness and and and and and and and in other words there's sort of a progression that all of these things lead into and then you know intimacy then leads to well well maybe we can have children together and it just snowballs into the future and you know a culture of consent one would argue should be less about self-protection more about genuine care for the other person and again she means more than just an emotional care well I care about you well if you cared about me you would have called okay if you cared about me you would have shared your money okay if you cared about me you would have given my time you would have given your time and attention okay and there's there's almost no end to this so there's you know there's a lot going on here consent is not just a little thing there are layers of implied contracts in there and part of the way it goes with human beings is that well I I said yes then but now I think that was a bad idea well too bad for you no now I can you know are there legal ways you know one of the things that came up with the with the college um title nine stuff was you know men were getting you know title nine by the college and basically then after some level of sexual contact if they had any suspicion that the girl was having second thoughts basically get to the title nine office before they do do a preemptive strike on your regret regarding consent well if only there was a if only there was a way that we could in a much deeper way establish consent and there would probably have to be witnesses and there might be a ceremony and well you know where this is going and a lot of this also has to do with identity that consent also happens in a context of identity now now again part of the real question going on right now in communities that I talk to is children and transgender issues you know it was amazing to me when my children were under 18 you know how much I had to be there because of the laws because under 18 they couldn't provide consent but then now in some of these cut out areas they seem to have total autonomy and a kindergartener can decide to transition and if that child makes all the right words all the adults have to sort of line up and more and more of these cases are ending up in courts because well can that child actually give consent consent is is actually a function of identity and identity is a function of an agent agent arena relationship and again with more traditional societies part of what marriage was about was creating an arena and an identity within that arena from which other issues such as consent were understood. A while ago Glenn Lowry had a very interesting interview with Megan Dom and it was very interesting because Megan Dom is sort of someone a journalist who has been making some noise about some of these areas and she told a story about when she was a young a young woman single trying to you know work her way up a corporate ladder there was an older man in the practice now she was young single attractive an older man a little bit lonely he might have been single I don't know I don't remember the details that well but basically he would keep asking her lunch and she'd keep saying yes and nothing ever happened there's no quid pro quo anything like that you know sort of a mentorship and you know she had to start asking herself well what exactly am I doing saying yes to these lunches and yes to these dinners and he never crossed the line he didn't do anything untowards at some point I think he might have asked her to his apartment or something like that and she said no and there was never any repercussions nothing like that ever happened but she had to look at herself and say now why am I really going to dinner with this man don't I sort of want to get something out of him aren't I actually engaging in a transaction and almost every relationship has a transactional quality about it both parties want something and and sex is a part of that transaction and it's a part of the negotiation and so I don't know that consent is really going to be able to do all of the heavy lifting that people imagine it can do and another piece of this is that civilization's clock speed is way slower than one human life you know and I'm old enough to remember the 70s when well yeah divorce the kids will be better off and just recently rewatched Mrs. Doubtfire because you know one of my kids in the family had never seen it so yeah let's watch Mrs. Doubtfire and I watched that movie with different eyes because it's all sort of well just yeah mommy and daddy don't love each other anymore but they both still love you now the longer this divorce culture goes on the more people are realizing that well we're formed and shaped and and in a lot of ways and and in a lot of ways we're reacting to negative things and we're reacting to negative things by sort of making things up as we go along we have no idea what the consequences of those things are going to be again I was looking at the God is Grey channel on YouTube and came across this one of her top videos you know the unmarried Christian pregnant and that's okay and she talked about how you know before it was you know I'm I'm a Christian but I'm having sex with my boyfriend and well now well suddenly there's an oops and you know how does she feel about it and in that video she even says you know I guess I understand why Christians you know emphasize no sex before marriage because no birth control is foolproof and and here we are but hey it's all great and okay okay now what about five years from now an integral change in my life happened when I was in I was I was in my early years in seminary I was single I had met the woman who would become my wife and Lou Smedes was coming to Calvin Seminary to give the STOB lectures and I was you have to do these psych evaluations for seminary to make sure that you're not a psychopath or anything like that so I'm doing my psych evaluation and just talking to the therapist and and he made a comment about you know because I was one of the few single guys at seminary made a comment about you know there's something about making and keeping commitments and actually Lou Smedes lectures given at the STOB lecture and I still have the little pamphlet that that made it out there the copy of the copy of the lectures but one of the things that Lou Smedes said is that when you make a commitment you well basically you create a world and put it in new language this is one of the points that Peterson makes as well because you intentionally limit your options and did a conversation recently that might come on the channel with a woman who um yeah things didn't work out in her marriage as she would have liked but she made a commitment and she's actually sticking to the commitment and if she decides to share the video with all of you I anticipate a lot of people are going to watch this video and think why is she doing this she has a right to go out and be happy and so I push her on some of these things because I'm not not to change her mind because I very much respect the decisions that she's made against bitterness but but because this is very countercultural because we we sort of live in a time and place when we have so many options we have it so good we're so wealthy we're so affluent we can kind of make things up as we go along and sort of deal with the consequences without the kind of draconian calamities that would have happened in in ages past but we don't know all the consequences and this this comes through in this book you know the adult children of divorce find their voice because they write about just what happened and Andrew Root was on the channel you know wrote a really wonderful book about divorce children of divorce and see it's not just us it's the child and I really wonder 20 30 40 years from now when the children that are sort of birthed into this very chaotic system what they're going to have to say and and even not only what they're going to be able to consciously say but you know there's a lot of attention paid to people being anxious about marriage because of of what has sort of formed around us in terms of expectations of marriage and divorce and again you can't watch any season of the bachelor and bachelorette at least I can't and not be tremendously impressed by the fear and and this comes through in this woman's video about well we're not necessarily going to get married because when it's when we marry that's really really it and it's like you're putting a lot of pressure on the will and actually what you need is a platform and a community and again some of you are going to say yeah but you know I'm not saying divorce isn't sometimes the better path I'm not saying that but I'll tell you as a pastor when you sit with people and they ask you what they should do I very tell them very seldom tell them what I think they should do I far more tell them well I think this is what the bible says and I think this is what I've learned in life and so I'm gonna I'm gonna tell you and again I hope I hope this this young woman who I had the conversation with agrees to share the conversation because it's profound when you look at someone who decides to take on a path that is personally costly for the welfare of their child but even for the welfare of someone who has done them wrong that's really at the heart of the gospel I found on the post calvin site a an article by someone who was just really angry the article is entitled I don't know I don't know why you avoid the we don't own them shit change my mind and this was responding to that incident with the table that I spoke about with with Brett Sockold and and and Kale Zeldin and just just anger just anger you know we don't owe folks a debate we don't owe them we don't owe it to them to entertain their ideas and theology of interest of promoting this free exchange of various ideas and viewpoints it's like it's the it's the it's like it's the it's the it's the it's the under group that wants the conversation because they hope it'll change it's the over group that has the ability to just say I ain't talking about it that's just the dynamics of that's just the power dynamics and you know I thought of I thought of a generation before back in the 80s I thought of you know a good old twisted sister and we ain't gonna take it and it was funny because the father you know clean your room and I thought someone doesn't surprise nobody sort of memed this into a Jordan Peterson meme but I again I I want to I want to I want to thank those who are trying to build an ethic because okay it's given us something to talk about we have to consider this clock speed and I think it's important to have the challenge to say all right so you want to displace one ethic with a new one good now we're talking and now we have something to talk about because things are on paper so we'll evaluate it but this is in fact a crisis and I think in many ways the church has to learn to be patient and live its truth and embody it how to how to convert maybe I should read some of what I wrote about monasticism the benedict option is out there a good friend of mine wrote me and basically shared with me he's in his churches he's sort of starting a a you know a group of well here's a rule of life let's all covenant together and agree to live this rule of life and I think that's a I think that's a right and good way but I don't know that it will be enough Protestantism particularly in the Swiss Reformation that spawned both Calvin and the Anabaptists attempted to convert the city into a monastic movement you can read about that in the book reformations the role of the secular magistrate is the division between the magisterial reformers like Calvin and the anti-magisterialism of the Anabaptists in some ways the Anabaptists lost the fight and over time won much of the war the west eventually adopted a more Anabaptist posture when the American experiment was tried an experiment and that experiment pretty much won the west monasteries addressed the poor cities in the wake of the swift reformation took over deciding who were the deserving poor to help even in the catholic parts of Europe it was the magistrate that would employ the sword to burn or punish heretics church and state work together hand in glove sometimes not always in many ways the Protestant Reformation where it took off did so because some areas were done doing Rome's bidding and sending Rome its money and having the church land and the wealth set aside for secular from secular youth use there was no escaping the political aspect of the Reformation churches now in some ways once again agree once again seek the high walls of the monastery as the state no longer is willing to partner and the culture itself seems increasingly hostile the group that wants to host the conversation between myself and Peugeot in Thunder Bay Ontario is called Urban Abbey it's an old converted Baptist church and you can watch my video with with Scotland Morrison and the conversation about that that was up a couple of years ago his sister is now a regular on bridges of meaning discord she's a therapist who took part in our generational handoff conversation which I have the link there the roots of urban abbey are squarely in the revivalist evangelicalism it's helpful to remember that monasticism 1.0 was not alone it was always a segment of the larger church project it's important to reflect on the whole history of the church's complex relationship with the monastic order plus those other efforts the church sort of inherited the Roman Empire in the west as the old empire collapsed and then had to navigate the barbarian conversions and always modulating relationships with power it should be remembered that the empire in the east lasted a long time further and that the church and state were in some ways not too seem a not too seamless whole until the collapse of both under the weight of Islam which too was a whole and one of the things about Christianity is that it does in some ways really struggle with okay now you've got the power everyone struggles with that though it's always in a sense easier to be the in some ways to be the pure minority because once once an ethic has to be deployed it's difficult I have no question a new monasticism is both inevitable and necessary but it's only part of the way forward just like in the past it was only part of what was on the menu for the church the monastics were in many ways the saving ways the savings account of the church of the church offering credibility it needed as the rest of the church far larger than the monastic wing wrestled with corruption and nearly everything else and so again part of addressing Russell Moore I think will probably be a new monasticism that here is a cadre of truly committed spiritual athletes who can exemplify and bear witness to the faith and that's the function that that monasticism had in the church for a very long time now again really at the height of its power then and also in in a to a degree addressing corruption both within and outside the monasteries the attempt was to make the whole city holy and it's a you know it's a it's a very interesting history the monastics were in many ways a savings account of the church offering credibility it needed even as the rest of the church far larger than the monastic wing wrestled with corruption and nearly everything else the protestant reformation in some ways rated that savings account quite literally in the iconoclastic efforts but tried to embody it out in the world we are the heirs of that attempt especially in America which is the offspring of the reformed utopians in the northeast and the successful drug dealers of tobacco in Virginia plus of course the rest of the non-conformists that were in between Pennsylvania New Jersey the you know Dutch Calvinists the earlier ones I think the new monasticism has come has come to continue has to continue to develop and it will but it's only a part of what the church needs to work on because as was true in the past it will only be a part of the whole so I do spend a lot of time thinking about the church and asking okay what must the church do how can we encourage our people to live what do we do with the the collapse of the Christian sexual ethic in much of the church and how to respond so more than that when I have my conversation next week with uh with Clay and John so thanks for watching leave a comment