https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=gl_4RBA7LUw

 crazy times we're living in. Yeah, they are. Yeah. It's, you know, it's hard to know where to begin. It was just crazy and then Ruth Bader Ginsburg's like, oh, now we're gonna have this fight, and then Trump gets COVID it's like, oh, it's like, and we're still, we're still weeks away from this election and it's like, oh, whatever happens may it not be close I mean may it not be hanging Chad's I don't know if as a society we can handle that level. So, yeah, I don't know either and that's the, that's, that's why I reached out. Right. Is, seems like we're in for 31 different October surprises because it seems like each day of October is just delivering us a new bombshell. Yeah, and that political report that came out I think on the first that trend line worries me a lot that since 2017 I think was when the polling started. And I think there's a number of respondents who said it was okay, at least a little bit of their side engaged in political violence to achieve their end went from 8% across four parties to now 33 and 36%. Yeah. For each party. And, you know, I would hope that that is heavily balanced towards the, you know, the minimum viable justification. Or I guess the maximum viable justification and that like, oh, I could see a world where I might be driven to this right they're not necessarily. Most people probably still aren't ready, ready to, you know, jump out of their seats but the fact that that trend line is increasing, and that we've seen political violence. This year already. Yeah. So, I reached out to you and I want to be mindful of that you know I'm the guest here I'm. Yeah, go right ahead. This is your house. I figured since since I could kick us off with that political report and the in our first conversation we, we came to the agreement of working terms that talking is better than hitting. And, and then we got into some really interesting sort of numinous style conversations about, you know, metaphysics and what that means psychologically and sociologically, which is all very fascinating but in the intervening couple of weeks, I'm now finding myself trying to very very concretely about what can we do right now today tomorrow the next day over the course of the next four weeks up to election day. And then, regardless of the results of the presidential election what can we do between then and inauguration day and what we do, moving forward to try and get that percentage of people who are ready to engage in political violence. What can we do to flatten that curve, because I see that as being catastrophic on a much shorter time scale than I would have hoped like we talked last time about the In the Protestant Reformation CS Lewis's complaint that it should have been handled by good friends over pipe smoke in the, in the study, but instead it happened in the battlefield. And to whatever extent we can preempt that sort of that sort of unrest here in the I want to, I want to do it and you seemed like a good person to talk to, to brainstorm, you know, what we can all do as individuals and maybe if you know of any larger scale efforts or, you know, who's doing good work in this space that you've seen figured you might have some input there. Yeah. Well, I think, I think one of the places to begin I think you asked the question. Well, when we say concretely. There's a big difference between I and we, because concretely what can I do, you know, I have a degree of agency and control over what I do. A lot of what if we, let's say by, let's say someone like Jonathan heights premise that I agree with that part of part of why we are where we are now is due to the rise of social media. When I look at how people use Facebook or Twitter, because those are the two platforms that I'm, I'm on. And so, I think a lot of people are asking, a lot of people are asking how can we blank. And that might mean how can we reelect Donald Trump or how can we avoid reelection, how can we. And so I think, I think a lot of this. Has to get into creating a context where we respect the agency of other people. Because I think, I think you and I should ask the question. At what point do people give up talking and start hitting or worse. Because that's, I mean, so if we begin with that political argument or that political piece about people just thinking out loud about the justification for violence. I think it's really helpful to ask, where is that line in people's lives. You know what, and this sounds, I mean people. We don't talk this way in public in polite society very often, but you might ask yourself if you're married, or if you're living with someone. At what point would you hit your spouse. At what point is it. Would you find it justifiable to hit your spouse now I think a lot of people would say, it's never justifiable that's what they would say that lots of people who say it's never justifiable probably still do it. And so when it gets into this question of, well what can I do, well one of the things that I can do is, for example, adopt adopt a personal ethic of non violence, let's say. And I think part of the reason. Dr. King's movement was so powerful. Because they, you know, there are a lot of there was there was there are a lot of different movements going on during the civil rights movement. Part of the reason that movement changed the country as deeply as it did was people saw that body of people were willing to have their blood shed, rather than to shed the blood of others. And the Gandhi, you know, Luther, Dr. King was borrowing from Gandhi. There. I mean, Gandhi asked, how can we release, how can we have the British Empire release control. And I think it's a good use question whether you know that only worked because the British were there, or. Interesting questions but we've got the nation we have right now. And I think part of what we need is a visible witness of people being willing to seriously not use violence to pursue an end. Well, as we talked about before. Part of where 2020 is different from the 1950s and the 1960s. I wonder, to what degree, the symbolic imaginary world that they lived in in the 50s and 60s, and we live in in 2020 has changed to the point where it's less understandable for people in 2020 than it was in the 50s and 60s because Christianity is that much less I don't know. I just threw a whole bunch of stuff at you. Yeah, I mean, yeah yeah yeah yeah there's, there's a lot that I think the personal ethic of non violence is definitely central. One thing, you know, there's that old chestnut that you know, defining the problem correctly is the lion's share of the effort of solving it. So, maybe if we can dig into making sense of the problem statement for our current moment. We know we know the result that we're trying to avoid. But you, you lose ends to Dr King and Gandhi are, I think they're the right inspiration in terms of a personal ethic. The other thing that I'm seeing is that the situation we're in doesn't doesn't line up with sort of the asymmetry at play. In the case of Dr King and in the case of Gandhi, because at those moments in history, it was a movement, demanding that we get a recompense from the state, or, you know, airing its grievance to a state level actor. Right. Whereas, right now the thing that's really keeping me up at night is, you know, it's actually has nothing to do with Trump or Biden. So, with, I'm kept up at night thinking about people that are kept up at night about Trump or Biden. And the fact that I know that there's enough people that are lying awake on both sides of that coin that whichever loses, I think that turns into a feedback loop of violence. And it's almost immaterial, which side starts it for me. Because at this point we're already so far. We're in Hatfield and McCoy land. Maybe not. I might have my own personal opinions about which political entity, I'm more irate with on a, on any given day. You know, I've got my personal background there. In terms of individuals who are, you know, befriending people befriending each other on Facebook who are refusing to show up to dinner and, and, you know, trimming off their real social connections, based on politics which I think is, is probably the first, like That was the warning sign to me in the wake of the 2016 election was people saying if you voted for Trump, don't ever talk to me again. Right. I saw that, you know, since I was coming from the left but you know there was absolutely this feedback loop of people self selecting and this facilitated by social media into camps that would would accept no, they would entertain no thoughts that anyone in the other camp might have I don't have a point about any like you. If you voted for Trump and you said the sky was blue, and God, excuse me. I almost turned a phrase there. But, you know, you know, if you voted for Trump you say the sky is blue, then, damn it. The sky is green. Right, that that's sort of the attitude that people would have. And that's different than the King and Gandhi thing. And I don't do you know of any historical parallels that might map better to that sort of situation where it's it's like, it's a grassroots civil unrest. It doesn't actually seem to have a top down cause. Other than propagandized. I think When I think about this. There's a few things that I think of number one, having a lot of experience in religious communities does give me a sense of how this plays out in individual lives. Because in religion in deeply religious communities people will cut, cut off sons and daughters for not going to church or going to the wrong church or marrying a spouse. How so that that that illuminates one aspect of the dynamic. And this is different in that we're seeing this scaled out on a political level over far larger numbers of people that's that's part of the difference here whereas when this happens in a community and a religious community there doesn't tend to be the fracture lines don't travel anywhere near as far they're they're very deep but they're very small. And in terms of the dynamics of that, you know, I certainly have experience with that. I have a lot of the questions involve the, you know, it's helpful to remember that in the 70s. Now I'm old enough to remember the 70s somewhat I was born in 63. So I was a kid in the 70s for the most part and then a teenager. You know there were bombings, you know, you go back and you look at you know the weather underground there were bombings that were happening in the United States if you go to Alcatraz, there was a. There was a community and indigenous community that that basically took up residence, nothing was happening on the island of Alcatraz and they took it over, you know occupy Alcatraz back in the day. America was deeply divided. But the divisions again were different, and I think both parties. Ironically, both parties were less pure and more diverse than they are now. So that's another that's that's another point of data that America was more violent in the 70s. And then over the Vietnam War and then over other issues just in general that were more diffuse. There were, there were bombings that were happening in buildings in New York City and in many places in the country, you know you have the Symbionese liberation army going around Patty Hearst, and there were many other groups like that. And the question, you know when I hear people anxious about a civil war. You know it's a good argument made that the American Revolution was a civil war in a sense because what happened was that before. Before an actual civil war could take place between the those who wanted to stay British colony and those who wanted independence at a very low level there needed to be sort of a sorting out and so people started to relocate. And I see some of that today, people are, you know, people are leaving California and moving when people leave California they tend to move to Nevada, Idaho, Texas. And so there is some of that purifying and homogenizing of areas. I don't know. Let's, let's play a scenario out. Let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let's say, let e want to occupy in America and what difference would it make in many countries around the world. If you want to have a coup d'etat, you know, a fact a fraction of the army takes the presidential palace. I mean, so I'm just kind of running through my imagination of how I've seen these things work out in other places and I lived in the Dominican Republic for an amount of time and there weren't any revolutions there but there were pretty regular revolutions in Haiti and which missionaries would have to come over the border to the DR to wait for things to settle down. So I don't part of part of what makes me think we're not going to see what we've seen in a lot of other countries in terms of a mass mobilization and and military style movement is the fact that unlike what I've seen in so many other places in the world, so many Americans have so much to lose via civil unrest. And, and so where I think you can have kids dressing up in black and bullying people in restaurants and walking through neighborhoods. A lot of the population in the United States is quite accustomed to being left alone and having the lights on and having services provided and getting things their own way, and many of the revolutionaries that I see are really sort of lightweights. You know, these people who let's okay let's pick on the left a little bit more. The, these people who say, well I really am deeply disturbed about the level of white supremacy in America and, you know, and I was like, why don't you give up your job so a person of color can have your job. And I don't want to do that. You know, in many, in many ways, even, even so many radical people that the change they want. They're not willing to sacrifice anything for it, much less necessarily significantly put their life or freedom at risk. So I, I don't know if I share the level of anxiety you do about a total breakdown. I suspect that after the election, I mean, again, not too many years ago there was a group of people that occupied a national park. We just had a group of people that occupied a certain number of blocks in Seattle. When I look at these groups. I don't, I think frankly they are pampered Western kids who when push comes to shove really like their cell phones, and a lot of the things in life that they have grown accustomed to, and don't even hold a candle to many of the religious people that I have seen who didn't, they never took up arms in their causes of social justice or anti racism, but they did things like sacrificed their own financial futures in order to pursue a nonviolent vision of justice and reconciliation. I don't see that happening in the broader culture, hardly at all and so when it comes to the, you know it's it's it's very romantic to imagine going out into the street and punching a Nazi. But when the Nazi punches back. Well, what then, you know, and there just aren't that many real Nazis you can find to punch. I, I find I find that political poll deeply disturbing, but I also wonder the degree to which real Americans are actually going to go out and make the kinds of sacrifices to do things. I mean, the guy that was, you know, arrested in Seattle, and it wasn't in Seattle it was in, in Wisconsin I think, you know, took a gun out to this thing. This is a kid who made some really stupid I know now is probably going to sit in jail and get a very difficult lesson on reality. I don't know, I don't know, maybe convince me that I'm wrong or maybe I'm helping you sleep better I don't know where, where do you want to go with this I'm, I'm not convinced. We're at a precipice right now, like that because I don't see some of the other signs. Okay. That it's good for me to hear that psychologically. I'm not convinced, it just is with any other filter bubble online you can go down. I heard the term at the beginning of code called doom surfing, where she just you find you find yourself into the rabbit hole of the world is ending. But, you know, there's. I have. If I might, you know, hold up my cardboard sign and say the end is near. I'm really worried. I could see a future in which we're not at a precipice in the immediate term. Right. But I can all, I'm probably. In fact, I'm probably at 20 against us being at a precipice, but 20% is too damn high. Right. And to my thinking, the. What I don't see is a negative feedback loop in polarization. Right. If nothing ever stays the same everything's a dynamic system intention. And you've got this trend line of political polarization, dehumanization, willingness to engage in violence, going up. Unless at some point, it starts going down again. You do. You do. Reach precipice. Now that the tension going up, but I see it going up in a multiplicative sort of exponential style fashion, where it's not just going up at a steady rate. Everything is building upon itself. And in the political report they mentioned that, you know, there's, there's evidence to suggest that witnessing or knowing about violence tends to make people more likely to engage in violence, or at least be supportive of it psychologically. I'm probably completely bastardized, bastardizing the data there, or what the actual claim of the report was I probably should have kept my mouth shut on that. But, I guess the overarching theme is that what everyone thinks the stakes are. There's so many people who think that the stakes of this election are truly existential on both sides. So the, whoever the losers are, are not going to take it lightly. Now, so maybe you know, best case scenario is that you get a couple of weeks of people chanting of whatever whatever the losing side is, they go out they do their protest the chant, they get some energy out of their system. And then, you know, and then the energy is diffused, and we keep chugging along. I very much hope that that's the case. But I very much worry that, given what we've seen over the summer given the continued stress of coven, given the continued economic insecurity of so many people. And I think that's the thing that you mentioned, you know, Americans as a whole, have too much to lose from civil unrest. Right. And if you're P enough to still be employed, and you pay your electricity bill so that the lights stay on. And so the, and the fridge stays full, then that's true. I'm really worried that it, it doesn't take anywhere approaching 50 or 60 or 70% of the population to decide to ruin it for everybody. Right, so I think you're right that the vast majority of people would just as soon be left alone. What I'm concerned is that, you know, all it takes is 510% to to drastically change. You know, it only takes one shotgun shell through the whole of the boat to start the boat taking on water. And I'm worried that there's enough people who are enough on the down and outs and have been driven into really just a blind rage towards their towards the segment of their fellow citizens that we do run the risk of a positive feedback loop, and so I'm not going to do say and say that it's 100%, but it seems to be probable enough that at those he is coming, have an obligation to do something to lower the temperature. Yeah, yeah. I was when when Trump was when it was announced that Trump had contracted coven. I was heartened by Biden's stands stance, when he pulled his negative campaign ads. And he said, you know, my wife and I are, you know, praying for your speedy recovery from coven. You know that's that's leadership that's striking the right tone. I was, I was happy when. And again, the difficult that when when Trump made some, you know, kind comments about Ruth Bader Ginsburg. And people can, when, when you're suspicious, anything that the other side says you see through. You see through a lens, but I think part of, we began this we began this asking the question, What can we do. Panic is contagious desperation is contagious. And I think part of what leaders do our model. Leaders model the behavior that they want, at least their followers and hopefully more to emulate. So I think, I think part of what we need to do is have a degree of calm and, and, and express that, because what happens when people get anxious. You know, if you let's imagine that you're a child in a family and something is happening and kids obviously often get more anxious before their parents, parents may be feeling the anxiety but when there are kids around what do the parents do with the kids. They calm them down, but are. Yeah, they put on a calm face they say everything's going to be okay. You know when when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor. The FDR had to strike a balance on one hand, the nation felt outraged and wanted to hit back and FDR understood full well. The United States Navy as in this in the Pacific has pretty much been blown to pieces we were lucky they didn't get the aircraft carriers. Truth be told, there's not a lot we can do to keep the Japanese from sailing those same aircraft carriers out you know offshore of San Francisco or LA and bombing the snot out of it. And the truth was that it was going to take the United States to or you know a couple of years to get to the position where they could do something you know they had to do little raid which was a psychological raid. But what FDR did was, you know, in terms of leadership, communicate a number of things that were aspirational a bit I mean they promised basically now we are going to. We are going to exact the heavy price on Japan for what they have done to us, but you know those immortal lines, you know, the only thing we have to fear is fear itself. And that was extremely savvy because it could go either way, because the truth is once our, our autonomic nervous system gets raw. It's fear it's flight or flight you know it's both ways and I think in many ways as a country, we have to bring down those temperatures. And how do you do that. Well, neither you nor I are at the are elected officials. But I think part of what we ought to communicate is that, well, are there. Is this are these dangerous trends. Absolutely. Okay, how should we respond. Well, we should certainly model what we want to see others do that is reaching across the aisle, talking to people with whom we have differences. Sharing, you know, if we catch our catch our rival doing the right thing and praise them, you know, more than criticizing our rival you know incessantly criticizing those for all of the negative things that they're doing, you know, catch them and do the right thing praise them. And, you know, there's a lot that can be done. And, you know, as a leader of a church and and in churches. These are all common things to, you know, there's I pastor a church which is, you know, struggling in many ways. But if I were to stand up and say, but you know who did this is, we're done here. Well, then it is done. But to say no, you know, we've got some challenges. But, you know, and obviously as a Christian who knows what God can do. And look at these, look at look at these bright signs over here. And, you know, let's take a look at that and let's emphasize that because, unlike a situation and let's say, again, go back in history, the beginning before the French Revolution I mean part of what sparked the French Revolution were hungry mothers marching on Versailles. A lot of people there are a number there are many people who are out of work now, but for the most part, America has managed and there certainly continues to be hunger here. And again, it is not like the kind of famine that caused the mother's march on Versailles. And so, I think, I really do think part of America's current crisis is psychological. And during the Oh, absolutely. I saw it during the Obama administration I mean people were talking to me about, you know how horrible Obama was and I was thinking, okay. But I see people on the left far more extreme than he is, and, you know, you've got Donald Trump, and I can certainly point out a number of things that I don't like about how he's done things yet. At the same time, we're still here. And I, you know, I was having this conversation with a group of people in a on a listserv. And there are people on the right and people on the left there and one of the individuals pretty far on the right. And the other person pretty far on the right also is a military chaplain and and you know people on the left are saying, What if Trump doesn't leave the White House if he's not elected. And the other person said, you know, members of the armed forces have made, you know, have made oaths have made vows promised to do what to support the president, no, to support the Constitution. So, there's no question that the constitutional mechanisms and America are being tested right now. There's no question about that. And I think in many ways, they haven't been tested like this, since the 70s, we might argue that things are different from the 70s but again if you go back to the the last century, talk about corruption and voting, political violence. If you read the history of the 19th century in the United States. You know, tremendously corrupt, the way campaigns were were off I mean and and political violence was, you know, outside of even the Civil War was commonplace. So, yes, there are there are things to be worried about, but I think part of what leadership is to help people pull themself back from the feedback loop and say, these are some real reasons why let's calm down. And, and again, our leaders need to do this. But not only, you know, I have a cousin who is quite a bit further on the right, you know, listening to him talk to and and I listened to him and he's got many people are disturbed at the way things are going, and they're old enough to remember when And I think that the Republicans would talk more about we and us versus them and you know as you mentioned Hillary's, you know the greatest, the greatest threat to the future of America are Republicans. And that's a statement like that should have been called out and said you know what that kind of talk puts us at risk, because we have political adversaries. So, so again, I think, I think we have to practice what we want to see people do. And I think part of that is for us, continuing to remain calm and not give into fear. Yeah. I would agree with that. It occurred to me when you were mentioning Biden pulling negative campaign ads that, you know, how much money is spent every election cycle, trying to convince you that someone is evil. And I think that's not only wrong, but increasingly, the, the message is not this person has the wrong vision for America, this person is actually evil morally. There's a lot of money dumped into that political apparatus. And I think, you know, we can talk about social media and social media definitely creates an environment where it's very very easy to get sucked into the echo chamber. And I think that's part of the partisan political apparatus and the campaign strategy of vote for me because I'm, because the other, the other option is truly the devil incarnate is, is it. That's really to me that's the boiler room of this escalation, because you have an environment where, you know, if you are, if I would be apathetic, or maybe say I'd want to say I want to support a third party. If I'm that type of person, but I am successfully convinced that I have to support. You know, the democrat or the republican because the other side is literally the devil incarnate. Then when I feel that bubble. I'm, I'm performing a psychological operation on myself I'm really, I'm, I'm, I'm agreeing to the argument. If I fill out the bubble according to that argument. And in so doing. Well, what's the next realization. Well the realization is that half of the country supports the devil. Right. And I think the, the analogy to, you know, religious fractures for apostasy or for dating or marrying someone from a different sector different denomination or even a different religion entirely. I do think that that is what's at play right now because we're not our political discussions are never about policy anymore. It really is. It feels like engaging in politics has become a theological exercise. Now, for, I think, for some people it's, it's a, it's a bolt on theology. And for the more secular it's become. It's literally filled the, the, the religion module in your brain. If you, if you don't subscribe to one of the, the longer running wisdom traditions, and that's disastrous right as a president. Weep for those individuals right to have to have what should be a part of your psychology that is guiding you towards the common good and towards you know the true the beautiful. And the good is instead directing you towards a, you know, delusions of grandeur in a holy war in your own country. Now, I think. I don't know what I think. That's. Maybe. Hopefully there was something in there that you can riff on. No, I think the world has obviously had many wars fought where there was a religious layer to it. And part of part of the. It's interesting what happened in the Great American experiment with respect to the decision that they're not be a state church that it uncoupled these two things and religion and politics are naturally coupled I often phrase it that religion is always in politics And then, and as we spoke about with with Andrea and our last talk we talked about the fact that when you have religions that have afterlife components in them. And that in a sense relieve some of the pressure that naturally builds up in the now, because God will eventually, you know, figure out what's best to do with Mao and Stalin and your political rivals. You don't have to do it. You know the classic verses Vengeance is mine say at the Lord I will repay. And what that verse actually says is, you don't need to be the. You don't need to be judged read you don't need to be judge and executioner, all at the same time. And, you know, again, many of these features have been put into our system where you have police, and then you have a court system and you have the separation of powers and that's that's really vital. I think you're right in that increasing secularity, ironically, makes increases the religious dynamic of politics. I think, as has been said many times before. Part of why we're susceptible to this now is that we are in a transitional phase, or at least a disruptive phase where past dominant religious slash political narratives are in flux. And that means that some of these stories. You know, if we look at what a human being is people implicitly or explicitly sort of sort of run on narratives that shape their expectations and that helped to modulate their internal mechanisms in terms of their, their, their sense of stasis. I mean the whole deep thing that Jordan Peterson offered was into whatever degree you want to quibble with him with respect to lobsters. The point of that whole story was we, we calibrate ourselves, based on status hierarchies that are fundamentally created within narratives. Part of what has happened is that these narratives have gotten really dramatically religious political. Now that's happened that's been happening for a while, and I've watched that happen in various religious communities. Personally, in terms of where I'm at in terms of the religious landscape, I always find it of horrent to see politicians in churches. Not that I don't want politicians to go to church. I don't want politicians behind the pulpit and churches. Now, that's been very common in the black community partly because of the particular history of the fact that African Americans had a very difficult time because the church was one space in which they could organize themselves politically. And so that's part of that story, but politicians belong in pews not in pulpits, and that separation affords the kind of disintermediating that allows people to That's a really helpful function in America that has functioned and right now isn't as we've seen, for example, the polarization of churches. And so that's part of the reason that I am a pastor in the way I do and part of the reason that I would. I do not want to see churches that are Republican and churches that are democratic, which is exactly what we're seeing now. And I think pastors need to pull back from that and lead their own communities and communities in that there's tremendous pressure on pastors right now from both sides to get into this game. It's pressure from their congregations and pressure among clergy. It's not uncommon for me to see. And again, I think social media amplifies this for me to see pastors in one place or another, basically say in the past, yada yada yada. But now we, you know, It is our duty from God to make sure that either Trump gets elected or Trump doesn't get elected. There's not a big, there's not a religion behind Joe Biden's the man. It's like Trump or no Trump. Oh yeah, absolutely. But no, and so I very much agree from what we've seen. But again, get to get back between I and we part of me is, okay, what do I do on social media? What do I do on YouTube? What do I do in conversations with pastors? I think it's pulling people back and in a religious space, I have more tools to do that because finally God is in charge and also finally God is the judge. And so I can leverage those tools. They're to a degree in the public sphere, but not as strongly. Yeah, there's so two things that you just made me think about. One is just an idea. Do you and you know tell me if you think this has legs or not. But observation that you've got you know your Republican churches and your Democratic churches more and more every day. It's not surprising but I hadn't really thought about it. I think there, there would be anything to a congregational ambassador program to like, just to this extent of, hey, you should, you should not be thinking about people who vote differently as cartoon devils, or as, you know, real demons. Do you think there's any, any actual efforts underway or do you think an effort of the style of, you know, a similar to like a exchange program for, you know, one or two Sundays in a row. Guests speaking and just being like hey, I know you guys lean this way politically I'm from this congregation, couple blocks down the road that leans this way politically, just want to say we're still neighbors. You know something along those lines. So that's the one thing is the doesn't I, is that just too campy and cheesy to ever work, or would have legs. And the other thing to the point of. I don't want to go too far down this rabbit hole because we spent a long time on it last time. But you're, we did talk about sort of the justice meeting needed out by God in the afterlife. And that serves a function. But it seems to me that that's also a double edged sword. Right, because you can. It can engender a sense of, of sort of relinquishing of duty to your fellow human beings to say okay well you know, Hitler will get punished in the afterlife so I don't need to. I don't need to fight him myself and I've, I am worried I don't know if you've seen anything to this effect but I have seen going around more and more. I want to say propaganda but propaganda isn't exactly the right term and I want something more specific but more and more writing and thought from. I don't have a ton of connections to the, like, sort of deeply religious community, but I have some have seen more that is focusing on revelations and actually making the claim that we are at the outset of biblical end times right. And, and with it typically typically comes the admonition. Like, you don't need to do anything. Just stay at home and kneel at your bed and pray, and you will be saved. And it seems to me that that level of inaction. That is, that is surrendering the game to the extremists who want to fight each other right those of goodwill. To go back to where we started a little bit with with Dr. King you know, we're, we're not there. There's a thing that a non violent movement right now needs to do is you're not making demands of the state. You're making demands of your, your, your, the person that gets in between two people swinging blows at each other at the bar, and puts your hands out. Right. Now that's, that's a terrifying call to action right to ask someone to do that but I think it might be the style of, of courage and ethics that we need to inspire in one another is to find the people who are willing to walk into the crossfire. And such that when, as they bleed, because no one's get to fighting camps. When the news comes out that there was an altercation. It's going to make the relative moderates on each camp, more angry at the other ones and increase the positive feedback loop that increases the chances that they get radicalized. When a true civilian is caught in the crossfire. When that news gets out. I think that has the opposing effect be it makes you angry at the conflict itself. You become Mercutio, a plague on both of your houses have no you're you're you're fighting over. Ultimately nothing. You're in the richest country in the history of the world like what what the hell is your problem, and innocence are getting in the crossfire. To the extent that we can follow in the footsteps of Dr. King or on the footsteps of Gandhi. It's, it's, it's willingly marching yourself into the crossfire to show that you're not willing to engage in the violence on either side and model that for other people. I think you're right there are certainly Certainly biblical material that can be used in one way or another and I see that happen. End times speculation is a is a near constant thing. You know 1980 countdown to Armageddon, I can, I can trip through titles that that sell sold books, pretty much all the way from the 70s until now. And because you know close enough to communities like that and that's that's that's pretty much a constant In terms of the You know, we began by asking the question, what can I, what can we and Over this weekend, there were two drive by shootings in Sacramento. And in one of them, a nine year old girl was killed. Other members of her family are currently in the hospital and another one, a couple of other people were innocent people were hurt. You know, I was struck and reading the news of this that. Because when there's police violence done in another city completely across the country. People show up in the streets to turn everything upside down. But when there's these drive by shootings here in Sacramento. You know, there was, there was a prayer request that church. But Why? That's an interesting question to ask. We human beings again getting back to this narrative thing. Obviously with George Floyd. What was triggered was a narrative, but that narrative. Did not happen in a vacuum. There was a an accident on the corner here and There's there are many accidents on this corner here by my church and you hear the screeching of tires, the slam and then I usually go out when I hear that see okay is anybody injured. Well, there was a white woman and a black woman who were in the accident and the white woman apparently was at fault. I don't know. And the black woman went after her used a number of racial slurs. She was larger than the white woman. And I basically went in and got between them because, you know, the black woman's daughter was injured her grandson was in the car. When this happens, all of this stuff in the media imaginary and in their personal pasts flood in And it creates a story and people act within those stories. So when we ask the question, okay, what should I do. Well, I think part of what we have to do is continue to Help Reshape the story for our neighbors. We have to steward the story for ourselves and we need to You know, in the in the story of getting between two people versus passivity Action itself. I mean, one might argue that okay When I got between those two women. I'm a man. They're both women. I'm a pretty big guy. In some ways, just my size and my presence cooled the situation because neither of those women knew me. Was I a threat of violence and in many ways that's often what curtails violence is there's another threat of violence and just by virtue of who I am and my size. The possibility of violence, they could quickly assess that neither of them would win any fight against me. And so no matter how angry one might be at the other. She wasn't going to get through me to get at the other person. And so my presence there stop the violence. I regularly have it in dealing with homeless people that home certain homeless people that get upset. Or even violent, they won't get violent towards me. They might get violence towards a smaller man or a woman. So that's a piece of this equation to and so another piece of this equation continues to have to be to what degree or another is the authority of the government seen as at least in some ways a neutral party. And it's, it's that, you know, it's that element of the current crisis that is difficult because as as the polarization, what really gets undercut is the imagination of the neutrality and the authority of the government to at least to one degree or another. Maintain justice, which is a degree of balance. So, I think all of this being said we have to be very careful about thinking about action and inaction with respect to these dynamics. So I could have stayed out of that scene and continued to watch the one woman, the one woman grab the other woman she threw up in front of the car, she starts spitting into her face. I didn't know if there was going to be a headbutt or fists start to fly at that point. So, at that point I just decided to act which I did. And she backed off a lot of yelling but you know I could get between them and they could calm down. And the police could come and then she starts, it was a white cop. And then she starts on at the cop, the cop had less patience than I had, and started talking, but you know you can just see this thing escalate. So, so in instances and individual instances, it's really important to be a presence of de escalation. And then, when we get into the we, a lot of what we're dealing with is messaging testimony witness posture, presenting narratives, presenting calm. And when we get into Okay, what can we do. I think it's, it's a lot of. When I'm on social media or when I'm on a list serve someone's heightening it, bring it down. They might be doing evil things, you know, Christian talk we battle not against flesh and blood, they might be being possessed by things, or there are other principalities and powers, working through them. But in a Christian in a Pauline sense, people are themselves image bearers of God and so we pull that down. So again I think a lot of this is modeling, training the people around us. And when you get further into the story as you did. Okay. What kinds of formation, do you need to be willing to absorb personal injury up to and you know you're talking about walking into the line of fire. You're talking about the potential of death. What kind of story do you need to be immersed in, where you will give your life, not against an enemy, that's an easier thing to convince people to do. But you will give your life for the maintenance of peace, and maybe futilely so. And again, I, even though you know I agree with the, I agree that in many ways. We're looking at a different take from, let's say what you saw in Dr. King's rally. The, the, the. Because of Christianity there are a lot of resources, because the founder of the religion, in a sense, does that, because Jesus is not appealing to the Romans. Jesus is not appealing to the religious authorities of his day. Jesus in a sense, appeals to die for appears to die for no cause. And on the cross, he cries out to God, which is that is his appeal. So, again, I think. Christians need to be better Christians. And so, people who have a degree of authority and standing like myself within our communities, and these communities are broadly spread out. I think Christian leaders have to have to have to lead in these ways to lower the tensions. Lower the rhetoric. And I think part of why we're in this mess is both parties have gotten to have gotten to the point where they imagine. The only way we can win is to keep pressing the fear buttons in the people keep pressing the evil buttons and keep ramping this up. And I remember john McCain at a rally was a very famous thing when a woman got up and starts just really be raiding Barack Obama, and john McCain basically said stop. He is an honorable man. We are having an election. You know, our country needs a lot more of that. And the part of the problem is that both parties have gotten into the habit of going to this place in order to scare people into the polls. And I think that's just the, it has risen and we've, I agree with you, we've got to bring that temperature down. And I think the only way we do it, I think we model it and we talk it, and we're willing to put our lives where our mouths are. Yeah. Well, that's, I think that's good enough for me. I think we can do it in the short term, maybe, maybe if I convince you to lose some sleep or if October delivers us another couple weeks of crazy, we can, we can think up again. Well, the question I have for you is what do you imagine to be done more than what is being done. Because when you're talking more of a week, you know, where do I and we connect. Yeah. Well, you know, I'm a, I'm a, I'm a software engineer of the, you know, Silicon Valley, I've never lived in the in Silicon Valley but I do find myself, you know, having that mindset that's like, oh, there's, here's the problem like, how can I decompose it and do something beyond the like what's the what the relations for a nonprofit or something like that. And, you know, there's, there's a whole host of ideas, right. For example, I spent several months now volunteering for Unity 2020, which you know someone called the quick sodak plan for bipartisan ticket. Now, my, and I should preface this you know I'm not a piece for the organization, I can only speak to my personal motivations for, you know what let me to volunteer a lot of time there. And my motivation was very much in addressing this problem. Because if you go to that political report. They say, you know, it's a percentage of people who think political just political violence is just for their team. Which means, you know, they're only going to be antagonists if they lose right, but if you could have a bipartisan ticket that would agree to consult each other in the oval office. And if you get someone from both the red team and blue team. Well then, you significantly lower the insanity of the losing team on November 4, when the election results are announced because nobody everybody feels, even if they didn't get exactly what they wanted. And so that the literal devil isn't in the, in the oval office whoever the literal devil is for them. Now, unity has, you know, we're getting to the point where, you know, ballots are printed so you know there was an announcement. A few weeks ago, that unity was, you know, suspending the quixotic, you know, partnership ticket. But, you know, there's a lot of great people in the movement that see the same sort of dangers and are still very motivated to do things and. You know, I've been thinking about what, you know, what's my next project. In line with that and once again to reiterate, you know, I'm. I, I, the, the ideas I'm about to spitball are things that I believe are going to be the most important. I'm, I, I, the, the ideas I'm about to spitball are things that I believe in strongly in, in, in terms of the way I thought them through so absolutely not. I'm just a volunteer, right. I'm not a mouthpiece for what the greater movement will wind up becoming in sort on the other end of the caterpillar to butterfly transformation, but I've been thinking about the psychological effect of signing on to the, the evil of the other side by filling the like if you are sufficiently afraid that you fill in the bubble by filling in that bubble that is your ceiling and cementing that narrative in your brain, that the every bit as evil as your side is telling, telling you they are. And by extension, that means you like, I think, every time someone fills in a battle ballot for that, for that reason with that is the motivation. We are increasing the temperature, which is why I see election time is so critical. So, there's what I would love to see is a mechanism whereby, you know, let's say, for the sake of argument, electorally, let's say we're in the same state, you and I, and let's say I'm a Biden voter. But I'm not an enthusiastic one and you're a Trump voter and not an enthusiastic one, but we're both getting propagandized 24 seven that this is existential and we can't let the other person win. If you and I are sufficiently fearful that that would would be motivating, but we don't want to be motivated in that way like we're on the cusp. You know, if there was a mechanism whereby we could build enough trust before we cast our ballot and say, you know what, let's defect together. We're going to count our fear, our fear motivated votes are going to cancel each other out. We need to recognize that and develop enough of a rapport and enough trust across the aisle as individuals that we're going to refuse to cast a fear motivated vote for the president. What, you know, that's the that's that's the extent of the agreement, you know, if, if I would have, if I want a green or libertarian or right in, I might do that. If you want a different. If you if you if you want a libertarian I want a green, or if you want a libertarian and I just don't care I just don't I want to free myself psychologically for making that fear motivated vote. And I just want to vote down ballot. The vote we do cast is still up to us in our conscience, right. It's just that if we can take the first step in advance of casting the ballot and build that conduit of trust. I think that pays dividends for our own psychology, and if we can, if we could proactively do that, then all of those pairwise of connections connections across the country of two people that decided to take a leap of faith and trust each other. And, and refuse to be motivated by fear. Together, those pairs of people can become conduits within their communities, they can introduce their friends to each other, and they can start to become, they can start to build real bridges in, you know, December and January and beyond the election. It's at the stage. So, like that's. And that's one example of an activity that could be taken right there. And that's sort of that's a, that's a hell of an ask right now right because trust is slim pickings especially across the partisan divide. So, oh, I mean, aspiration, which are something that can happen, but so I'm not the part of the good, you know, it could be as simple as, you know, hey, hey, let's say a cloud and someone that you're going to jump down on. They talk about. And the only purpose is so testimonial truly believe, and say hey, this is what I thought this person believes before I taught how to, when all I knew was that they were going to vote for Trump. This is what I thought that they believed. And then at the other side of a half hour phone call. And then you fill out a survey and say, oh, this is what they actually believe, I still disagree with all of it. But at least I understand the better. I'm not, I'm not interacting with a caricature of them anymore. I'm interacting with something real. And all of this, in some ways requires that that people. I mean, part of what's so challenging about it is that in order for people to participate in it they've already got in one to one degree or another recognize the problem. And so they're motivated to participate in something that gets them further towards that. And so, I very much like a lot of the ideas about that. I think a lot of, I think, in many ways, the question is, how do we, how do we get people off the off the go juice in terms of these political polarization and say and again I think a lot of those is okay. Let's, let's, let's lower the temperature. Let's, let's, I'd love to see. I mean, there are political ways to do this I'd love to see political campaigning narrowed to certain timeframes, I think having, you know, this this constant political campaign, which is sort of what we have now, we're always, you know, we're always trying to narrow it down to a few different things. But I think again it comes down to each of us. Let's find some solutions to broaden our connections with people who are on the opposite side of a political divide. Let's do those kinds of things intentionally. Let's do it in our space, let's do it in our family space let's do it in our neighborhoods. Let's have a higher resolution view of one another beyond just their political spectrum perspective, maybe have an understanding of why they have the political spectra perspectives that they have. What, what are some of the interests that they're concerned about that perhaps I never thought of. I think at least I may disagree with them, but I can say, I can understand why they're making the vote that they're making. I understand the world through their eyes. And even if I lose this election and I win, and they win, I can live with that, and especially if I have a sense that they care about me and I care about them. And so, whatever the government does with the power that it has. I will not only be interested in my political side, but I'll also be interested in the well being of my political rivals. So, before country, before party. Sorry, I got it inverted. I'm sufficiently brainwashed I guess still. So, yeah, well, maybe, you know, we've got a month or so, it's coming up on a month before the election. We'll see. Hopefully, things will, you know, whatever happens I hope that the election is clear, so that there can't be too much. Hemin and Han. And then, hopefully whatever side loses concedes and vows to fight another day, but holds that off until that metaphorically metaphorically. Yeah. So, yeah. I'll join you in that hope. Hey, Paul, thank you so much for for the time. This was a lot more somber than last time but it was still lively and, and fun. Well, I'm, I'm. I don't. I don't see a lot of reason to cheer in the news, but I think there are still reasons and I think we ought to hold on to hope. Works for me. Okay, right. It was good talking to you. Likewise. Stay healthy buddy. All right, you too. Bye bye.