https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DiAzkf1iWmM

 You're easy to remember because we didn't, it wasn't so long ago that we talked. Yeah. I'm back for more. You're back for more. I'm a junkie. Oh boy. Yeah, actually right after I got off my meeting with you last time, I went, I'm like, huh, I'm curious, just on the off chance there's a date open and sure enough there was a date so I gobbled it up. You're a lucky man. I'm sure some people are going to hate you for that because some people have been trying to get a slot for a while. You got to check the calendar. It's, you know, a lot of, you know, a lot of people, I don't know if I'd ever do this, but a lot of people connect it with, you know, if you support me at a certain level, then we can talk and I'm glad I can do this because this is, I don't want money to necessarily determine the hierarchy. So maybe persistence. At least until I have a legitimate stalker, then maybe I'll have to, I'll have to end it. Right? Yeah, maybe I'll have to hold off for a little bit to give other people a shot. Well what's on your mind for today, Ryan? So what is on my mind for today? So I have this particular idea I have that I want to run by you and anyone who's listening to see if people can poke holes in my reasoning here. Ooh, a challenge. Tell me why I'm wrong. Yeah. Ooh. Because it's a pretty lofty idea. So I'm sure I'm missing all sorts of nuance here, but. So I guess if I had to explain it a little bit. Have you heard of the documentary that the BBC did called Sentry of Self? No. So I think one of your past guests, Josh, told me about it or it was in one of his videos. But it kind of traces Sigmund Freud at the beginning of the 1900s and sort of the birth of consumerism and marketing and public relations as we now know it. Obviously now we understand how manipulative it is and how it pushes our buttons and all that stuff. So it's four hours long. It's really, really good. It's on YouTube and it sort of diagnoses. You know, I don't know if it hits the mark completely, but it sort of diagnoses our sort of cultural selfishness, I guess you could say, that I think most people would probably is the reality today that people seem to be fairly selfish as compared to other generations. And so it kind of links that with marketing campaigns and obviously social media is more recently kind of a factor, right? It's a sort of inward view of yourself and you see it with, yeah, sort of worldviews. There's more of an inward focus now, less of a focus on family and community. That's sort of a starting presumption for our idea. So let's just take that as true. Let's assume that that's true. I guess as I started exploring the political landscape, I became very interested in why the right and the left both lean so strongly on certain things, right? In general, the right is very much against abortion. On the left, you have something like environmentalism that's almost sacred and how important it is and you see it's almost one of the doomsday predictions, right? There's been people who have predicted the world will be done in 10 years. So kind of where I lie on something like environmentalism is that, yeah, it probably makes sense that we're doing something to the environment, but the question is how much, right? I wouldn't subscribe to the idea that the earth as we know it is going down the tubes in 10 or 20 years. That seems like a manipulative position to take. It just doesn't seem... When you say a manipulative position, what do you mean by manipulative? So when I say manipulative, I'm making an assumption that politicians will make more dramatic their claim in order to increase the urgency and therefore the support for it, which is a very utilitarian thing, right? If all the best research says that we're 150 years from some environmental catastrophe, which I think is plausible, it would make sense to me that politicians like Alexandria Cortez and stuff, she was on... I don't know if this is out of context, but she was on the record saying the world's going to end in 10 years and we're thinking about how to pay for this large scale thing. So when I hear that, I think like, well, that kind of sounds like you're apocalypse-izing the thing to get people scared and therefore to do what you want to do. To me, that seems... Yeah, so there's a lot of assumptions here that I'm making about intention, which is not super productive, but with... That's the part of your definition of manipulative. I assume what you mean by manipulative is that, let's say the person thinks to themselves, we're cooking the earth and it'll be a real problem in 100 years, but I'm going to go out and say 10 years in order to get action. Right, exactly. There's a deceit built into it and instead of necessarily giving people good information, true information for them to use their agency as a, let's say, an image of God bearer, someone with the divine spark, as Peterson would say, someone who is a respected human agent, I'm going to take away that agency by giving them, by willfully and deceptively and intentionally giving them incorrect information in order to use them to achieve a political outcome that I might think is good or desirable for whatever reason. So that would be your definition of manipulation. Yes, yep. Okay, good. So that's my operating definition that it seems disingenuous or whatever. So yeah, I guess I'm starting to get a little too much into the details here. I lost sight of my original thing I was talking about, but I think that there's a natural incentive there built in, right? I think it's understandable. Politicians do what politicians do. They're going to start slowly kind of being, like when you're telling a story of how big a fish you caught, it slowly starts getting bigger and bigger. I think that that intuitively makes a lot of sense that when there's an incentive there for you to get done, you want to get done, you build a catastrophe. And the right absolutely does this as well, but just to use this example. So yeah, so that's, let's see where I'm losing my train of thought here. Okay, I have some notes here so I don't go completely off the rails. So I'm trying to parse this all apart because I'm saying, okay, there's probably like a good reason to be concerned for the environment. And again, the environment is actually just an example of what I wanted to talk about. It's not the sole focus, but basically there's a, I think, there's a, I think there's a basically there's a desire for me to understand how to get to the bottom of the stuff. So I think that, and we talked about worldview last time. So I'm trying to sort of understand the left and the right thing. Like there's things presumably that everybody cares about, right? Like enjoying the natural world and human value for life. But the left is obviously more interested in pro-choice and environmentalism, whereas the right is more interested in pro-life. And it seems like people on the right, I don't know why, maybe just to be contrarian, generally tend to not seem to care too much about the environment and kind of write it off probably because of people like Al Gore, et cetera. So I'm just trying to get to the bottom of that. Like why, assuming we both care about both of these things, why do, it's almost like we have to take a contrarian position to be loyal to our moral camp. And I started thinking about the, right, that documentary, The Century of Self and stuff we see going on with social media and sort of a general more inward focus. And this kind of gets into stuff you hear in Jonathan Haidt, Verveke talking about the meaning crisis, right? So it seems to follow that if there's a meaning crisis and a focus on self, then something that's going to come from that is apathy, right? It's just not caring, right? Which to me, again, this is all trying to make sense of this left-right split and like what could be the reason for the fact that most people probably think human life and the environment are good things, yet we take such polar positions? Why could that be true? So I started thinking about the meaning crisis. And again, if we assume that that's a given, if we assume that that's true, that that is the case and that people don't have meaning in their lives. Let's see. This is I'm trying to get too lofty here. I'm losing my train of thought. Let's see. Where was I going with this? So meaning crisis and apathy and yeah, I guess sort of the fact that what does abortion and environmentalism have in common is they're both abstracted, right? They're both things that, you know, if you look at the recent stuff in Sri Lanka that happened, that's something that everybody can agree is a horrible thing that we should try to prevent because it's very immediate, it's very obvious to our deepest intuitions. But things like the environment, things like unborn human life, those are both abstracted, right? We can't see them. So there's this trouble with how do you get people to care about something that's abstracted? And it seems like caring about abstracted bad things is a function of having meaning in your life and not being apathetic. Like it seems to me that if you're someone who has sort of lost your bearing on having meaning in your life, the first thing that is going to drop off of your radar, right? The first thing that you're going to become apathetic about is things that are abstracted, things that aren't immediate to you and yourself, like future generations enjoying the planet or an unborn baby that you haven't seen or like it seems to be that my hypothesis here, my highly tenuous hypothesis is that the meaning crisis is linked to people not caring about. The meaning crisis might explain why, let's say, there's such heavy polarization that seems to be centered around, let's call them abstracted disasters, right? Things we can't see. A hundred years the earth is gone, we're dead, what do we care? So I'm trying to piece together all these things like we seem to be more inwardly focused, right? Century of self, the documentary, social media, we seem to be about me, me, me, my life, not the community, not future generations, but you hear both sides sort of trying to appeal to outside of themselves, care about with environmentalism, it's about future generations, it's about our children's children enjoying this wonderful planet on the right side of abortion. Human life is human life that has value and it's so interesting that I think everybody cares and thinks there's fundamental value to all of these things, yet my hunch is that there's something linked there with the meaning crisis and the focus on the self that is causing those things to become so untenable to people that it becomes, your brain has to work much harder to care about things that you know aren't going to necessarily affect you in your life, right? It's like to care about other people, we have to have our foundation solid, like our rock, we need to be good ourselves before we can then start going outward and caring about our friends, our family, and then it just goes outward into the world, our community, our nation, everybody, which is why the Christian message is fascinating to me because it seems to be this tool for love your neighbor and that's what attracts me to it because I see political polarization and I see like everybody sort of has a different worldview framework that are highly incompatible, so there's no real solution there. So anyways, I've talked long enough, stumbled around here, but I'd just be curious to hear your thoughts on, first off, if that made sense, like if you can trace the frame of thought I'm trying to get at here and what you think of it. Well, let's maybe start with the meaning crisis and think about, part of what we're doing, let's pay attention, let's pay a little bit of attention to the exercise we're trying to do and where and what this exercise is situated in. For example, we're, first of all, the left-right thing, you're thinking pretty much within, let's say, an American political sphere, right? Yeah, focus in America. Okay, so an American political sphere, so now already we have a context and within that context, there are a number of things playing out, so it's an American context, so and we're trying to think in terms of, let's say, an abstract person, which is kind of funny because, number one, there are no abstract people, there are only people and so then we'll say, well, any person, okay, so then we might even begin to ask some questions about this any person and say, does this person have shingles? They say, well, what do you mean does this person have shingles? Well, because actually whether or not this person has shingles, that's going to impact their thoughts on the meaning crisis because actually if they have shingles, they might not, shingles might do away with the meaning crisis for this person and you might say, well, how on earth would shingles do away with the meaning crisis for this person? Well, because they're probably going to experience a high degree of meaning by seeking alleviation from the pain of having shingles and so right away, even just introducing the question of whether or not the person has shingles, we've already noticed something about the meaning crisis, which is, part of it tends to be in the words of one of my colleagues who used this in a church meeting once, the fat man's disease. What on earth do you mean by the fat man's disease? Who might say, does this person have gout? The fat man's disease basically means that this person is probably situated in a highly affluent country where there's a great degree of food security, physical security, they have the kind of, let's for lack of a better term, animal security to sit and ponder things like the meaning of life. Right away, you've actually got a pretty select subgrouping of every human being that has ever lived and we would say not only a subgrouping of every human being that has ever lived, but probably even only a bracketed segment of that person's life because they didn't have a meaning crisis when they were six months old and trying to find their hands so they could reliably get their thumb in their mouth and they didn't have the meaning crisis when they're sitting in a nursing home waiting for some minimum wage worker to come and change their diaper. Or you know, they're not going to be able to do that. So they're going to have to wait for a nurse worker to come and change their diaper. Or you know, sitting there with a very uncomfortable catheter because their bladder no longer works well. So right away, we're taking humanity and just shrinking it down into a segment and we're taking two items such as abortion and environmental awareness. Now part of what happens in the public community is that there's a big difference between abortion as an issue and if you're a 21 year old girl who grew up in church and has secretly been having sex with your boyfriend and just discovered that your bumbling at birth control didn't work so well and you're pregnant and you're going to lose status in your church if you have a baby or if you have an abortion. And now suddenly the question about abortion becomes not a theoretical question, not fundamentally a political question, but a very real question for that person in terms of their life. And what's now suddenly, it's not terribly theoretical, it's very existential and it's very immediate and now suddenly a whole bunch of other issues that in fact might have been functionally existential and theoretical in the person's life such as a moral position that believes that the baby growing up, growing inside this woman should be afforded the status of image of God versus the status they would lose if it's known that they're pregnant or the status they would lose if it's known they've had an abortion and so right away it's like wow. So at that point the whole political conversation about abortion now also takes on a different light and you get over to environmental things, well those are even more different because, and I would just throw out another question for you to think about as in the way that you framed the question, let's say for example that let's imagine that AOC really honestly does believe that life as we know it in this world will end unless Congress takes dramatic actions such as outlying air travel in the United States. See because here's a funny thing about environmental apocalypticism. People and you see this all the time with people, people are very strange. I remember a friend of mine who was told that they had lung cancer and they had smoked all of their life and well okay a doctor said well you've got lung cancer and we're going to try and fight your lung cancer but you have to quit smoking and well if we imagine that human beings are rational we would imagine well that human being would quit smoking. Do you think that person quit smoking? In that case they didn't they just snuck them and it's like okay so what's really going on with human beings because to assert that they're rational that's never really worked for me because I know human beings and I watch them and I watch me and you know at the end of the night if I'm sitting around and my wife and I are watching whatever we're watching on Netflix and Amazon we're spending an hour together enjoying each other's company and I'm sitting there and I've had how knows how many calories I've had throughout the day and if I have a thing of ice cream in that freezer my mind is going to go to that thing of ice cream and I think you know I really would like to lose another 10 pounds but sitting right here with my wife enjoying this the amazing Mrs. Maisel or whatever we're watching on Amazon I sure wouldn't mind sitting and enjoying that dish of ice cream one little dish of ice cream that really won't make a difference and you know that's how we are right and so you know okay the meaning crisis well the meaning crisis is a funny thing because one of the one of the great things that Peterson has I think blessed one of the great truths that Peterson has blessed his following with is some pretty accurate articulation of the fact that we are mysteries to ourselves now this idea you can certainly attribute the psychoanalysts Freud and Jung we can attribute that idea to them but this idea goes back to Augustine and St. Paul and even the Greeks before that we are we are very strange creatures and now one of the things just to throw in one other thing before you can take a stab at this I remember back in the in the political the election between Al Gore and George W. Bush now given given what we're going to be facing in 2020 in terms of the Dems versus Trump and this whole thing that's coming some people may look wistfully back to the days of Al Gore and George W. Bush and I remember Ralph Nader who of course was on the extreme left at that point Ralph Nader making the observation about George about Al Gore and George W. Bush you know there's not really a lot of difference between them and when Ralph Nader said that I thought yep that's true and so what Al Gore and George W. Bush decided to do is try to differentiate differentiate each other you know from differentiate themselves from the other side and so of course Al Gore is going to come out and he's going to be you know he's going to be for the environment gosh he did a documentary about it or he would do one view in the future George W. Bush is going to talk about abortion and at some point you have to say how serious are either of these sides really about these arguments that they're using because the truth is if if somehow the Republicans would make the whole question of abortion just simply go away that's now we get into politics and manipulation that's sort of a bad move because abortion is a real vote getter for the Republicans it has been for a very long time and now the Dems have some of their own social issues such as gay rights or the environment that that they can use as social issues and what's really nice about these what's really nice about these issues for both parties is it doesn't cost them much I mean you don't you don't have to it for most of us to be against abortion doesn't cost us hardly anything at all now for the girl who is a Christian girl and has been secretly sleeping with her boyfriend and discovers that she's pregnant and in any case letting anybody know that either she's pregnant or has had an abortion she's going to lose status in her community well she's got skin in the game but for a lot of the people in politics I don't see the Republicans doing a lot about abortion and I don't see the Dems doing a lot about the environment and or even either side being able to do much which is kind of the perfect which is kind of the perfect formula for a political issue and then neither things get addressed really exactly which is pretty much what we've seen for the last 20 years and there are reasons for that but now pay attention when 9-eleven these guys run airplanes into towers how long did it take to ground airplanes in the United States like that and that gets to your other point about I don't think it's abstraction it has much more to do and and Verveki talks about this with relevance or salience as he calls it because when those planes went into the towers there was salience and I remember one member of my congregation talking about her fear that Osama bin Laden was going to drive an airplane into her three-bedroom tract home somewhere in suburban Sacramento and inside I had to be curious because I was a pastor but inside I was laughing my head off it's like Osama bin Laden does not have you as his target right but we are funny creatures both ways right yeah that's right my dad actually because I was talking about this with my dad recently he he also pointed to 9-eleven as this this sort of example where people on both sides were unified at this very palpable evil right it's like it's right there right remember Peterson says and he's dead on right with this we see opportunities and threats abortion and environment those are political opportunities 9-eleven threat well yeah vote together in congress with my people across the aisle easy peasy right right yeah that's a that's a good so it almost seems like and this kind of gets back to my last discussion though but it seems like you have to get to morality before I mean it doesn't seem like it you do have to get to morality before you get to politics on an individual level trying to understand what do I want to believe because politics is an inherently um right it's it's a game in a sense it's like there's it's like game theory it's like there's people trying to figure out what other people are going to think so they say things that they might not mean so it's almost like this impossible it's this impossible playing field to come out with any real coherence because it's it's somewhat arbitrary in a lot of ways right so so that kind of points me to morality right and and saying okay well right and wrong seems to be the way because evil is the is the lack of good right there's things that we can all clearly get together behind and agree that they're evil but then it becomes much more complicated when we try to agree on what we all say is good and the the hierarchy right of of there's have you heard of this have you heard of alistair mcintyre he's a philosopher yeah he has i haven't read it but he has a book um i think it's who's justice which rationality um and it just talks about the the fact that people are are coming at right so you have politics on the top right which is maybe our manifestation of our beliefs and then presumably under politics you know you ask okay how does x person arrive at the place where they say i support this position on let's say environmentalism well it seems like morality is what's the base layer there and then if you dig deeper into morality you get into teleology right like what are people for what is right morality is kind of like what's uh what's the answer to the good life right what's a human for what's what's a proper human look like what does flourishing look like we all want to flourish right but it's these different frameworks that we have that are incompatible with each other where a a materialist is never going to cede any ground on like uh um i listened to an interesting um conversation with esther o'riley one of your uh followers and think club who i know you talked with about basically proving that there is a such thing as objective morality and it just went in circles because the uh as you would get that one too yeah it is it's i thought adam won i mean i think that like the error but adam won i know i think she got caught because she was he was basically demanding almost like physical evidence of you know he says oh you say it's objective but where's your evidence but i feel like the tool he was requesting didn't make sense for the i think objective morality is more not necessarily like concrete object but more so like absolute or universal or transcendent and i think objective kind of uh is confusing because objective we think of physical objects material but that's not what that's not what it is it's absolute it's is it universal and so he's demanding like physical evidence like where's your science experiment i'm like what like that that seems like a pretty basic i don't know i maybe it seemed like a really obvious uh thing but i don't know we we all get caught in these things but when i looked at that i saw i saw that um think club um i guess his name is adam right yep he he was starting from a position of assuming no metaphysical reality being possible and esther was assuming metaph he's he's assuming skepticism with respect to metaphysics right well it almost seemed like he was assuming not just skepticism but that it was an implausible like it was ruled out from the beginning right so when esther tried to make a claim i mean i think she was getting at um um metaphysics right but his worldview from jump rules that out so there was no way that he was going to acknowledge any argument that uses that tool because he's not even able to use that tool in his worldview right so anyways long story short is i think that it's so interesting to wonder and like say okay you have these different frameworks that all these people hold and it's like let's say politics is the manifestation and then underneath that you have morality and underneath morality you have what does human flourishing look like what's a proper human life and then underneath that you have all these frameworks you have materialism secular materialism you have um islam christianity various faiths and then under all of those are assumptions that we can't and never will prove right um so it's interesting because it's not like any one of the major worldviews is is is provable in an airtight sense right like any worldview and i think a lot of the new atheists are would get a little skittish talking about this but like secular materialism also rests on assumptions right you talk about the monarchical vision it's like there's no there's no view from a vacuum right like we can't we can't get out of the fact that there is no airtight proof for achieve a view from a vacuum right paul cant ryan cant adam cant and and so in a sense the move they try to make is exactly the move you started with well let's assume an abstract person okay why don't you show me one right right but you don't have one to produce for me none exist in fact there's no such thing as an abstract person right you're a materialist right do you think like back to your abortion example with the girl who got pregnant do you think that that person right not an abstracted person but a real person who has skin in the game do you think that they're in a a better or worse position to make a judgment on the morality of their predicament do you think that they're there you think that someone is more or less well suited to because it seems like when you're in a sticky situation you you have very strong biases for self-preservation socially culturally so therefore or like this seems to be where like in the christian world view the bible is so important because you you need to you need to almost have some external standard by which to measure something when in a given situation you know that the biases are stacked up against you and we know we trick ourselves all the time so it's interesting to me i think about the girl who has to go through an abortion and um the girl who's deciding about whether or not she's going to get an abortion right right right she's in that predicament and then i wonder and it's hard because obviously it makes good sense that like on a lot of issues that we should listen to the people in the position and you know i'm sure people get sick of um you know white men in the united states making all sorts of decisions about uh women's rights and you know minority communities and you know it's it's a theme and i i get it that a lot of people are you know you have this swing in the opposite direction where if you're it's like if you're not in this predicament you can't have an opinion on it which i think is silly um so it's very hard to parse apart everything right and so that's what gave me that's what well let's go back to her a second because here's here's a funny thing in our culture so on one hand we look at her and say she because she has skin in the game should be the one to make the decision about it because she has skin in the game and there's truth to that okay because the she has there's there's some things that she has because of the predicament that she's in now if she wasn't in a christian environment and there was no loss of status for either having the child out of wedlock or having an abortion the frame of reference would be different still but we we have this we have this cultural liturgy that says only people with skin in the game should make decisions about their future and there's something to be said for that however there's an opposite position such as let's say a judge has been let's say a judge has just been arrested for for driving under the influence let's say that okay the judge has been arrested they haven't been convicted let's say they haven't been suspended which probably would happen and now they have a whole court docket full of dui cases they are supposed to preside over what would our legal system say with respect to that right no go why not yeah yeah so here here are the here are the two here are the two issues one says unless you know it personally unless you have the kind of knowledge that is personal knowledge people without that personal knowledge have nothing to say to you well i understand that argument and i see the point but there's the other side of it that says the personal knowledge that we have biases us and there's another kind of knowledge this more impersonal knowledge this knowledge that we're a little bit separated from emotionally that says that side should have it say too and so in some ways you know a lot of the identity games that we're playing in our society right now we're seeing one side of it and say only women who only religious girls who are pregnant out of wedlock should decide or they are exactly the wrong people to decide because you know let's say okay only the people who are starving have any right to decide whether or not bread stealing should be legal right or should it be the baker who isn't going to eat any bread because he's been you know elbow deep in dough and bread all day long they should be the ones who are just to decide over bread stealing so you know right away you begin to see none of these things are easy to deal with and this is part of the reason why we approximate a monarchical vision via community and multiplying the voices and that's why multiplying the voices is very important and that's in a sense part of what's underneath democracy where we say it's the hungry person tempted to steal bread and it's the baker who both have a say in whether or not we should have laws against bread stealing good point so it's just a synthesis of the two viewpoints because it's not even necessarily synthesis both in a sense feed into what what charles taylor calls the imaginary both and feed into it and then we has then you have these legislators who have multiple things pulling at them and in a sense the way our system works is that there's an economy of forces at work and so we hope that at least over long periods of time the legislators will get things right and this actually then gets back to let's say jordan peterson's idea about what the bible is what the bible is is the wisdom of many many many many many generations encoded into into stories that are enormously complex and sifted through and worked through and that that by virtue again he's coming from below that by virtue of this profit of this process should be given precedence in the rest of our conversation which i would say in fact it does because and and it's not just the bible it's history of common law it's you know all of this stuff that that we decide rather than in the moment where the hungry person is tempted to steal bread you lift that person up and say that is the only frame of reference that matters for the decision as to whether or not people should be allowed to steal bread so i mean it's the stuff is the stuff gets complicated it's so fascinating though i mean and that's why it's important i think getting back to alistair mackintyre in his book it's like well i think we all like to believe that there's one one say worldview or set that's that's true and i think possible is true but we're not going to know if it's absolutely true in any in any sort of definite sense as we define definite right in our culture like scientifically definite so the question is looking at all of our options right it's like a it's like a free buffet and really we have to look at and understand what's the what's the least worst right like what and that's that's what fascinates me about christianity is like you look at you look at and i'm just beginning to understand it so you know way more than me but it's interesting that has tools built into it that like what worldview has tools built into it that aren't just domineering or like it seems like when you look at some of the people on the left the the oppression olympics some some people call them it doesn't seem like there's any empathy built in so that if you get on the other side of what you're advocating for you'll be a loving person it seems like there's and this isn't everybody of course but i mean there's a certain there's certain people that are that seem vindictive in their in their pursuit and and i look at that worldview and while i don't necessarily disagree with what they're advocating for i'm skeptical because i sense that even if they get what they want this world doesn't seem like an awesome place because nobody's safe from the scalpel of their of their oppression ideology i mean i think a lot of it is valid right i think i agree with a lot of it and that's the hard thing because i do agree with a lot of it but at the same time i get this sense that there's almost this you know you get into counterfeit gods it's like when you don't have that it's almost like there's a need to fill that with something and if you know let's say legislation on environmentalism is you know very dramatic as past it seems like that would very quickly segue into something else and like i haven't seen the love i haven't seen hints of a a loving future and i think that's this is valid for the right as well so i was i forget what chapter of the bible it is but i i read this verse that said that was talking about law and judgment like you said and it was talking about don't be don't be partial to the rich or the poor which is interesting i think that's so relevant for today it's because it's almost like the poor can be viewed as a tool or a trump card that like that people use and manipulate to achieve ends and it it's silly to assume that that's not also a problem even though it's much easier to hate the rich person like i've heard people talk talk about rich people and it just scares me because they're like this person deserves to die because they're a billionaire jeff bezos and i'm like that's that's they deserve to die because they've got lots of money that's the idea right crowd right right especially if they're north american because compared to say someone living in pakistan or bangladesh yeah right so that's a roof over your head do you drive a car you drive a car baby your top you're part of the top um your top part of the top four percent in the world right right and but it's that's the problem with relativizing and comparing and there's no end to it right it's like we're gonna reach a point and say great we all have 40 000 a year let's love each other like that's not gonna that's not gonna happen we're gonna hate the person that has 45 right right and that's what sets my alarms off because i'm like well like i think i know human nature well enough by knowing by way of knowing myself that people in you know like a communist society aren't going to be okay with uh people aren't just going to all of a sudden be okay with being completely equal in possessions and and equal outcomes and yeah so that's why i think that that like surveying the political landscape gives you good tools to sort of dig layers deeper and then get to back to fundamental worldview presuppositions right leaps of faith secular materialism theism and then at the end of the day you know you're not going to logically prove any of them so then you just it almost seems utilitarian you just have to look at them and say what which one seems to have a system built in that is going to uh that has tools built into it that will um not just spiral on into forever and um christianity seems to have a lot of that although i'm sure non-christians can cite you know leviticus i was reading and it's just like you know they eat bread stone them and they all stone them and i'm like damn okay well i had this very fluffy understanding of christianity and i'm going through this and it's like okay well all right leviticus is a really cool book but it's a really hard book i you know a number of years ago when i decided i was going to start preaching in genesis and just keep going through the bible uh leviticus is a fascinating book and even rob bell when he started um when rob bell went to start preaching at mars hill in grand rapids michigan rob bell his introductory sermon series at his new church plant was on leviticus and actually if you if you want to you can find my bunch of blog posts from my leviticus sermons on my blog i have this section on my blog which is sermons and studies and before i did videos i would often just as part of sermon prep i would often write a little blog post about um the sermon that i was working on just to kind of be able to vomit some thoughts out there and put them out leviticus is a fascinating book but again leviticus especially for christians is and it is for jews too because they you have you have the torah and then you have the all of the record of the long conversations that rabbis and the communities have used in order to figure out how to apply the torah in radically different cultural and historical contexts now christianity of course you've got the old testament and the new testament and there's a lot that goes into christian traditions that are that develop long past the bible by which the communities figure out how to deal with that and in fact the the controversy that's recorded in axe 15 where the apostle paul and barnamus the new churchers are starting among the gentiles they have this question about circumcision and dietary laws and and it's all these identity conversations about what ought new christians to do and they have the council of jerusalem so you know even having the book of leviticus even for highly literalistic you know the bible says it that's it i believe it i do it um there's still myriads of complex usually subtle often under the surface decisions that are being made between this is what leviticus says this is how i live my life so it's it's and but most of the time you know we don't make these things up so what we actually do is well we do what people around us who we admire we do what they do because that gives us and usually as kids we grow up we do what our parents do because we saw them and that's kind of your rough draft and then you you go from there and as we talked about in our last conversation you know you're at the point in your life now you've learned from your parents you've seen the rough draft you're at a point now where you say well i'm gonna apply pen to paper what am i gonna write and you actually write you know back to the big fork at the beginning of this book which is is the world a a space of objects or a forum for action because after you and i hang up we're going to use this telephone metaphor for a very non-telephone thing we're doing right now after you and i hang up you're going another moment will come and you're going to have to do something next and this whole world of decisions all floods into that moment and you will make a decision and will that decision will you turn on the tv and just use up those electrons that were produced by that coal-fired power plant which is putting mercury into the air and carbon into the i mean it it just whoosh the world is incredibly complex every little thing we do it's like the butterfly effect out it goes into the world so and there we are thinking nothing of it no i'm just going to go into the fridge and get up here i open the fridge door how many you know how much electricity do i use now that all of that cold air is just you know flown out of my fridge the world's an incredibly complex place this is why people don't spend time thinking about it because that's right you have to love it it's a hobby hard you have to be a weird person that enjoys is a is a masochist philosophically that's true so a couple more minutes left anything you want to get in before we before we uh hang up yeah um we've hit we've hit most of it and i know this is you know obviously we can't get into too much depth because of the propositions i'm laying out it's like the nature of politics and worldview um something i wanted to quickly quickly hit on is um yeah the idea of of how powerful it is to change people's hearts and make them come to something rather than coercing them like i see government mandated things where people have to do something good and how people are much more likely to be reluctant to approach something but you see it from the top down like even with relationships like when you're not forcing someone to do something and you're um acting lovingly and inviting them in and leading them through example i i'm just amazed at how much more powerful that is it's like you almost have to give people 90 percent and let them get the last 10 on their own and i think about that on a worldwide scale and i think of like changing the world and it doesn't seem like it can be something that's just legislated you know from the top down it has to come from individuals acting on individuals and i work in filmmaking so we know well that the the the one person is going to speak way louder than the 500 000 right you see it 500 000 children starving in africa but the one that you include in your film that you learn her story is such a longer lever for change and for empathy for for people and i think it's really encouraging to look at the bible whether or not i believe it or not at the moment but to see that exemplified through jesus and to see that tool being used on people and saying you can come if you want i'll be over here but check out just check this out that's such a like i know that that's true like i know that that's a better um method and a true method and um so so yeah that's um that's basically what i would throw out as a as like a tentative you know in response to all the political stuff and gridlock and world views and it seems like you just have to win people's hearts in a very non-coercive way that's the only that's a very presbyterian church in america formula of how people work as you win people's hearts and you can listen to tim keller talk about that for hours on youtube yeah but the one but the one point that you know i'd like to kind of follow up on is when everyone talks about jordan peterson and those who have influenced him they obviously talk about young they talk about nicha the person who doesn't get anywhere near is not enough footnotes when you talk about jordan peterson's formation is piaget because the more the longer i listen to peterson the more i see him continue to sharpen and um really to sharpen and refine his offering to the world piaget is really at the heart and of a lot of what he does included the equilibrated state which is jordan peterson's uh is his his vision for the kingdom of god but also piaget makes the point that the voluntary the society in which people voluntarily do good rather than coerced good will outperform the society where everything is coerced for example china you know i heard someplace recently that china spends four times as much money on internal security as it does on external defense well there's an example the carrying cost of maintaining you know of of eliminating descent will in effect that carrying cost will over long periods of time make your society uh be non-competitive compared to free societies where you have freedom of expression freedom of religion where where you value people within rules we're not going to allow you to kill each other uh but to talk against each other that's okay so i mean and the point that you just made is very much that point from piaget where um the power of a person voluntarily and this again is part of peterson's gospel when the individual voluntarily turns and addresses the threat that's there's power there and and peterson is right in that so so we're out of time i don't want to i don't want to short the the next person oh yeah yeah i'm already hogging i'm already hogging the airwaves with your talks but um yeah thank you again i've never i've never had an hour pass by so quickly it's like a time machine oh wonderful wonderful and i'll send this to you ryan and uh whatever you want to do with it all right that sounds great all right take care cool thanks paul yep bye bye