https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=AnTkzEg_IJQ

 Hi, this is Paul. David French is a political commenter. He's a member of the PCA Presbyterian Church of America, which is a denomination you might describe as a bit more conservative than the Christian Reformed Church. The Presbyterian Church of America doesn't allow women elders or women pastors. He lives in Nashville. We have at least one mutual contact of sorts. A couple of pieces. I don't know if this is gonna be one video. It's definitely gonna be one video. I might split it up into two. We'll see how long each part goes, probably longer than I intend. This morning he had a tweet said, I'd be interested if other pastors agree with Nate. This is a tweet by Nate Pyle. Nate Pyle says, prediction, in the next two years there will be a large exodus of pastors from the pastorate. Every pastor I talk with is exhausted and to a degree frustrated. Theological and ideological differences between pastors and parishioners is increasing. It's not sustainable. Somebody then said that to me, my attention, and those of you who follow me on Twitter, when you find stuff I'd be interested in, I do love it when you sort of at notify me. Twitter for all of its failings is brief. The brevity is of course its glory and its use. Nate Pyle's observation, whereas when I look around at my colleagues, the colleagues that I know best, I don't know any of them that are sort of on the edge, but the idea doesn't surprise me at all. Sky Jitani, whose career I followed a bit, he was Phil Vischer's interlocutor back when the Phil Visser podcast was on YouTube, which I followed on YouTube pretty closely. In some ways Phil Visser preceded me in this space. He's still on audio and sometimes they do YouTube. So Sky Jitani was a former editor at Christianity Today. He's an evangelical writer, thinker, celebrity pastor. He doesn't have a real congregation. He's kind of out there doing stuff. I think Christian Missionary and Alliance in the same church as Phil Vischer. And Sky Jitani's written quite a bit about the evangelical industrial complex, as he calls it, which is part of the reason and part of how I came up with the idea that in many ways evangelicalism is less an ecclesiastical entity and more of a marketplace. I talked with Dr. Dumé about that in my interview with her last week. And so Sky had a couple of salient responses to it. He said, I've been tracking this growing gap between church leaders and laity for years. Now my interest and my take on Nate Pyle and David French's question has much more to do with the meaning crisis. I'll get into that in a little bit. Sky, to my knowledge, although he and Phil Vischer have discussed Jordan Peterson a little bit, to my knowledge Sky is not up to date or aware with much of our discussion about the meaning crisis. But I thought his comments were helpful here too. And then he wrote an article which we'll look at next. But before we get to that, Sky said, I've been tracking this growing gap between church leaders and laity for years. I think most pastors are realizing that despite their efforts, people are being formed far more by media than ministers. And when I think about my colleagues, they would say an overwhelming yes to that. This leads some pastors to fundamentally rethink their ministry structures. And that is very true too. If you look at, for example, the life of Sky Jatani, who is again a celebrity pastor, not a not pastoring a local congregation. I think a lot of pastors fantasize about that because real people are difficult. And if people just leave you alone, you can sort of think what you want and imagine the church as you please and go out there and maybe critique and complain about it. But you know, there it is. Is this an area of ministerial burnout for people? Now the sample of ministers I'm closest to in terms of colleagues is quite heavy in terms of church planters. And I would suggest that the distance between pastor and church planter is far less than the distance between pastor and inherited established churches that tend to be older, founded by previous generations, often builders or busters or boomers rather or earlier than that. And so I hadn't really thought about, although this what Sky Jatani is pointing to is a very old thing. It's far older than our moment now. Clergy on the whole have tended to be often, you know, this often better educated, at least theologically, sometimes in the humanities than their congregations. That's not as it once was when my grandfather pastored churches, he was, especially the churches he pastored in farming communities in the Midwest, he was quite likely the best educated person in the community with a suburban or urban congregation. You'd regularly have PhDs in your congregation. But what it means to be educated has also changed significantly in that the siloing of education has seriously impacted your ability to presume knowledge based on the level of degree achievement. For example, a PhD in science might have read almost nothing in terms of the humanities and the minister up in the pulpit might know almost nothing in terms of science. And so there's a big gap between clergy and laity and the theological gap. For centuries it's been true that especially in modernity that clergy have been, let's say, more liberal. Now I'm thinking theological liberalism here, more liberal than their congregations. It certainly has been true within the Christian Reformed Church. And again, we'll get into populism in a little bit. Sky's next tweet in response to this is, others have accepted this reality and accommodated to it with silence to keep their churches and careers intact. This we would call corruption, I would say. And still others have decided to fulfill their pastoral callings outside the institutional church. That would be Sky Gittani. Leaving a paid church job is not necessarily leaving ministry. Again, that would be Sky Gittani. And I have certainly known and seen that for many of my colleagues once they get into their, about the point in their career that I am, many ministers weary of having a congregation. People are complex. Dealing with people on a pastoral level takes a certain degree of patience, kindness, generosity, and ministers wear out. Before I read Sky's comments, and I, you know, I agree with his comments, I posted that basically Nate Pyle's observations wouldn't surprise me in the least. And I referred to Andrew Roots, the pastor in a secular age. And I think in that book, although I didn't really find anything in that book that showed too much of a way, I think the book attempts to do that. I didn't find, my way forward is not Andrew Roots' way forward. And I don't see a lot of similarity there. But I think his diagnosis of the situation is very right, especially with respect to, I mean, if David French really wants to understand this, he should read Andrew Roots' book. Because what Andrew Root basically does is, in that one chapter that in a previous video, I read nearly the whole chapter. What Andrew Root does in that chapter is pretty much walk you through the deconstruction of clergy and the church. And again, because pastors tend to be better educated in their own fields. And if they, if their education, in fact, exacerbates the meaning crisis and doesn't relieve it, you can see the crisis of church and the ministerial vocation very aptly laid out by Andrew Root. And Andrew Root has, this is not his only book, he was a youth pastor. He wrote a tremendously perceptive book on divorce. And so I've got a great deal of esteem. Maybe I should have tried to talk with Andrew, but the problem with those conversations with people like that is, you know, he doesn't have any idea where I'm coming from. And so it makes those kinds of conversations not ideal. Anyway, but Andrew Root's book is definitely a worthwhile read if you're in the ministry or considering a career in the ministry, or even just understanding why and how church has changed. And I think especially going into what Nathan, what Nate Pyle, again, I don't know that Nate Pyle is at all up to date on our meaning crisis conversations. David French probably should be as a journalist. Randy Blacketer is a friend of mine. He was a classmate of mine. He went on to get a PhD in church history, wrote a book on limited atonement, I believe, on the canons of Dort, has been working on a project of a new translation of Calvin's New Testament, a new translation of Calvin's Institutes. Randy is no longer in the church. And I think some of that has to do with his outspoken political nature, which if you follow him on Twitter is there for all to see. And Randy very much was in sync with David French's. Now, David French is a conservative. You're not going to go to the PCA without being a conservative in many respects. But also he's an ever-Trump-er. And so he's really in some ways part of, let's say, Republican establishment. Randy Blacketer agrees 100% with David French here. I left ministry in 2016. Many American Christians, he puts Christians in scare quotes, are simply bigoted culture warriors. And I cannot discern Trump and cannot discern Trump from Christ. And given the choice between the two, I'm not at all sure they'd choose Christ. Now, Randy pastored, I believe he pastored a church in Cannes. I didn't look this up. And the purpose of this video is not an expose on my friend. And whatever differences or non-differences we have politically, you know, I would continue to consider Randy my friend. He was a little upset by me retweeting something from the Babylon Bee. But Randy pastored some conservative churches. And I think he ran into, I would, my guess would be just off the top of my head, 70% of the Christian-informed church voted for Donald Trump. Christian-informed church is a fairly conservative denomination. Christian-informed church was a conservative break-off of the state church. And those aspects within the Christian-informed church have been persistent, even though the Christian-informed church also has a left wing. And the left wing of the Christian-informed church has tended to be in the clergy, not so much Calvin seminary. Calvin seminary has tended to be in the conservative span of the Christian-informed church, Calvin college, more moderate or liberal, generally speaking. And so again, if you're used to the interplay between politics and religion and evangelical denominations, this will surprise no one. Academics tend to be a little bit more high in openness, a little bit more liberal, so on and so forth in these denominations. But again, back to Nate Pyle's tweet, what's causing pastor burnout? Now, pastor burnout is not a new thing. Pastor burnout, in fact, and I think this speaks to my appreciation for Andrew Root's work here. Pastor clergy burnout and clergy departures are a far, have a lot more to do than I think just with Sky Jatani noting the difference between clergy leadership and then the flock. But I think in a lot of ways, those dynamics are also very much part of this meaning crisis. Now, in the piece I'm about to read, or at least some of by Sky Jatani, he notes leadersless movements. And I've been tracking that, Brett Weinstein has been talking about that quite a bit in his podcast, that in some ways, the new woke religiosity is a leaderless movement. Not that there aren't leaders there, and you can look at Kimby, at Ta-Nehisi Coates, at the author of D'Angelo, the author of White Fragility. You can certainly look at leaders in that aspect. And maybe AOC. So there are leaders, but I think part of what Brett Weinstein, in the leaderlessness of this movement, is that unlike many movements before, although you can point to leaders, there's not a pinnacle leader. This is much more of a movement flowing through the culture. Now, I re-listened to a good bit of, I woke up this morning and really wanted to dig into Dostoevsky's Life in the Underground. And so I found a really excellent 10-minute summary of it by another psychology professor who just recently retired and has a YouTube channel. I don't remember his name right now, but he had a 10-minute, he had a 10-minute digest of Dostoevsky's book, which I found very helpful. And then I noted that Google served me up Jordan Peterson's 2015 lecture on Dostoevsky and Nietzsche. And so I listened to a good bit of it on my walk this morning, and it was fresh. And, you know, I understood it certainly better than I understood Jordan Peterson when I first started listening to him a couple of years ago. And, you know, it was a masterful lecture. You know, the insight, you know, I was still taking away insights from that lecture, having obviously heard a lot of his material before. I don't know if I'd, I hadn't gone back and listened to all of his previous classes. But again, this was a Jordan Peterson that we miss. And, you know, part of the discussion we had at our meetup last Sunday night was, you know, my question for them was, essentially, when did Jordan Peterson sort of jump the shark in his book tour? And we know now that part of that had to do with not only his wife's medical condition, but his medical condition. And some people, I think, quite fairly question whether a book tour of that pace was necessarily the right move given both his wife and his medical conditions. But those were his decisions to make, and he made them. But, you know, at some point, you know, what would we like to see from Jordan Peterson going forward? A good rest. A good time with books. Some good conversations offline. Restoration of the foundations of his life. Whatever that means for the health of his wife and himself, and the welfare of his daughter and son, and son-in-law and granddaughter. But anyway, Brett Weinstein and his leaderless movement. I also have been watching more of Burn Power's stuff lately. I really enjoyed his 21st century cargo cults that sort of followed on a conversation that we had. A lot of interesting stuff in that video. But then Google served up for me a really nice video, probably my favorite video of his that I've watched so far, on the symbolism of horror films. Burn is, I had a friend in this church, Neil Hand, who was the music buyer for Tower Records, at least for opera and classical. And Neil had this voluminous memory, high resolution memory of art and music and literature. And Neil was also a very, very great friend of mine. And Neil was also a recovering alcoholic, and I learned almost everything I learned about AA, I learned from Neil. And I had such a wonderful relationship with Neil, and he passed away a number of years ago, and I miss him dearly. But Burn reminds me of Neil sometimes, because Burn has immersed himself in the culture, and Burn pulls out horror films that I would never hear of throughout my life. And Burn's also a pretty good video editor, and so I really enjoy his videos. If you've got the time, and the difficulty with his videos, you really have to watch them, because he uses, unlike me, for whom this is mostly talk, Burn you really have to watch. And I just deep appreciation for, he can pull out illustrations and examples that I would never have heard of. And so anyway, but he also in his Cargo Cults talks about these leadership, these leaderless movements. This is spiritual formation, and when I use the word spiritual, I use it highly intentionally here. This is a distributed agency, this is a principality. People don't have ideas, ideas have people. When we're talking about spiritual here, we're talking about whether it's the kind of spiritual movement that Bret Weinstein is talking about, or the kind of leaderless movement that Burn Powers is talking about, or the kinds of things happening in our culture. Again now, every time I hear someone in a secular space use that word spiritual, I always pause and ask myself, what do you really mean by that? And please lay out, one of you who sends me emails fairly regularly, quite good emails from blog posts and some other things, sent me an email recently on the need to return to ontology. Because in many ways to use that word spiritual, you're going to be backing into an ontological conversation with respect to being at its deepest level, and the assumptions that we bring to that. Because my best understanding of the secular term spiritual is that, is an acknowledgement of a lot of what Jordan Peterson deeply tried to address to the chagrin and dismay of the waning tide of celebrity, new celebrity atheism. That there are movements and agencies and powers that are at work that aren't necessarily instantiated or fleshed out in individuals. In fact, the kinds of leaders we see in these leaderless movements, those individuals that are themselves underneath the power of, Jordan Peterson would call them ideologies, but one might ask what in fact is an ideology but a principality and a power, as the apostle Paul would call them, or a spirit of the age, a zeitgeist, or something of that nature. That in fact that there are powers and things that are immaterial and not human, and non-human, that are above and beyond us and beside us, that are in fact at play. And in Jordan Peterson's 2015 lecture on Dostoevsky and Nietzsche, you know what he really gets into, and you know he got into all the usual things he got into in those lectures. I've listened to the 2017 versions of those lectures multiple times, and perhaps I should have gone back into some of the older ones. That when he talks about what had happened in Germany in the 1930s, and what happened in what became the Soviet Union at the end of the First World War, and Peterson notes nicely that you can't blame this all on Hitler and Stalin, that something else is possessing the land. If we go back to the book of Daniel, it might be the Prince of Persia, against which even an archangel must prevail. I think about the Apostle Paul, Ephesians 6, we battle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers in the heavenly realm, and even if you're a bit skeptical about non-human consciousness, there's no question that these spiritualities have agencies that move people and nations and history and time, and that in fact when I'm making a video here in my chair or doing something else, I am engaging in a sort of spiritual warfare. Now a lot of people might have questions as to whether Christians who are on their knees in prayer are also engaging in spiritual warfare. Well, I think what the church needs to do is update its language about what we mean by the spiritual. Well, now, Sky Gittani, well, I'll get to Sky's piece in a minute, but I think this all has everything to do with the impotence of the church, which David French, writing from the Bible Belt, likely does not feel anywhere near as strongly as one might feel on the coasts. Sacramento, 31 percent of people call themselves religious. In the United States, the number is, I just recently, I was working on the church website, so looking up some statistics. In the United States, in 1990, something like 85 percent of Americans consider themselves religious, and that number is somewhere like 69 percent, but in 2015, I think in Sacramento, 37 percent of people call themselves religious in Sacramento, meaning that if you're on the coasts, religiosity, not so much, which means that being a pastor in a place like this, you tend to notice it. You know, you can't just harvest from the masses of religious people, but the impotence of the church, and I don't remember what interview it was, but whatever, it was even a recorded conversation, but you know, part of what got me into this was Jordan Peterson's doing his thing, and I look at him and I say, well, what's the matter with me? This man who doesn't, whose identification as Christian is ambiguous, lectures to a packed hall of five to six hundred people in Ontario, another highly non-religious place, Ontario, Canada, people paying 40 bucks a pop to be there, and eventually taking his tour on the road and talking to hundreds of thousands of people, his videos gaining millions of views, and he doesn't believe at all, or that's not exactly his belief is different from the kind of standard you would imagine in an evangelical church, and he critiques evangelicalism and fundamentalism, usually kindly, but often aptly. So we have the impotence of the church, and we have the, one of the things that I've been noting as I've been having more conversations about estuary, and people making some videos that are unlisted about it, responses to me, the interest in estuary, not so much Living Stones Online, which is interesting to me, but estuary, what about this, what about this, this open space grabs the interest of people who are, either have walked away from the church, didn't grow up in the church, or kind of thinking of leaving, or are at least feeling the chafing within their churches, and then of course the meaning crisis. Sky Gittani wrote this piece, Sky Gittani wrote this piece, and I thought it was a good piece, who's really leading evangelicalism, the shepherds or the sheep? Now, now inherent in that title is the question, what is evangelicalism? Who's really leading the Roman Catholic Church? Well, you, well, you sort of know, it's Pope Francis, there's that other pope, but we won't talk about him, the one that Mary really likes. He's not pope anymore, but he's still alive, and yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Recently a priest in Sacramento was excommunicated from the Roman Catholic Church, because he keeps using Benedict's name in the mass instead of Francis, and so they kicked him out. Maybe I should look him up and see if he needs an estuary. But who's really leading evangelicalism, the shepherds or the sheep? Hint, it's not the shepherds, is it the sheep, or is it a principality in power, is it a spirit? 20 years ago when I was engaged to my future wife, a counselor told me the key to a successful marriage is not who you are on your wedding day, but who you are becoming. Healthy couples grow together over time, not apart. Based on that wisdom, the marriage between American evangelicals and their leaders is heading for a divorce. Now, which leaders? Because evangelicalism by its nature had churchless leaders. In the Dominican Republic, you, in the little denomination, the Christian Form Church of the Dominican Republic where I worked, you couldn't be a leader in that church if you didn't have a local congregation, and that was a pretty good rule. And we had a pastor in our zone, which was sort of like our classes, our little cluster of regional churches who, he was a pretty shady guy. He was, there was a lot of stuff going on, and nobody really trusted him, but those who were born Haitians and didn't have legal standing within the Dominican Republic sort of used him and deferred to him because he was of Haitian ancestry, and he spoke fluent creole, and he was better educated than the other pastors, but everybody knew that you couldn't trust him with money or maybe even with your wives. So, I have a classic story. And so at one point, the pastors really wanted him out of the ministry, and I knew that a former missionary had kind of put him in, and so they understandably came to me as the missionary and said, you need to put him out. I said, I'm not going to put him out. You can put him out. I'm a missionary. I'm your consultant. See, I sort of, instead of being the foundation of the church or the pope of the church, which they sort of wanted me to be in the zone, they wanted, I said, I'm a consultant. I'm going to sit here and talk to you, but I don't have any power in your denomination. I'm not even a minister in good standing in your denomination. I'm a minister in a different denomination. You, the classist, the local mesa, you put him out. And I went back and forth with that group over a couple years over that, and I can be a pretty stubborn guy. And eventually they did. And part of the way they did it was they told them, you don't have a local church because you can't find 10 baptized Christians who want to call you their pastor because nobody trusts you. You're just out there driving around being a denominational bureaucrat, but the people close to you don't trust you. And so at one meeting, at one confrontation when some of the other pastors were going after him, saying he didn't have a local church, he stood up and very famous, I'll never forget him standing up saying, Yo soy la iglesia madre. I am the mother church. And I thought, oh, we're at the Protestant Reformation right here right now. Because the hierarchy is not the church, the people are the church. And so when Sky Jatani complains about leaders and sheep growing apart, I'd want to say, well, Sky, tell me, tell me, tell me, what is the church? What is the church? Now, it doesn't mean that the sheep don't go astray. It's virtue of the metaphor. But what is the church? Since 81% of white evangelical voters lifted Donald Trump to the presidency. Oh, Donald Trump. See, you know, I talked about Donald Trump more directly in one of my previous videos. Donald Trump was a stock sermon illustration for me for years. You know, I grew up in the New York metropolitan area. Donald Trump's a very known quantity. Donald Trump, who built his Trump towers, Donald Trump, who opened his casino in Atlantic City, Donald Trump, who would go on Howard Stern, Howard Stern was on the radio when I was a young buck delivering lumber in North Jersey. And we had AM radios in those old trucks. And we listened to Howard Stern and Donald Trump would go there. And I know who Donald Trump is. I was more shocked than anyone when, well, I wasn't surprised he ran for president. I thought it was sort of a joke. Then when he started winning, ah, so now our politics and religion are sort of in parallel here. Remember, religion is always and politics is now. And so the separation of the elites, of the leaders, you know, Donald Trump was not supposed to win the nomination. Donald Trump was not supposed to be president. But while he didn't win the popular vote, but elected he was. And he might be insecure about Obama's, you know, crowds at his inauguration and he might want to fudge the numbers. And well, Donald Trump is all about publicity, always has been. But now, you know, suddenly Donald Trump gets elected and evangelical leaders have a crisis because there's a, there's a wise, there's a wise member of my church here who, he just died recently. He's a dear friend. I miss him too. When I decided to stay at my church years ago, I knew I would bury my friends. And I didn't necessarily know what it would be like to bury my friends. But I remember when we were making some changes here at church, he said, well, you know, there's an old saying, if you're out in front taking a walk and you look behind and nobody's following you, you're just walking alone. You're not really leading. So here are all these evangelical leaders and the sheep aren't following. Are you really a leader or do you just have status in a publication on a magazine or someplace else? Well, some people are following. Yeah, some people are. And of course the evangelical church is, is divided, but I get this 81 number thrown out as white evangelical voters again and again. Many evangelical leaders were wondering what happened to the movement when they were supposed to be guiding, supposed to be guiding, but hardly recognize anymore. Well, which leaders? Because last I've seen a lot of churches have pastors. Aren't those pastors leaders? Or maybe you don't like their leaders or maybe your, your, your evangelical industrial complex is out of whack. Can evangelical support immoral candidates and not lose their moral authority? I think Christian ministers have done pretty okay losing their moral authority all by their lonesome. How did evangelical go from a theological label to a political one? Ah, well that one's not too hard. It's the mass media, but it's not like evangelicals went there kicking and screaming. Billy Graham, pretty political, not as political as Jerry Falwell Sr., but you know that road was paved and, and neo-evangelicalism, you know, the founding of Fuller Theological Seminary, Billy Graham, we can name some of those leaders. You know, Christianity today, in many ways, you know, trying to, what's the difference between an evangelical and a fundamentalist? A fundamentalist is someone to the right of you. Evangelicals trying to deal with modernity and the meaning crisis in a way that, that they don't lose, they don't lose the narrative thread with traditional Christianity, because looking at the threat that theological liberalism and what was theological liberalism a subset of, but modernity, and all of this has to do with the meaning crisis. These questions have flooded blogs, editorials, and even mainstream media via articles by luminaries like Tim Keller, Mark Galley, Russell Moore, three men I respect. The latest book is written by Mark Laberton, president of Fuller Theological Seminary, featuring a collection of essays from diverse cross-sections of evangelicals, quote unquote, insiders, but inside what? Inside, see, if you understand the modernist fundamentalist fight in some ways, this tearing apart that Sky Giotani is talking about is sort of not dissimilar to the tearing apart of the end of the 19th beginning of the 20th century, the dissolution of institutions and the founding of new ones. It's a continual process. It's sort of like Hawaii where, you know, they keep making new Hawaii. It won't be too useful for a while, but volcanism does its thing. Evangelical, quote unquote, insiders wrestling with what it means to be an evangelical in the age of Trump. Well, I don't think Trump brought this on. I think like many other things, Trump reflected and exacerbated, but he didn't bring it on. All of this soul-searching and hand-wringing, however, is unlikely to have much impact because as Michael Lindsay has observed, there's a growing divide between ordinary evangelicals and evangelical leaders. Again, you're going to have to define an evangelical. Nobody seems to be able to. In my conversation with Dr. Doumay, you know, she noted that when she started her book, she was just going to go by the Bebington Four, which you can look up. It's on Wikipedia, kind of the standard definition of what an evangelical is, and she very quickly discovered as she was writing her book that that wasn't really going to work with the story she wanted to tell. A decade ago, Lindsay authored Faith in the Halls of Power. Ooh, there's that P word. Documenting the influence of elite evangelicals in American society, but he also recognized how little they resembled the rank-and-file evangelicals throughout the country. Those evangelicals who lead denominations per capita, they were the most important parachurch organizations, relief and mission agencies who write well-researched books and publish editorials in the New Yorker. Not a lot of evangelicals get written up in the New Yorker. May Walk the Halls of Power, well, powers created by the evangelicals as part of the success of the neo-evangelical movement, read Mary Worthen, great book on evangelicalism. But they are not the voices actually shaping popular evangelicalism. Sky Giotani is dead on right here. In fact, there's growing evidence that even local pastors are having less influence on the evangelicals filling their churches. This is Sky Giotani's point in the tweets to David French and Nate Pyle. During the 2016 election, for example, polls found that evangelical pastors ranked Mr. Trump last among Republican candidates, while ordinary evangelicals consistently put the malcontent mogul at the top of their lists. Responding to this finding, Ed Stetzer says, one of the few religious groups that national polls track are evangelical Christians, and it's hard not to notice a surprising gap between them and their pastors. I did not vote for Donald Trump. Some of my congregation did. I didn't vote for Hillary Clinton either. 2016 was not an anomaly. The gaps between elite and ordinary evangelicals have been growing for years. Back in 2013, the evangelical immigration table called the Obama administration and Congress to pursue comprehensive immigration reform that included compassionate treatment of undocumented immigrants and a path to citizenship. The effort made national news because it was led by the National Association of Evangelicals, and its signers included leaders from virtually every evangelical denomination, college, university, parish, church, relief, and mission organization in the country. Evangelical elites made their views on immigration clear and anchored it in a robust biblical theology. Ordinary evangelicals, however, were having nothing of it. It's a good article. This guy's a great writer. But he doesn't stand outside this dynamic. He's very much in it because Sky's part of those elite. Almost always with an article, you can read the last two paragraphs, you really get the punch line. I've also spoken to administrators at evangelical colleges navigating increasingly frequent conflicts between faculty, elite evangelical, and parents of students, ordinary evangelicals, who are distrustful of campuses that affirm political, cultural, and intellectual diversity. There's more going on than just that. The Big Ten evangelicalism championed by Billy Graham 70 years ago, and embraced by institutions like Fuller, Wheaton, and Gordon, is being challenged by siege mentality evangelicals clutching to their Bible and guns? Sky? Siege mentality evangelicals wanting a safe space for their children to avoid liberals and their ideas. We haven't moved one inch from our evangelical convictions, one exasperated university official told me. It's the people in the churches who've changed. In that book I was reading, I mentioned a few videos before of the faith, the faiths of the founding fathers. It was very interesting because I think it was James and Dolly Madison at a dinner party talking about theological issues that were in play and obviously you've got the rise of New England Unitarianism, Transcendentalism, Deism versus Trinitarianism, all of these issues. These for them were potent issues with respect to the politics of the day. Now there's no question in evangelicalism that the movement became highly political, but the way in which it became political, that's about gays and abortion, right? The way in which it became political was in some ways disconnected from the theological. I had a conversation with someone who was prompting me to get back to my LGBT series and I very much should. I'm ADHD, I get distracted, things get dropped, it's a mess. But she as well as many others expressed a little bit of frustration, why don't you give me the answer? And in a sense my answer to that is why don't you think for yourself? Because while I appreciate me being seen as an authority, I'm not as concerned as whether you wind up on the same side as me with some of these issues as whether you wind up on the same side as me with some of these issues as whether you have the tools and machinery to work through these issues at a deeper level than the kind that we see being worked through in the popular media, evangelical media included. And this is not really to go against Sky Jatani's point, but the the facile shallow tribalism and evangelicalism as now we see apparent in the mainline church and outside the church and on social media and in mass media simply will not do for the moment. And as I said to this individual and and as I said to this individual and as I said to this individual, you know, I think in many ways the the churches have let us down and this is part of the reason behind Living Stones Online and Estuary because the church needs to do better. And I really don't blame a lot of people who've walked away from the church Should they have? No. Should they stick with it? Yes. But I understand and I understand why pastors walk away from the church because it's hard. Should they walk away? No. Should they do better? Yes. But I understand. I suspect in the coming years there will be a reckoning. I think the reckoning is here. Apart from a dramatic realignment or unforeseen intervention the center will not hold. It's not holding. COVID is pushing it. And the divide between the elites and the ordinary evangelicals will become an irreparable breach. Probably something of like the breach that we saw in the fundamentalist modernist controversy. Now again thinking about that and I don't believe any historian has written about it and so I don't really know if it's the case but it seems a little more than coincidental that the last major pandemic in the United States happened between 1918 and 1920 and you could probably mark that as pretty close, now these things move slowly, as pretty close to the end of the major rift between the liberals and the modernists and the dawning of the fundamentalism and the conservative movement. And yeah, you can draw lines in lots of different ways, but those lines get very complex very quickly when you consider it. When you start looking simply beyond white and black, when you look simply beyond Protestantism and you look into Catholicism and the black church and Hispanic communities and and and that the what we know of this period of time is exhaustive and so trying to write about or to discern the trends requires significant diligent work. Evangelical elites will find themselves having to choose between finding new pastors or maintaining their institutions by falling in line with rather than shepherding the sheep. As the divorce between elite and ordinary evangelicals becomes more likely, one question remains unanswered, who will get the kids? And at this point, it's very much unanswered, but the rates of deconstruction are significant. I think those kids need an estuary. I had my conversation with Dr. DuMai that I posted last week and I achieved my goals with it in terms of having a I didn't intend the conversation to necessarily be a critique. I wanted to push on some things. Maybe I was too Maybe I was too Dave Rubin with her. I'm not a journalist. But I did want to get some question answers and I got answers that I was curious about. Chump derangement syndrome is real. It might break in 2020. It might have to wait until 2024, but it will break. Those of you who suffer from it, Donald Trump will not be president forever. You might argue that Donald Trump has done damage. Fair enough. Others will argue Barack Obama did damage. The The habit of bypassing Congress and doing things by executive order. Obama and Trump have both done that. Can we blame Congress for that? Yeah. Can we blame the president for that? Yeah, as is most likely the case. There's plenty of blame to go around. But what we're looking at here, what Sky Jatani is looking at is clearly populism. And populism goes beyond Democrat and Republican. Because of course the Bernie Sanders movement was a populist movement that didn't really take over the Democrats. But it took over the Republicans. And when Donald Trump is done, Republicans, just as Democrats, are going to have to come to terms with it. And whereas in a sense, elites who are keepers of institutions tend to be moderate of sorts. Our either our extremism or our bend towards moderation often has a lot to do with what we are responsible for. And whether you're a denominational official responsible for keeping the family together as in the reform Church of America, which is at this point pulling itself apart probably irrevocably. Or you're the leader of a political party. Or you're the leader of a political party. Or you're the leader of a political party. Or you're the leader of a political party. Or you're the leader of a political party. Or you're the leader of a college. You want to keep the thing together because after all that's kind of your job. And you know, hey, if you're a responsible person, do your J-O-B. And if you don't like it, resign. And for that reason, I think Nate Pyle is right. And David French is right. And Sky Jatani is right. Yeah, pastors are going to go because they're going to say, I'm done. And you know, I did my interview with John Sook. And John said that he was done. Now he found a church that he could pastor and really loves pastoring. A liberal, you know, United Church and Canada Church. He's very happy doing it there. But yeah, done with the CRC. Populism is a movement against elites. It's what happens when elites of the existing institution no longer fit. And people decide to go out on their own. And we started to see that. out on their own. And so when Donald Trump was elected, many people had many different motivations for that. But you know, I think about Jordan Peterson's comment, Jordan Peterson's a Canadian, he doesn't vote in American elections, but you know, and Jordan Peterson in the way that he so often could, he simply articulated, yeah, by all rights, I should have been a voter, but seeing the way things are going, F it, Donald Trump, a lot of people did that. Well, now they've had four years of Donald Trump and they can decide for their own if they want four more or that's the point of an election after four years of an American president. Let the process have its way. Part of I think the pain that evangelical elites feel with the election of Donald Trump was a denunciation of them and their agenda and they felt it too and they didn't like it. And so probably my harshest critique of, I don't know my harshest, but a critique I have of Dr. De May's book is that it's red meat. It's red meat for certain kinds of CRC people. It's red meat, just like I think daily wire and some of those other news channels are red meat. If you salivate sitting down to watch MSNBC or Fox News, well, you're watching red meat and fair enough. I like red meat. I like a steak and I like it juicy. I like it red in the middle. I like red meat, but I should understand what red meat is and what it's for and well, can you live on only a diet of red meat? I don't know. Ask Jordan Peterson. How'd that go? I have no idea. I'm not saying that dismissively. I'm just saying red meat is red meat. The movement against elites and the elites don't like it. They're losing their sheep and you lose your sheep, you're going to lose your job because you shear the sheep and you make the wool and that's how you get paid and yeah. Anti-intellectualism in American history has a long tradition. American politics has long had a populist strain to it and that strain is accentuated in American evangelicalism and I've read a number of times, it's an article I referred to with Dr. DuMai, an article by Mark Knoll about what happened when Americans were forced to leave the church and they were forced to leave the church. I think that's what happened to Americans when they went over the Appalachian and left behind the deconstructing, the letting go of the church and starting your own ones has a long tradition in American church history. Remember that American culture is deeply Protestant. Well, what does that mean? It means that a Christian has a queen, God bless the queen, God bless Jonathan Pigeot but we Americans have presidents for better or for worse and America is deeply Protestant in this sense in that if you don't like your church, don't just go look for another one, go start your own. Entrepreneurial in that way and American evangelicalism has had that and so that evangelicals walk away from their elite, well-educated, articulate, bright leaders, past evangelical leaders would say, oh, they did that to us. That's what they do. That's what this sheep does. That's the brand of sheep you've been shepherding the whole time. You haven't figured that out yet. Seminary education, I remember at the end of the church growth movement, the seeker movement, it's still going in places in the Midwest and sometimes in California. I remember somebody noting that seminary education is a negative indicator of church growth. All these egghead pastors, is my head shaped like an egg? Sure is. Do I read lots of books? Sure do. Do I have a seminary education? Absolutely. Do I show books all the time on my channel? Sure do. Negative indicator of church growth. My church is dying. I didn't turn it around. But then we complain about why, why, why? All that masculinity, all that rebelliousness, all that populism. I noted on Twitter, Nevada City, Nevada City, and Grass Valley, Nevada City, they had a Black Lives protest. I was actually there last Saturday and noticed some of the Black Lives Matter signs and thinking, not a lot of black folks up here at all. But you know, they had a universalist, those towns up there, Grass Valley and Nevada City are interesting little towns. Because if you're against income inequality and wealth inequality, don't go up there because you walk around there and it's very clear that there's a few group of people who are very wealthy and there's a lot of people who are very rural. And I'll tell you, poverty is not just for the inner city. Some of the poorest places in California are rural areas. Just drive north of Sacramento, north of Redding. The poor, poor communities. You might have a rancher that has all of the money and then all the poor folks. We used to have a Christian informed church that I had some responsibility for way up north in California and the pastor that went up there, he felt it. He kind of took the side of the poor folks. The folks who paid his bills didn't like it. I respect that pastor for that. I've got a populist aspect to me too, even though I like books and like thinking thoughts and all of that. So what masculinity is toxic? Is it this white masculinity that's in Nevada City pushing around some of the Black Lives Matters protesters or is it the black young men who are throwing paint on this old lady who's saying, I live in this neighborhood you're not helping the black folks that live in this neighborhood by burning it down. I know a lot of black folks who feel the same way. But getting all up in her face and throwing paint on her and mocking her and masculinity? Are we against masculinity? Well, or is it masculinity? At one point I saw someone stand in and I don't know what he was saying but I hope that that young man was saying, hey, come on. If you're young and masculine and have testosterone, don't beat up on old ladies. What's wrong with you? Go pick on someone your own size. But then someone sent me this black male privilege checklist and very quickly it seems, all right, well, we got to agree to the cookies. There you go, track away. Black male privilege checklist. How many articles? Almost 100. I'm able to be out in public without fear of being sexually harassed by individuals or groups of the opposite sex. That's your privilege. Own it. Masculinity. Well, they came for the white men. Sorry, my black male friends, they're coming from you, the Humanities Project, Arizona State University. Wow. I think this is some of what made Jordan Peterson a sensation. And when we were talking about Jordan at the meetup, it's funny that now that we're considering changing the name to something else, we're talking about Jordan more and more. Maybe that'll happen. That's fine. Nobody's going to accuse Jordan Peterson of being anti-intellectual. If they don't like what they say, they might say he's a bad intellectual, but he likes the fancy words and he likes the science and he likes the long lectures and he likes to quote Dostoevsky and Nietzsche and all of these people. Isn't that amazing? He's a great guy. He's a great guy. He's a great guy. And all of these people is not anti-intellectual. And in fact, what Jordan Peterson created amongst a bunch of people, both in church and outside of the church, is a hunger for the intellect and a desire to talk about obscure things and a hunger to go back and read books and learn things. It's not anti-intellectual. Maybe the intellectual elites are a little sour because a lot of them didn't like Jordan Peterson. Why? Because he could actually talk to the people and they understood him. And I don't know, again, depending on what happens with Jordan, he's got COVID now, I don't know where this goes. We don't know the future. I don't know where this goes, but what we saw in those couple of years of the Jordan Peterson wave was significant and how significant it will be over time. It's not just what Jordan accomplished. It's what Jordan set in motion. Jordan set me in motion in my YouTube channel. That's been significant, at least for me. And for those of you who are listening and those who tell me that you listen almost every day. And here's the thing about Jordan. The populations manifest distributed spiritual realities. There are archetypes. What are archetypes? And Jordan goes through the Lion King and Pinocchio and the wild animals. And once Jordan teaches us to fish for archetypes, we start pulling them out of all sorts of places, don't we? And of course, Peugeot has very much lived through that. If you learn about a little bit of symbolism from Jordan Peterson, you'll learn a ton from Jonathan Peugeot. And if you learn a little bit of psychology and cognitive psychology, you'll learn more from John Vervecky. And I don't know that Brett and Eric Weinstein would be where they were if it weren't for Jordan Peterson or the hoax paper trio. So archetypes, distributed, social, dramatic, we act them out. We like watching them being acted out. And we see movies that are popular and oh, by the way, George Lucas, George Lucas was cribbing his notes from Joseph Campbell. Yeah, teach me to fish for archetypes. I'll find them all over the place. But archetypes are these dramas. They're extended. They're social. They're multi-personal. And of course, symbolism is sort of an already more compressed aspect of there where there are images. They can be still images. They're pre-linguistic. They're right brained. And in my, not a lot of people watch my superhero video. I was surprised by that. I thought that was a good video. Maybe I'm an elite who's griping about losing his sheep or his mooks. But you know, so you've got archetypes. You've got symbol. And then you've got this literalistic language layer that we use. And again, all these three layers are needed, but they're in relationship to one another. And they're related. And Jordan Peterson laid all this stuff out and it was like a bomb went off. People would listen to, start listening to Jordan Peterson. It's like, wham. You know, that was Jordan Peterson. I'm not going to use woke, but that was Jordan Peterson pill, boy, because I, and people would ask me, you know, my son or daughter is drifting away. Give him some Jordan Peterson. See what that does. You know, this trial and if, you know, you're going to complain to me about that. I see doctors do it all the time with psych meds here. Take this, see how it goes. Yeah. It didn't really help Jordan Peterson. That's really where estuary is coming from. We need a sandbox or maybe a whole beach front to kind of start building stuff and to talk. And you know, you need room to explore. We need space to grow. We need to plant some new plants. We need to try some new things. Say, well, pastor, that's dangerous. Yeah, it's dangerous. Life is dangerous. Now, hopefully, and I've, you know, sort of found my image for estuary, which is this amazing monastery town in France, St. Michael. And I've been there for a long time. And I've been there for a long time. And I've been there for a long time. And I've been there for a long time. And I've found this very, very town in France. St. Michael. St. Michael. didn't worry about Jaws. But there's current going along on the beach and it's sort of like spirit. And that current would move me down the beach. And then at some point, my mom would be on the beach saying, I'm like, what do you mind, mom? I'm fine. But she wanted me out in front of her on the beach. And the current would pull me away. And every time I'd jump up and down in that New Jersey surf, the wave would push me over a little bit more, a little bit more, a little bit more. So yeah, playing on the beach is dangerous. Playing on the surf is more. But you need a fixed orientation. You need a point. And it's the same with kite flying dynamics. Without a fixed point, you don't know the kite can't get air. I don't know how long this video's gone. I have a second part to it that I don't know if I'm going to just. My original idea was there'll be one part and then two parts. And I'm thinking about this shorts channel. And I don't know if I can ever make anything short. I should really try harder. But the church needs an estuary. And estuaries are going to happen. You've got the outflow from the river and you've got the sea, and the river's going to flow, and stuff's going to happen. So why don't you build your church by the estuary? And if you're already a church, why don't you start an estuary? What does that mean? I don't know. I'm still figuring it out. And so, as I said to Andrea, Andrea's going to release a video this week and I'll release it too. Because she had questions about estuary and she had some of the stuff that she had said on the Bridges of Meaning Discord. I thought I want to talk to her about that because I want to talk about this to people because I'm learning from you what we need because I don't know. Because I'm living in the town. I'm living in the church. And I need to hear from you outside of the church. In that Jordan Peterson video he mentioned Heidegger and care. And that's right. Without care there's no life. It's deeply tied with meaning. So I don't know. I'll pause here and then start the second half. More Trump. More David French. Like I said, I don't know if I'm going to split this up. At this point I'm thinking I probably won't because in many ways as I look over it the ideas come together. Bill Maher. I first noticed Bill Maher back when he was doing Politically Incorrect and I used to TiVo that show and tape that show and I used to use elements of that show from my sermon illustration. So no, none of this is terribly new. And I know some of you hate Bill Maher. And fair enough. Remember comics are supposed to be beneath contempt. And Bill Maher is Bill Maher. Always has been. Always will be. He's Bill Maher. So love him, hate him. And this will tweak some of you too. He doesn't like Trump of course. But he had a video that's caught attention where he has a eulogy for Trump. And I noted on Twitter even Atheist Bill Maher. Atheist Bill Maher who in 2008 sort of at peak new atheism makes a movie religious where he kind of does the new atheist thing and has all the new atheist tropes and keep that religion out of politics. Fair enough. Fair enough. But of course he had Jordan Peterson on and I could see why he was fascinated with Jordan Peterson. Bill Maher is definitely low in agreeableness. Jordan Peterson not so much but Peterson's his own cat. And Maher at least likes to be a comic truth teller. And that's what comics should do. Comics should tell the truth as they see it. And you know just because someone tells what they think is the truth doesn't you know. It's out there. Deal with it. Think about it. Push against it. Whatever. But he's putting it out there. And so hey Bill Maher. Bill Maher's doing Bill Maher. And I don't have a problem with that. Doesn't mean I always agree with him. I mean obviously a guy who says religious and here's someone that believes in the virgin birth and the resurrection of the dead and the second coming of Jesus. I'd be subject to his mockery but I could take a little mockery. But what really struck me about the Trump eulogy was I couldn't I couldn't not have David Brooks. It was really a wonderful book. I really enjoyed this book. I wrote about it. I blogged about it back in my blogging days. You can find lots of blogs on my blog about this book The Road to Character because what he had is all these little tiny little biographies of famous people and and you know whatever you think of David Brooks he's a good writer. I've used this illustration a ton in sermons because I think it's excellent. It's just the introduction to the book. Adam 2. Recently I've been thinking about the difference between the resume virtues and the eulogy virtues. The resume virtues are the ones you list on your resume. The skills that you bring to the job market and that contribute to the external success. The eulogy virtues are deeper. They're virtues that get talked about at your funeral. The ones that exist at the core of your being whether you are kind, brave, honest, or faithful. What kind of relationships you formed. This is exactly what Bill Maher is talking about Donald Trump. Now is Bill Maher fair to Donald Trump? Probably not because in my experience people are very complex and Donald Trump more than anyone else I think. My take on Donald Trump is at least part of what he's doing. Scott Adams, I give Scott Adams some credit with this, he's playing a role and and I suspect Donald Trump understands when he's playing a role. He's a reality TV star. He's an actor in some ways. He's playing a role. Now so so in many ways Bill Maher is eulogizing the part that Donald Trump is playing. I think anyway you can watch Maher if you want to and decide whether it's fair or not but the point here is about these resume virtues versus eulogy virtues. Most of us say that eulogy virtues are more important than resume virtues but I confess that for long stretches of my life I've spent more time thinking about the latter than the former. Our educational system is certainly oriented around the resume virtues more than the eulogy virtues and read the introduction to Dallas Willard's The Divine Conspiracy for a great illustration of that. The public conversation too. The self-help tips in magazines, the non-fiction bestsellers. Most of us have clear strategies for how to achieve career success than we have clearer strategies for how to achieve career success than we do for how to develop a profound character. One book that helped me think about this were these two sets of virtues was The Lonely Man of Faith which was written by Rabbi Joseph Slovichik in 1965. Now when I read this actually it was just a number of months ago I picked up The Lonely Man of Faith and there's actually some really good YouTubes about this rabbi here. It was very interesting. You know 1965 in Protestant theology you're sort of at the peak of neo-orthodoxy. Well not the peak necessarily but it's still pretty high. The nebors and so understanding this rabbi in that context was really helpful but very very interesting. Helping me understand a little bit better some of what goes on in American Judaism. I should be able to say his name but I can't remember right now. Slovichik, Slovichik, Slovichik noted that these two accounts of Genesis, that the two accounts of Genesis, of creation in Genesis and argued that these represent the two opposing sides of our nature which he called Adam 1 and Adam 2. Modernizing Slovichik's category a little bit, didn't need that much modernizing, it was pretty modern when he wrote it and what he was his whole project was. He wanted to you know the the history of Judaism in America is is at least as interesting as the the history of Christianity in America. Fascinating. Even the fact of my own great grandfather going Dutch reform, did that happen in the Netherlands or did that happen in Western Michigan? I don't know but so it's it's involved in me and my father and my grandfather becoming christian form ministers for Pete's sakes. What do these Jews do? Anyway, Adam 1 is the career-oriented ambitious side of our nature. Adam 1 is the external is the external resume Adam. Adam 1 wants to build, create, produce, discover things. He wants to be high status and win victories. Adam 2 is the internal Adam. Adam 1 wants to embody certain moral qualities. Adam 2 wants to have a serene inner character, a quiet but solid sense of right and wrong. Not only to do good but to be good. Adam 2 wants to live intimately, to sacrifice self in the service of others. Adam 2 is very christian. To live in obedience to some transcendent truth, to have a cohesive inner soul that honors creation and one's own possibilities. Adam 2 is fighting the meaning crisis baby. Adam 2, Adam 2 wants meaning. Adam 1 wants stuff or that's not really a fair split of them either. I have to do more thinking about that. Well, Adam 1 wants to conquer the world. Adam 2 wants to obey a calling to serve the world. You can probably sense two sides of David Brooks in this writing. While Adam 1 is creative and savers his own accomplishments, Adam 2 sometimes renounces worldly success and status for the sake of some sacred purpose. While Adam 1 asks how will things work, how things work, science. Adam 2 asks why things exist, the manifest image and what ultimately we are here for, meaning. While Adam 1 wants to venture forth, Adam 2 wants to return to his roots and savor the warmth of a family meal. While Adam 1's motto is success, Adam 2 experiences life as a moral drama. His motto is charity, love, redemption. Very christian David Brooks. Slavichik argues that we live in contradiction between these two atoms. Yes, he's right. The outer majestic atom and the inner humble atom are not fully reconcilable. We are forever caught in self-confrontation. We are caught to fulfill both persona and plus and must master the art of living forever within the tension between these two natures. It's deeply impactful of the meaning crisis. The hard part of this confrontation, I'd add, is that Adam 1 and 2 live by different logics. Adam 1, the creating, building and discovering Adam lives by a straightforward utilitarian logic. Its logic of economics input leads to output. Effort leads to reward. Practice makes perfect. Pursue self-interest. Maximize your utility. Impress the world. Adam 2 lives by an inverse logic. It's a moral logic, not an economic one. You have to give to receive. You have to surrender to something outside yourself to gain surrender within, to gain strength within. You have to conquer your desire to get what you crave. Success leads to the greatest failure, which is pride. Failure leads to greatest success, which is humility and learning. In order to fulfill yourself, you have to forget yourself. In order to find yourself, you have to lose yourself. David Brooks has a chapter on Augustine in this book. No doubt when you read this first part. To nurture your Adam 1 career, it makes sense to cultivate your strengths. To nurture your Adam 2 moral core, it is necessary to confront your weaknesses. Which brings me to Jerry Falwell Jr. and back to David French, which I talked about in the first part of this video or a separate video depending on how I splice them up and we'll see where this goes. Last time I did two videos, everybody watched the long one anyway and this one is long. Jerry Falwell Jr. recently got suspended as president because of a picture he had with his wife's secretary. She pregnant and I guess she, you know, those jeans are a little restrictive, so she had her pants open and I just thought it, Jerry Falwell Jr. I actually, I didn't, wasn't upset by Jerry Falwell's picture. He's just messing around. Doesn't the guy get a right to mess around? Ah, but this gets more complicated than that. So his buttons were on, his pants was undone and I didn't really need to see Jerry Falwell Jr.'s undies. You know, I remember when my wife was pregnant, you get pregnant and your clothes don't fit and you know, yeah that happens, but maybe Jerry's gained some weight and, but then a drink, was an alcohol in that drink and I don't come from a tea totaling tradition, but some of the cheeks, fair enough, Esther had the best line. I read Esther's tweet, I laughed my head off. I have a modest proposal for Jerry Falwell Jr. Try being a fundamentalist for a day. That's why Esther's a genius. She wrote a good piece on it too, but the tweet, the tweet took the cake. But, so David French wrote a piece on it. Let's see, do I quote it? Yeah, I do. Jerry Falwell, however, was blazing a new trail. He was living his sin out. Careening from controversy to controversy, even as his students and faculty lived under the tradition, more traditional strict moral rules of Christian education. In response, Falwell didn't bother pretending to be a spiritual leader. Instead, his argument was higher education, there was a higher educational equivalent of a scoreboard. His success excuses his sin. And now it's getting interesting. Which Adam? Adam 1 or Adam 2? Is that really the right split with this? Now in all fairness, a good friend of mine was recently Title IX'd out of Wheaton College. My friend, from what I can see, the chargers were ticky tacky and knowing my friend as long as I have, I'm not surprised he violated some sensitivities. I'm skeptical that those were the real reasons they wanted him out. Maybe I'll get him on my channel to talk about that at some point. Jerry Falwell tweets, you're putting your ignorance on display. It's kind of like Trump here. Always take the offensive. I'm not sure it's going to work for Jerry Falwell Jr. Jerry Falwell, I've seen Donald Trump, you're no Donald Trump. If you really want to be the bad boy, be the bad boy. You know, if someone found a picture of Donald Trump with his arm around some hottie that wasn't his life and his pants undone, so? You shoot someone in the middle of Fifth Avenue. It's Donald Trump. You've put your ignorance on display. I've never been a minister, UVA trained lawyer, and commercial real estate developer for 20 years. University president for the last 12 years, student body tripled to 100,000 plus enrollment from zero, endowment from zero to $2 billion and 1.6 billion in new construction over those 12 years. There's a man named Galen Biker, former president of Calvin College. Calvin College similarly has had drama over presidents in the past. Galen Biker is politically conservative. Calvin College's tamer version of Jerry. Galen Biker was the president of Calvin College when everything fell apart in 2008 and Calvin's finances were a mess and yeah Biker, Biker, he was shown the door. He took the fall, but that gets into stuff I'm not going to talk about here, which is ongoing battles within my own tradition and denomination between right and left, between that perhaps is why this video should stay as one because all the issues that I talked about in the previous part of this video. And it has everything to do with the seeker church movement. I remember before I came to Living Stones, interviewing for a job and I was in the Dominican Republic and someone asked me, do you think business practices should be used in the church? I was a missionary and I didn't know what he was talking about because the seeker movement was just getting going when I was in seminary, but I was learning about boving and kiper and theology and all that. So I wasn't paying that much attention to North American church growth because I was going overseas anyway. But the seeker movement, Bill Hybels, Rick Warren, seeker movement came in and Bill Hybels, son of a successful businessman, sold produce. Bill Hybels father sold produce, Christian reform church member in Kalamazoo, Michigan. Good friend of mine as a teenager cut the grass for Bill Hybels mom. You know, these are all in-house stuff. You know, how to use business practices, how to use media to help the church be effective in creating a safe space for a dangerous message. Bill Hybels, great line, one of his great lines. He's very good at lines. Bill Hybels, of course, his reputation slightly tarnished by a little bit of sexual scandal of his own. Jerry Falwell Jr. I'm not a minister. Ah, but you're a university president of a Christian college that is a fundamentalist college that has strict expectations of students. I went to Calvin College, not Wheaton. Wheaton had a pledge. Calvin didn't have one. Although they had some community standards for students, you know, it was a dry campus and smoking pot would get you in trouble and, you know, I was a security guard so I was, I had to enforce some of those things. But yeah, Jerry, are you the leader of the band there or not? Make no mistake, David French goes on. Those are impressive stats. The envy of countless Christian college presidents, but these presidents, including the men I know without fail, believe their highest calling isn't raising money or building an athletic program, but rather demonstrating as best they can Christ-like servant leadership for students, faculty, and staff. We're Protestants after all, you know, after all, priesthood of all believers, one speed. We want everybody on the same page. We want this to be Geneva. And preserving the moral, the spiritual integrity of their institution from the top down. Now again, I wasn't, you know, there's some business between Jerry Falwell Jr. and a pool boy that I didn't understand. Didn't have to do with sex, but money or something, I don't know. He's a real state developer. Of course he's friends with Donald Trump. Of course they're together on that. So what are the standards? How should they be enforced? Where should they be? And again, in some ways, what's interesting is that I put next to it, because I was looking for, because I remembered that tweet from Esther and I thought it was absolutely hilarious. So I had to scroll down through her tweets and I found this tweet. I guess I haven't been talking to Esther as much on Twitter and her tweets aren't coming up as much in my stream because I don't necessarily spend a lot of time on Twitter, but maybe I should scroll down more. So Esther quoting from, of course the title grabs, the nudes aren't going away. Kate Hill's okay with that. What? What? What? New York Times? What? What? What? What's Esther tweeting about now? She was in leggings in a tank top, hunched over the computer, which is propped on wobbly kitchen table. Well, what does that mean? Well, I'll get to that in a minute. So I vaguely in my mind, remembered a female me too sex scandal where she and her husband and their divorce, I mean, just a huge amount of mess. I mean, that's a, that's a Donald Trump mess without the money and the NDA to kind of keep a lid on it all. It's certainly way bigger than a Jerry Falwell mess, but apparently, you know, she out of Congress. I didn't even know who she was. And, and guess she took some pictures or someone took pictures and they got out and on and on and on and on and on. But what's she doing with the leggings in the tank top? Well, we'll get to that in a minute. How to evaluate success in the postmodern age. That's really what we're talking about here because Bill Maher asked questions about how do we evaluate success? And Bill Maher notes that lots of people, including Barbara Bush, didn't want Donald Trump at the funeral. George W. Bush made it to all the funerals. Donald Trump, please don't come. We don't want your kind of drama here. Fair enough. But what's it going to be like at Donald Trump's funeral? That's Bill Maher's question and he plays with it, of course. And Maher is clever. But how to evaluate success? Atom one and atom two? Resume virtues versus eulogy virtues? Well, somewhere along the line, I think the Twitter, no, it was a pocket because I get the things from pocket. Pocket's always interesting to show me what people thinking are really good articles. And Gina Davis. Oh, I haven't heard from her for a while. And that kind of triggers the whole, well, if you're a leading lady, once you hit 40, you know, nobody wants to give you a job. Well, why? Why? Does that mean you're not a good actor? You'd be the best actor in the world, but it's movies after all. It's a visual medium. Why do all the women on Fox News, not just Fox News, ABC, NBC, all the television news, all the local news, why are those women so extraordinarily beautiful? There's a local woman, she was anchor on the ABC affiliate here, beautiful woman. Now she's on radio. And I think, at what age do they send you to radio? So Gina Davis, as soon as I hit 40, I fell off the cliff. I really did. That's an interesting article where, for the most part, this is the Guardian after all, for the most part talked about how she has this film festival where she's, you know, working her quotas on, you know, LGBT and people of color and all of that. So now she devotes her life to promoting justice by trying to hit all the expected reprisational quota benchmarks. And I thought, okay, I guess this follows the narrative in terms of you got there at least partly because you were young, white and pretty. And well, why does young, white and pretty still sell? Well, I'm against that. Well, are you against sales? I mean, what is it? Well, it's, it's, well, the question is, how do we know what's good? How do we evaluate success in post-modernity? And that reminded me of this Edward Dock's piece that was from July 20, 2011. And I first picked this up out of a Tim Keller sermon, because he would drop the best illustrations. And so part of what I do is I'd listen to a sermon. So when I'd hear a killer illustration, boy, I would get on my blog and type that illustration out and put it there. So again, those of you who read, who do see my blog, if you see that I post something and think pastor shouldn't post this, I, I can promise you there won't be any posts of me with my fly open, at least not intentionally. But I post things on my blog because I want to remember it. I'm not promoting it. I don't necessarily agree. I don't necessarily disagree. It's just data. Okay. So that's my blog, unless I'm writing it. And then obviously there's more involved, but that's my blog. My blog was what I did before YouTube. More people read my, listen to my YouTube than ever read my blog. But the question is, well, his Edward Dock's, and I still wonder if that's his real name or if it's some kind of troll, you know, postmodernism is dead. So it's a good article. Read it. The link is below. The second point is deeper. Still post postmodernism aimed further than merely calling for a reevaluation of power structures aimed further than that. It said that we are all in our very selves, nothing more than the breathing aggregate of these structures. I've been reading again, notes, notes, notes from the underground Dostoevsky. Wow. Wow. The way that book starts, it's like, yeah, it's a masterpiece. Why haven't I read it before? Because I'm stupid. It's really good. Read it. It contends that we cannot stand apart from the demands and identities that these structures and discourses can form. Discourses confer upon us. In other words, postmodernity implicates us all in the structures we enjoy. So, uh, Ms. Gina Davis, okay, fair enough. You're trying to write the world now that your Hollywood career is done, but, um, didn't, isn't all that money, dirty money that you got that all that status that now you're using it to, you know, to somehow right the wrongs. It contends that we cannot stand apart from the demands and identities that these structures and discourses confer upon us. Adios, the enlightenment. See you later, romanticism. Instead, it holds that we move through a series of coordinates on various maps, class, gender, religious, sexual, sexual, ethic, situational, and that these coordinates are actually only, are actually our only identity. Get that. Our only identity. What Dostoevsky is, is dealing with is, but what about this spite that wells up within me? Where does that come from that will smash the piano keys that even if rationality and the new atheist vision of who human beings are supposed to be, I'd still smash them. What's the deal with me? Dostoevsky asks. And, and, and Peterson rightly notes in 2015 piece, in 2015 lecture on Dostoevsky and Nietzsche that Freud imagined, well, we're, we're, we're born, we're born healthy and, and kind of taking a page from, from the, from the, from the romanticists that, that, you know, and then we get malformed by the traumas of our youth from our toilet training or, or the nanny that felt us up or, or what have you. Where, where, where others said, no, we're broken from birth. Here comes an Augustinian anthropology recently talking to someone who basically said, you know, if you get your anthropology wrong, theologically, religiously, you just, you're just, you're just not going to get anything else straight. And I think they have a point and it's Thomas Sowell's point in many ways. But we're entirely constructed. But part of what Jordan Peterson deconstructs in that is, yeah, but, but, but not just the, not just the, the cultural class. Remember Brett Weinstein and his Weinstein and his two tracks, we have the genetic and then the cultural. And, and in a way the postmodernists want to say, oh, it's just the cultural is, is, is purely formed and constructed by all of this. And Jordan Peterson says, no, this goes back all the way to our friend the lobster. Even this squishy one that I have to blow up because he keeps falling off the shelf. That, that, okay, fair enough. And, and, and what Dostoevsky in Notes from the Underground is really wrestling with is, am I somebody? Am I beyond just the piano keys or am beyond the malformation? Is there really a human person? That's the meaning crisis in many ways. And there is nothing else but the class, gender, religious, sexual, ethnic, situational constructions of who we've become. There is nothing else. There's no there there. And, and all of these, all of these waving postmodern flags on top, but underneath burrowing down looking for the secret, sacred self and then demanding, aha, this is who I am. I'm born this way. And the postmodernists say, you're not born anyway. You're just, you're just the sum of your constructions. That's all you are. So time to repent. And you would ask, ask, why would I repent from that? That's all that I am. It's all that I can be. No, you can change. Where do you get that from? Change into what? That's as bad as Brett Weinstein's pro, you know, assassin robot saying, Oh, I won't follow my programming. Well, it's plugged in. See, this doesn't have any programming. So it doesn't really, will my computer stop following its programming? It's a closed system. It's all group A to pull back that old video reference. And this is an oversimplified, oversimplified nutshell. It is the main challenge that postmodernism brought into the great banquet of human ideas because it changed the game from one of self-determination, Kant et al. And other, and other determination, theism, Calvinism. Am I constructed? I am constructed, therefore I am. I am oppressed, therefore I am. But here we come to the last of the trickiest questions of all. How do we know postmodernism, postmodernism is over and why? And it's a longer article. I'm just reading two paragraphs. And he works on that a little bit. And then he says, in other words, increasingly artistic success has become nothing about, has become about nothing except money because there is no muse. There is no self. There is no thing that is expressing itself. The art is merely representation of all of the formation that have been putting these places. And there may be dramatic examples like Yosemite is a dramatic example of glaciation. And maybe there are certain tricks that we look at and we say, ooh, ah, big wall. Ooh, ah, Eric Hodel climbing up it. But it's just us and our programming. It's no different from programming a little jiff that says ooh, ah, ooh, ah, all the time, never ending. It's just programming. So how do we know? How do we know? How do we evaluate? Is it, is it, is it Jerry Falwell Jr. expressing the self-discipline of a conservative fundamentalist tradition? Try being a fundamentalist for a day, Jerry? Or Jerry Falwell Jr. is just doing what his business, his business programming insists. Is there any Jerry Falwell Jr.? All there is is money. All there is is success. And increasingly artists have come to judge their own success in that way too. This is the reason today that we feel the genre writers cry, I sold millions so powerfully. Even though in truth, it can say little about the art form other than it sold millions. Changing disciplines. If we take this commodification, commoditization of art to its natural limits, we arrive at Damien Hearst's Diamond-encrusted Skull for the Love of God 2007. Commoditization has here become only the point. The work such as it is centers on its cost and value and comprises also, I would say mainly, the media storm surrounding it. The rumors that it was bought for 50 million pounds or that Hearst himself bought it or that he offset his tax bill by claiming diamonds as tax deductible artistic materials or that he didn't buy it at all or that nobody has bought it and so modernity so postmodernly on. The paradox being this, that by removing all criteria, we are all left with nothing but the market. And it's so interesting because the postmodernists are all, oh the market is evil. That's all you're left with. How do you know evil and good unless you're cheating on postmodernity? Which you are because you can't help it because that's what you have to do. I'm oppressed therefore I am. It's my Cartesian certainty based on this moment of anger or outrage. The paradox being this, the opposite of what postmodernity originally intended. What matters is movement in the narrative. So here she is in her tank top in front of her cell phone making YouTube videos or a podcast or a video on YouTube. Or something because she's no longer a representative of the people of the great state of New York in the United States Congress. She's a celebrity, probably going to make more money. And well how did she get her celebrity? Her husband took naughty pictures and either did or didn't leak them. And anyway, throttle. I didn't know that word before. There you are. How is the movement evaluated? How much money? How much power? How many likes? How many views? How many people? How much can? But here's the thing. What is that money and the masses and the popularity? What is that all in leverage of but the future? Because the money is potential. That's the power of money. Money is storified, narrativized potential. That's what money is. And population, notoriety, fame. Everybody knows your name. Not because you passed some landmark legislation but because, and not even that you wanted to invite a girl into your marital bed with your husband, but because she was a staff worker. And so therefore, me too. But well, Donald Trump was in some ways famous for being famous. And the money and the popularity is potential but it's all potential for the future. And here we are engaged in the question of meaning because the meaning of money is potential in the future. Or, you know, maybe status. That's certainly one of them. If you look at Glenn Lowry's, I thought it was a really good conversation with David Kaiser. Kaiser says, money is the privilege. It's much more important than skin color. It's much more important than gender or orientation or all of this. It's the privilege because it's potential and it's status and it's the future and it's what we're all looking about. It's why you pick up the phone when the big donor calls and the widow who put in two cents, well, she has her treasure in heaven but we're skeptical about heaven. And even Bill Maher gets it. But it's not a funeral. It's a eulogy. But what is the secular replacement for well-done, good and faithful servant? Well, it's to be remembered as a good person. It's to be remembered to be on the right side of history. It's to be remembered to be important. But as each passing year goes on, I'm just reading notes for the underground now and I'm a reasonably educated person perhaps. So who cares what they say at your funeral, right? Right? Donald Trump, do you remember what they played and what he sang as he had the first dance in the inaugural ball? I did it my way. Donald sang, hey. Now, of course, Donald holds up a Bible but what Donald Trump thinks about, I would imagine Donald Trump is fully expecting God to be on his side and yeah, God will understand about Stormy Daniels and the Playboy model and the three divorces and all of those kind of things. And grabbing them because you're famous. I don't know if Donald Trump thinks a lot about that. Maybe the presidency for Donald Trump is his act of redemption because he's doing what he thinks needs to be done. And again, I don't, is Donald Trump sincere? I think so. I mean, how much money does he need? But to be a good person, well, now we're sort of going back to the Greeks to be renowned but the Greeks and the Romans, now we're back to Tom Holland. You know, Julius Caesar wrote his campaign in Gaul because he bragged about killing a million and enslaving a million more. Those were his eulogy virtues. And so what's dramatic about Bill Maher's little eulogy here is Bill Maher who does ridiculous, Christian virtues all the way. Christian eulogy virtues. And he doesn't know it. And he doesn't know it. He's decidedly downstream from Christianity even though he's mocking it all the way. Does that mean postmodernity is right? Well, it means it has a point. Well, what else does it mean? Does it mean he should read Dominion? Of course. Well, he probably not. But here we are. What matters? What really matters? What matters? Why are pastors burning out? Maybe it will be one video. Why are pastors burning out? Most pastors get into it because they've got a sense that the religious matters. Because, you know, if your life ambitions are resume virtues, as Andrew Root notes, pastoral vocation is probably not your best bet. If you want to make a lot of money, be an engineer. If you want to make a whole lot of money, be one of those 1% of artists that make a whole lot of money. You can go for it, but you're probably not going to make much. But what really matters? What really matters? And if you're a pastor of a church, you think you know what matters because you talk about it all the time. And you kind of want to get people to respond to you. But will that necessarily get it? Will you do what's right? Will you be what's right? Will you have known what's right? Or will you sing, I did it my way? Probably not. The devastation of the meaning crisis is that, well, I kicked Daniel off the church grounds again this morning and he protested. Things haven't been going well for Daniel lately. The trajectory of a number of things around his life is pretty much following as I would expect them to follow because I've seen them follow in these ways before. And in his protestation, but I'm doing the right thing, pastor. I'm an asset, not a liability. Okay? Okay. But here we are. Here we are. Bill Maher, a little mock funeral. The question is not only what are the virtues you want to be remembered for, and most of you will say the eulogy of virtues. Part of the question is going to be be eulogy virtues in whose eyes? Because this bias towards the future, okay? This bias towards the future, money is potential of the future. Well, you know, there's no, there's no, there's no yuha following the hearse. You can't take it with you. And so is it renowned? Is it fame? Or is it in fact renowned in the eyes of one? That's what Christianity says. That's what various religions say. And I don't think we're about to kick this religious thing anytime soon.