https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=y6DKgVH2q6k

 All right. I guess we are on. Good morning. Let's start out with some announcements. We've actually got a lot going on right now behind the scenes. So we have so coming up in June, I am flying to Chicago June 6 and I will be in Chicago June the evening of June 6 and then June 7 and June 8 and leaving for Grand Rapids June 9 to do the CRC Senate. But in the meantime, we'll be having a little having a bunch of get togethers and shindigs and and fun over in Chicagoland. And I don't have a link to I know Sam, have you done a website yet for that? I don't have a website. I could I could give you some meetup.com events that people could RSVP on for the events that weekend. Okay. Not weekend during the week. Yeah, not. Yeah. Okay. So why don't why don't you just give a little little quick summary of at least some of what's planned? Sure. So Paul's coming and we also have the commentator formerly known as Esther O'Reilly coming to Bethel McGrew and we have kind of two days of main events planned on Tuesday. That's Tuesday, June 7th. Let me make sure I'm getting that date right. Tuesday, June 7th. We're going to have two live podcast recordings during the day. One will be on Parker's Pansies, that Parker said a case's podcast and he's going to be interviewing Bethel and Paul. And then one I think will probably just be Paul's podcast. And so the there'll be an opportunity for some live audience question and answer. And then we'll also have lunch together and some sort of time to discuss the podcast and small groups, sort of like meetup style. And then Wednesday evening, Wednesday, June 8th at Elmhurst Christian Reformed Church, there's going to be a live moderated talk between Paul and Bethel at 7 p.m. Central Time. And that will be hosted by the Chicago Meetup Group. And there will be time for a live audience question and answer for that. The events are free, although we're asking for suggested donations. So if you're in the Chicagoland area, that would be great. If you are coming in from out of town, you could email me at transfiguredchannel at gmail.com if you wanted some more details. But generally, the events will be happening in Wheaton and Elmhurst. So those are both two western suburbs that are relatively close to each other. So if you're coming in from out of town, I'd recommend staying over in that neck of the woods. And Wednesday during the day before that live talk, we'll do some fun Chicago area stuff. And there will also probably be a brunch Thursday morning. So we have events on on those three days. So hopefully, if you're in Chicago or you want to come in from out of town, we're happy to have you. So that's all the Chicago fun. So then I go to Grand Rapids and there's the Christian Form Synod that I'll be participating in. That will be from the 9th to the 16th of June. And then on the morning of the 17th, John Vendank and I are hosting a breakfast at the Prince Center at Calvin University. The focus of that will primarily be for church leaders. You don't have to be a pastor or even necessarily a church leader, but that will be the focus of it. And we'll be talking about basically making space for estuary in church, what estuary is, its value. And that event is also free, although John and I think we'll pass the hat because we're on the hook for a few hundred dollars to rent the room. John lined up a donor to pay for breakfast. So if you have no money, you can certainly come. But if you if you can donate 10 or 20 bucks to the cause, that will mean that John and I have to subsidize it less. So that's the morning of June 17, probably 8 to whenever you want to leave. I'll be getting together with the Grand Rapids meetup estuary. And I don't exactly remember which evening that is. But I'll be in Grand Rapids until that next Tuesday. Then I return home to Sacramento. Come August, I am flying to Europe for the first time in my life. I'm really looking forward to that. John Vendank and I are traveling together. It's going to be like Laurel and Hardy or Abbot and Costello, Lou Costello. I guess I'm the short fat one. That's as you can see me and Vendank stand together and decide who's the short fat one, who's the tall, skinny one. But so we were going to be flying to Europe and we are going to first stop is in the Netherlands. And I think there are some things being planned there. I've never been to the Netherlands. So I'm really excited about that. Then we are going to Germany to participate in the festival that Matthias is scheduling. There's a website out there for that. I don't know, Rick, you can maybe drop some of these links in the show notes when you get a chance or at least in the comments. And so then after Germany, I think we might swing through Switzerland. I'd like to visit Geneva and Le Brie. And from there, I think we're going to Vendank was first looking at air travel. I said, let's ride the train so we can see some things. And I think then we're going to go from Geneva to Paris and then from Paris to London. And then we'll be spending the rest of the trip in the British Isles. My schedule for that segment of the trip is by no means set. There are some people I want to see, but there'll be time for we'll probably have about a week in the UK and in the British Isles. So we'll over between now and then we'll be trying to set up estuary groups or meetups or get togethers or whatever, whatever we can. So that will be that will be the end of August and the beginning of September. And then come the middle of September, there's the conference Consciousness and Conscience. This conference was originally planned in Thunder Bay for September 2020. But you all know what happened in March 2020, which made September 2020 not happen. But now here in September 2022, we will be traveling up to Thunder Bay and there'll be four of us. This will be the first time I get to meet Jonathan Pigeot and John Verveke in person unless I have to actually probably fly through Toronto. I might spend an overnight in Toronto on my way to the conference. And so who knows, maybe I'll get together with them before. But that'll be really our first that'll be a big deal. And it begins with Airsoft, which is almost paintball for Jesus. They've got the schedule here. Let's see. Where's the schedule sessions. So on the 16th, you've got pre-conference Airsoft and barbecue. And then you've got a community lunch. And then John Verveke kicks it off with the first talk. And then I have the second talk. And then John and I talked together. And Catherine at the Discord server is the one who's really pulling this whole thing together. So if you have detailed questions, you can ask Catherine if you're on the Bridges of Meeting Discord server. And so then we, you know, we'll be talking with each other and we'll talking with all those who gather. September 17 in the morning, Dr. Richard Mondrell is from Thunder Bay. He's a professor there at a university. And so he'll be giving a lecture on the subject and then Jonathan Pigeot will be giving a lecture on the subject. And then those two will talk together. And then there'll be a panel discussion and then there'll be a roundtable of sorts. And then there's a dinner break. And then Jonathan and I will talk for about an hour. And Richard and John will talk for an hour. And then some concluding comments that would be September 17, a Saturday. And then September 18, which is a Sunday, Urban Abbey is a worshiping congregation. So I will be preaching at their service in the morning. And then Jonathan Pigeot in the afternoon is giving an introduction to iconography as a talk. And John Vervecky will be doing something with respect to guided meditation. And that's the end of the event. And so the events.eventzilla.net slash e slash consciousness conscience and then a bunch of numbers will make sure that we propagate these links on the channel. I usually after the live stream, after Rick and I finish up, whatever we have to finish up, then I usually go up and make a new thumbnail and clean it up and post it onto the the audio, the audio channel for my podcast. And I'll I'll take these links and I'll put them in so so you all can sign up. So there are three clusters of live events that I will be participating in. Chicago, Grand Rapids in June, August in Netherlands and Germany, September in the UK. But none of that is organized yet. And so I'm currently working on getting those things organized. Doing that in conjunction with John Van Donk. John's been a super help to me. He arranged the air. He arranged the air travel. He's he's sort of my tour guide. And yeah, John's been tremendously helpful in organizing that. But the UK segment is at this point completely unorganized. But there will be time for some meetings and podcasts and whatever whatever you all want to do in the UK. And then in the middle of September, then this event that a number of us have been waiting two years for, which will be this big deal in Thunder Bay. And I think I think that's going to be I think all of it's going to be tremendous. But I'm I'm looking forward to all of it. But yeah, so there's early bird registration that you can sign up if you get your tickets early. You get something of a discount on them. I you know, Catherine is a little nervous, you know, am I going to am I going to lose my shirt on this conference? And I said no, Catherine, I think this thing is going to fill up and I think it's going to fill up fast. A lot of people have been asking about live streams and stuff. Decisions haven't been made about those kinds of questions yet. They're first just trying to put put this whole thing together. So, yeah, that's what's coming up. And any questions about any of that from the Discord group? Doesn't sound like it. All right, so I will. Sounds pretty great, though. I hope you can all pull it off. Oh, sounds pretty good. What's what's what's going to what's going to stop us? You think COVID is going to get us again, Joe? They got us last time. Yeah, I mean, who knows what happens. I'm not going to jinx that by coming up with examples. Seriously, I am not. So, yeah, I just hope that we get to the end of the day. Yeah, I just hope it all works out. And I'll get to I'll get the whole Job's baby. So that's that's something to look forward to. I'll get it mentally prepared. Should I bring should I be bringing ear protection? Oh, you have no idea. Oh, you probably should. No, I actually bought my wife these big ear protectors like that. You wear when you use a chainsaw like that's how bad it gets. Yeah, maybe maybe Job's maybe Job's son will someday be a preacher with a big loud voice like George Whitfield or something like that. So who knows, Joe? Who knows? No. All right. So I'm going to dive into the questions. Eric Young Art asked Happy Friday, Paul. These are from a week ago. You teased in your recent Peugeot Weinstein video that used to engage Jehovah's Witnesses in their theological debates when they came to witness to you. Can you recall any of the conversations or debate points regarding their version of Jesus or Satan that really stumped their foot soldiers? I didn't I don't remember afterwards that an elder of their congregation ever stopped by. We did have an elder stop by once. I you know, I was so it's a Saturday morning. I'm home. It's my day off. I'm trying to do you know, cut the grass and take care of kids and go to Costco shopping and you know, all those kinds of things is when the kids were younger and then someone comes to the door and it's like do I you know, do I usually you just kind of brush them off but every now and then I'd feel trollish and so I wanted to see to what degree these Jehovah's Witness foot soldiers basically had some default evangelical ideas rather than strict Jehovah's Witness theology and there's some obviously Jehovah's Witnesses are not Trinitarians. They've got some ideas about who Jesus was who Satan was who participates in heaven who the other sheep are, you know, there's a bunch of these little subtle points that I used to I used to be a little trollish with them. But and then I'd feel bad about it because these people didn't need me, you know, these people didn't need me taking up their time trolling them. So I then when the elder would come I didn't often have, you know, an hour or two to just sit down because of course it was Saturday and I had five kids at home. So not a lot of great reflection, but just me being a little trollish because I was curious about to what degree the pervasive and most of these people coming to my house were African Americans given the community I live in and the considerable degree to which Jehovah's Witnesses have impacted the African American community, but the African American community is deeply Christian and has been for a long time. And so I was just curious to what degree the Jehovah's Witnesses were thoroughly indoctrinated in doctrinal distinctions between evangelicals and Jehovah's Witnesses. So and I found that yeah, if the more I'd push the squishier they get and I'm sure they'd have an elder who was sharper on some of those doctrinal things, but it wasn't my it wasn't my goal to humiliate them. I just sort of had this this this question I had in mind. So that's what I did. I don't know Eric if you want to ask any follow-ups to that, but you know, I'm talking 15 years ago. So it's a little while ago. All right, Zan in the past. I've seen you make reference here and there to the great Bob Dylan. Just curious if by chance you are a Bob Dylan fan. I've listened to Bob Dylan over the years. I you know, I you might notice from my from the way I make videos. I tend to get interested in something and sort of beat it into the ground. So there was a there was a Bob Dylan phase where I listened to a lot of Bob Dylan. That was back before we had these streaming services. So I'd have my Zune. I loved my Zune. Zune was awesome. And so I just have all this Bob Dylan on my Zune and I'd play my Bob Dylan on my Zune and and then I'd listen to Bob Dylan for a while and it was sort of map territory and I'd move on to something else. That's what I tend to do. So I probably pick him up again and listen to more Dylan. He's an interesting guy. So Chad, what sort of thinking would possess a Christian pastor? Chad already gave a little walk this back a little bit before the show. To reject a relationship with his blood brother that also claims to be a Christian but is a member of a 12 stop program where he helps people find a God of their own understanding. This is an actual situation of a friend of mine found himself in these last couple of days. How should one deal with this? People are people. And families are complex. Part of what gives Christianity its power is the ultimate. And so it's it's it's our it's not even just Christians. People can be insanely dogmatic on particular things that make no sense to anyone else. That's just the way people are. And it's it's often it often has a historical cause maybe how they were raised maybe how a particular transformation happened in their life. And they can be you know it shouldn't come as anybody any surprise to anyone who looks at religion on the Internet that people can be dogmatic and obnoxious when it comes to things they care deeply about. That's just the way we are. So one would imagine that. And so then each of us the word Christian is a really funny word in our culture. John Vervecky made a point when he was talking I think it was part of his conversation with Jordan Peterson where people would tell John Vervecky that they thought he was a he was you know he was he was more Christian than the Christians they knew. Now they clearly meant that as a compliment even though John Vervecky doesn't I don't know people have made the same comment about Jordan Peterson in fact there have been comments on my YouTube channel where I'd mentioned such things where people would say Jordan Peterson is a better Christian than you. It's like except that he's not really you know his his owning of the label is a little ambiguous as opposed to mine. But then again there's all sorts of Christians out there doing things that we might not agree with. Of course there's this lovely picture of Putin participating at the Easter mass and his Orthodox Church. There's Westboro Baptist. There's I mean there's there's there's people all over the place who are doing things in Christ's name. And so yeah how do we deal with this sort of thing. Well I think we ought to be careful about traps of self-righteousness. Jesus is very clear about condemning others and he says be careful when you condemn others because the measure that you use in condemning others will be applied to you. Andrea Andrea Lewis who has her podcast and she's a great writer and she's a great writer Andrea Andrea Lewis who has her podcast. She's she's trying to arrange with me a conversation where we're going to talk about some of these dynamics. Something I was this morning I was listening to Jonathan Peugeot's human sacrifice video. That was another interesting. Peugeot's making so many interesting videos now I can't. I'd love to make commentaries on all of them and I might make commentary on the human sacrifice one because he gets into so much good stuff in it. But that starts out with him sort of pushing back on decoding the gurus. And. And Andrea you know asked me well when when should we push back when should we call others to account when should we. That's actually a really sensitive question. Now obviously I do commentary videos and so in a sense I do that to a certain degree in a certain way. And I just did a series of them my last video. My last commentary video on Brett Weinstein where I you know sort of locate Brett Weinstein between Genghis Khan and Jesus. Yeah there's some holding to account and challenging ideas etc etc. And I think part of the important thing is that we do challenge ideas and spirits vigorously. I think we ought to hold human beings with a degree of respect because they are image bearers of God. Figuring out how to do that well. That's not always so easy. So the fact that and I've I've known there's not many anymore. But years ago I knew Christian pastors who were quite annoyed at 12 step programs because they thought the higher power was sort of a a softening up or a watering down of Christianity. And well fair enough. And I don't in church we talk about God the Father God the Son and God the Holy Spirit. We read the Bible. So you know God has you know God has some names. Higher power does sound very vague. However I think understanding the context and where people are coming from I think it's a very useful on ramp. And one of the general criticisms that people might have of my approach in my channel is in fact that you know people might say well you're too open. You're too soft. You're too accommodating. What we need are hard lines. And that's part of the reason I have is often talk about there's there's the need for the antithesis and there's the need for the gradual the analog the nuanced and it's not the same thing. You're too fast and you have to have both of those in your system. Now, just this morning on Twitter someone was complaining linked my conversation with vocal with vocal vocal distance. And you know complaining commiserating with Christian Christian to me about vocal distance and why she blocked him on Twitter. And and then his last tweet was I don't know why Paul VanderKlaai can't see through that stuff. OK. Some people looking at my interview with Kristen do may might say well you should have you know that they were looking for some kind of red meat combat. And apparently this other person would like to be to draw on a strong line between vocal distance and myself. You know when I had my conversation with Vouch. My goal of that conversation was to have a meeting of minds and not just a food fight and too many things on the Internet devolve into a food fight. I tend to find it more productive to especially when we're talking face to face and in person to try to find each other. Look for common ground illuminate differences talk about the reasons for the differences. Let the audience sift through the pieces. That's my strategy. Does that mean that there isn't a time and a place for more confrontational things. No I think there is a time and a place for that. So in a situation like this I blessed are the peacemakers for they'll be called sons of God. And yeah I would like to as much as possible be a peacemaker and help people understand each other. And in my experience with my overall goal of continuing to pursue the reconciliation that Christ affected in his ministry in this world. I tend to find that peacemaking is an important thing. There are times and places to draw sharp bright lines between things. Absolutely. But generally speaking when it comes to human beings let's be peacemakers. Now especially when you have a conflict within a family who knows what went on in that family. Every family is is an unknown territory to everyone everyone outside that family. And so you got to be careful with that stuff. Family is an intense environment and an intense environment differences get intensified and can explode. There's my wife has been watching all these various versions of the staircase which is about this. This husband was who was convicted for the murder of his wife and all the all the things around that story and it's on HBO Max it's on Netflix. All spate of things coming out about that. Why is it that if if a wife shows up dead prime suspect number one is the husband. On one hand you could say oh that's bias. Well yeah sure it is. But on the other hand there's a reason why police start there because love and hatred run together. So I think we ought to be patient with one another. We ought to listen well to one another. And I think especially in this age of polarization we ought to learn to be peacemakers. Let's let's be as clear as we can with ideas and spirits and talk about them vigorously. But at the same time let's treat each other with respect and let's see if we can understand each other better at the end and maybe even learn to love each other despite differences because that's really what love is. So by thinking on that. Greg will Paget will Weinstein and Peugeot ever intersect or are they forever divided by the immaterialist materialist chasm. I don't know. I. I think Jonathan has a pretty good idea about Brett's position. So I was listening to Jonathan's human sacrifice video this morning really enjoying it. But I was listening to it I was thinking about the fact that four years ago if I had listened to that video I don't know what I would have understood. And that a lot of my appreciation for Jonathan's work now has a lot to do with all of the time that I've spent listening to him my engagement with Jonathan and John Vervecky and Jordan Peterson and all of you. On the Discord server and all that I've learned. Your vervecky has this you know in the in the four horsemen video a little clip that I've clipped out and used a few times. There's this idea in nominalism that Gosh I have a mental picture of it but getting into words is difficult that everything is everything is sort of exposed and plain. Peugeot's idea of initiation runs directly counter to that and this other little sub conversation that Karen Wong and others have been have been pointing out is that there's a certain area of knowledge in human beings that is entered into and it isn't plainly exposed. I'll say it that way. And I think this has this is connected with Vervecky's four P's of knowledge. There's a certain knowledge that you have because you love that you cannot have if you don't love and we all understand this in terms of just look at any look at any young couple in love. There's an epistemic field around those two that yeah clearly there are distortions but there's also certain knowledge that is not publicly accessible. Huge hosts of knowledge are not publicly accessible and if If as as as Brett Weinstein likes to say scientific knowledge is the key to understanding by definition all of that kind of knowledge is not scientific. So we're talking about sorry job I'm going to use you and your baby. So job loves job loves his baby boy more than job knows and job didn't know how much he would love this baby boy before he had the baby boy and the longer job is father to his little boy the more he will grow and love for him. And yet that love will be complex and nuanced and that will be a that will be an undiscoverable country for just about everybody else apart from them. There is sort of an epistemic sphere that can only be entered into via love and commitment and community. And that that sort of love is in many ways inaccessible by science. Science can look at aspects of it but by nature of what science is excluding the personal it can't be known. So the world is full of that kind of knowledge and Brett system. And this is part of part of what vervecki has been pointing out again and again and again. Brett system is by design blind to that. It just is can't be any other way. It's, it's sort of like Let's say, let's say you were studying NBA basketball and you discovered that having the sound on the video was a distraction to whatever aspect or frame you were using to study the game. And so you intentionally only study visual recordings of the game and intentionally you turn off the sound. Now someone comes to you and says, What does a basketball game sound like? You have to say, I've, I've turned my back on sound in order to see these other things. That's what science does with persons. And I know that this gets wiggly when you get into psychology where you want to study persons, but this has been the, the reason that social sciences have had difficulty with universality, because they try to include what has been excluded by, in many ways, the scientific process. And so they have to make assumptions about human beings that may or may not be valid to pursue them. So, will Brett ever ever understand Peugeot? A lot of that depends on a lot of things, but one of the things that I noted in like the Four Horsemen video with Bishop Baron, Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Peugeot, and John Verveke. And then Jonathan Peugeot and John Verveke could get on, could, could get on each other's page quicker than any of the rest of them could to a degree, because they've had a lot of community. Now, Verveke and Peterson have had some and Peugeot and Peterson have had some, but in that conversation, specifically within that conversation, they could get on the same page quicker because they've been working on it. It's just natural. In some ways, Bishop Baron was the least able to understand the other three, because he's, he's had the least amount of experience with them. And so that's why there's something about reps, and, and I mean reps in terms of repetition, repeating the cycles. And so the more, the more Peugeot and Weinstein talk, the better that they'll understand each other. Now, if Brett decided he was going to listen to dozens or even hundreds of hours of Peugeot, that would accelerate the process. So, there's also a reality that in a context, a minority culture always knows the majority culture better than the majority culture knows the minority culture. African Americans know white people better than white people know African Americans, generally speaking. It happens with ethnic groups, and it happens in all sorts of other ways. Jonathan Peugeot has been living in a secular society, was educated in the university. He knows secularism very well. Brett Weinstein, how on earth is he supposed to get up to speed on Jonathan Peugeot without a whole lot of work? Now, should we, you know, should we think less of Brett Weinstein because he can't put in the number of hours? No, he's got a, he's got a wife, he's got a, he's got a job, he's got all of these things, he's got interests that go far beyond. It's probably not going to be an expert with Peugeot. Part of the interesting thing about this little corner is that Peugeot and, and Jordan Peterson and John Vervecky all had a degree of mutual contact before the rise of Jordan Peterson and all of these online video conversations. And so that puts them to a degree at a certain advantage. Also, having in-person experience with one another heightens and very much fills out the knowledge that we have of one another. And so that's why I'm so looking forward to the Thunder Bay Conference, because even though I've listened to a lot of hours of Vervecky and Peugeot, and they both listen to hours of me, when we meet each other and when we talk face to face, there will be levels of knowledge that we're not even conscious of that we will gain in just being together and talking together and meeting together. And so I'm really looking forward to that. That is the secret sauce of community. So will Brett and Jonathan find each other? Their next conversation will probably be an improvement on their last one if, I think, if Brett can sort of get up to speed better on Jonathan. Now, part of the difficulty in making a commentary on them is, of course, I'm not, I'm biased. I'm a Christian. I've, you know, I'm a fan of Peugeot more than I'm a fan of Brett. And I've listened to far more Peugeot than I've listened to Brett. I know far more about the kinds of things that Jonathan talks about than what Brett talks about. So, you know, I'm not impartial, but will they find each other? I hope so. But then again, you also have the question. And I see this often in the commentary. Some of you are Brett Weinstein listeners and are really happy that I spend the time to sort of decode, if I dare use that word, their conversation. But then there are always some comments. I get them on Twitter and I get them in YouTube comments that don't spend any time on Brett Weinstein. He's not worth it. Okay. I find Brett's sort of neo-Gnostic take intriguing. And as I mentioned at the end of the last commentary video, some of his application of this to abortion policy, I found a little disturbing. So anyway, I don't know where any of this goes. It could be, you know, someone is, you know, it could be that Weinstein and Verbecky will talk. I don't know how well that will go because John can be difficult to understand too. Back when Brett Weinstein was meeting with Alistair McGrath on Unbelieveable, Justin Briarley was trying to arrange a talk between myself and Brett. And that for whatever reason, that didn't come off. So will Brett and I talk at some point? Yeah. And I hope if I ever get a chance to talk to Brett, I hope it's a productive conversation. Part of why I do my videos and my commentary videos and why I would perhaps do a commentary video on Jonathan Peugeot's human sacrifice video or even on his book of Enoch video is partly because I find in the process of doing those commentaries that I learn a lot just by slowing things down and listening carefully and getting into sort of a flow state and commenting on it. But also because I, as a pastor, one of the disciplines that I learn is taking a difficult text, which is the Bible, and trying to help it become accessible to people and applicable to people. That's what pastors do. And so when I do a commentary on something like human sacrifice, I try to come at some of Jonathan's points. I'll do some critique, but I'll also do some accessibility work where I'll give other illustrations of maybe helping other people see Jonathan's points because I learned a lot listening to that video this morning. And I think there's a lot of interesting things, points that can be made. Some applications to some of the stuff that Jacob and I touched on last week with respect to substitutionary atonement. I think sacrifices are by definition substitutionary and that's part of the point that Jonathan Peugeot was making. So, will they find each other? I hope so. Why is this valuable? Because there are a lot of people out there. The majority culture, majority culture in terms of media mouthpieces and those who hold high positions in our culture right now are much closer to Brett Weinstein than to Jonathan Peugeot. And so I think having Brett understand Jonathan a little better is good for Brett. Having Jonathan figure out and continue to grow in how he can articulate and communicate with Brett will mean that he'll be able to communicate with those who agree with Brett. In a lot of ways, what we're doing in this little corner of the Internet and what I'm doing with my commentary videos is in fact not necessary. It's not necessarily so important that I convince Jordan Peterson or John Verveke or Jonathan Peugeot about something from my Dutch reform perspective. What we're really doing, because all of these conversations are observed, is we're really talking to each other's audiences. And there's a little bit of, there's some chaos in that process. But overall, I think what we're discovering is that it's a helpful process because we're all learning along the way. And so I, if it's fruitful and enjoyable for both of them, I hope they both continue to do it. And I hope they come to understand each other better. So that's some of my thoughts on that. Chaplain Rhythm. A woman in my life is an ex-Mormon and tends to shy away from most elements of Christianity. She feels a lack of feminine presence in Christian theology and feels that though she can't relate to the father concept of God. What would you say to someone who feels this way? Can women relate? What can women relate to in the Christian story, especially relating to God? One of the interesting ironies of this debate, and it's by no means, this woman is by no means unusual. One of the deep ironies in this debate is that it appears that for most of the history of the Christian church, it's been majority women. And over the last number of generations, there's been an increasing concern about the feminization of the church. Something strange has happened in our culture. Well, there's a few other things to say about this too. Protestantism, of which Mormonism is a rather extreme example. That's that isn't even true. This stuff is so complex. This is a really good question. Feels she can't relate to the father concept of God. Is that because, oh gosh, this is such a good question and it's such a hard question. It's such a hard question to answer. Because I think in our culture, for innumerable reasons, we imagine that we must somehow identify as the God figure instead of as the bride. I think part of the reason Christianity has had more success attracting and holding women than it has for men is because in fact in the drama of the gospel, we all play the feminine role. The church is the bride of Christ. Now that isn't universal because we are sons of God and that's within a particular drama of a particular cultural drama. Yet in Christianity, we tend to play the feminine role. God is the male and we are the female. Now when someone says, I can't relate to the father, we're not to relate to the father as a male. We're relate to the father as a female. We ask the Holy Spirit to come inside of us. Listen to that language. We are the bride of Christ. The Christian life is a deeply feminine thing. And churches are often very feminine spaces. And God is our master, our warrior, our male lover, who acts like a man taking his bride and we're the bride. Once you understand some of this drama, it should be the men that look at it and say, I don't know where I fit in that. I don't want to be feminine. So I don't think it's a matter of relating to the, I think it's a matter of where we relate to the story. And again, given the fact that historically, again, I've been reading Bart Ehrman's book on the triumph of Christianity. It's a fascinating book. I've really been enjoying it. And one of the points that he makes in this book is, from his reading, the New Testament church was majority feminine, majority female. And that has been true. It's true of churches in America today. It's true at Living Stones. It's true of the black churches. It's true of almost every church I've ever known. Part of it is because women outlive men, and especially if you have an older congregation, you'll wind up having more women because they're living. But I think part of the difficulty that women are having is because of some cultural narratives that assume, gosh, I don't know any other way to say it, that God is our husband, that God is our master, and we're in the feminine position. And now if someone wants to be in the masculine position with respect to God, well, now you've got a position of competition rather than resignation. And if you're going to compete with God, good luck. So I would say that women should have a better sense of what it means to live within the body of the bride of Christ than men, because men actually have to do a little bit more translating in terms of how we participate. But I think a lot of this boils down to this competition of the sexes that we've been in for the last few hundred years, to one degree or another, disrupted by the Industrial Revolution, on and on and on, and it's still pretty messed up. So it's a great question. It's something worth a lot of deep reflection. But I just, again, I think initially the reason women have in many ways been in a majority in the church throughout history is because the way the narratives go, the church is feminine. And I think that's part of the reason that in a majority of cases, churches have sort of given males preferential treatment in the drama, partly because it doesn't come naturally to us as women. One of my big disappointments in the Christian Reformed Church, when in the 1990s we stopped excluding women from leadership, we were supposed to do that as a way to continue to discern. But what actually happened was we stopped talking about it, because those who had won the position didn't want to jeopardize their hegemony. And so they wanted to cease debate. And those who disagreed with them were sort of pushed to the margins. And now that the church wants to figure out what to do with same sex marriage and all of those kinds of things, well, the conservatives aren't going to fall for that trick again. So it's a mess. It's a mess. Thank you, Rick. Oh, thank you, Job. PVK Euroturk Gas Fund. All right, Renee, thank you very much. We have our Rick delivered super chats here. Send PVK money and get Rick exercise. All right. Sprawl well. How strongly are sacredness and hiddenness related, if at all? Did this change in the New Testament? Wow. It's a great question. Why are sacred places dark places? Read C.S. Lewis's Till We Have Faces. There is a relationship between sacredness and hiddenness. Earlier, I was talking about knowledge. Let's see. I can call it insider information. Let's talk. Call it privileged knowledge. The relationship between a man and a woman, between a husband and a wife, between a father and a son, between members of a community, members of a church. It's sacred in some ways because it is hidden. You know, the opposite of if you look at the mosaic law, you have common and holy. Holy is basically functionally sacred. Common is common. It's out there. It's public. So, yes, the holy and the hidden are there's a deep relationship between those two. Does this change in the New Testament? So when I was watching Peugeot's human sacrifice video this morning, I was thinking about some of the ironies of the ministry of Jonathan Peugeot. One of the ironies is that he is explaining that which is hidden. And that explaining is connected with disenchantment. And so as someone who is very excited about the recession of the disenchantment of the Enlightenment, he and many of the explainers in this little corner of the Internet and the Orthodox are, you know, with their podcasts and such, these guys are doing it in spades. Ian McGillchrist makes this point in the preface of the Master and his Emissary. When you explain, you demythologize something. You take something that is hidden and in some ways implicitly sacred and you make it common. And so even as Peugeot is on a mission to see Peugeot isn't really enchanting the world. He is celebrating the recession of a disenchantment, let's say. But he in order to do that, he is explaining and making visible, revealing that which is hidden. So there's some deep ironies in this process. So once you once these secrets of sacrifice are explained and made common. The power sacrifice loses something of its power. Ironically. So. I think, does the New Testament do that? In similar ways to what Peugeot is to a degree. So what you see in the preaching of the Apostles is to one degree or another, explaining. And so revealing, bringing out into the open, out into the common space. But I think what we see. In the New Testament in the revelation of Jesus Christ as the as the revelation of the story of Israel, because that's really what Christianity purports to do. And why, of course, there's differences between those who say, no, Jesus doesn't reveal the mission of Israel. The mission of Israel is more over here. It's not over here with Jesus, because, of course, Jesus is making particular claims. But in Jesus case, and Peugeot says this all the time, and I think he's very right. Jesus does this so. Jesus does a number of things just so. I don't even know the word to you so hugely. I mean, he fills up the hierarchy as Peugeot likes to say he's he's like David, but even more so. He's more of a fool than David and more of a king than David. He's more of a servant than David and more of a master than David. And so when you get into this question of human sacrifice, even the question of human sacrifice, Jesus completes. I was thinking when I was listening to the Peugeot video about the last season of The Last Kingdom that's on Netflix, which my wife and I watched all of that and I enjoyed it. I learned a little bit about Mercia and Northumbria and Wessex and Athelstan and all of these people that Tom Holland likes to talk about. But there's a little spoiler alert here. In the fifth season, the Danes are in York and sort of ruling. They have Daneland up in York and they're sort of a truce between Edward down in Wessex and the Danish, the Danish king in York and then both Brita, the former wife of Uhtred, son of Uhtred. She comes in and also one of the nobles from Wessex. They want to destroy the peace between Edward and the Danes. And so there's all this intrigue and such. And eventually they do destroy the peace between the Danes and the Saxons. And the Saxons win and the Danish, at some point the Danes have to be called to account. And the king of the Danes becomes a sacrifice for the rest of the Danish people. And Peugeot lays that out nicely in that video where the king loses his life so that there isn't war between the Saxons and the Danes where the Danes will all be slaughtered because they will lose that war because they are outnumbered. And Wessex at that point has a bigger economy and more soldiers and more wealth and more population. And the Danes at that point really can't compete. And so the king is a sacrifice for his people. And that's built into the story of Jesus. And so in some ways Jesus illuminates all of these things that are, as René Girard says, hidden from the foundations of the earth. René Girard gets that from the New Testament. Jesus illuminates them. But in some ways Jesus does not demythologize them. We don't just look at Jesus and say, oh, he's the substitute for mankind. Done. Sometimes you see that in church. Jesus died for our sins. That's another way of saying it. But the mystery isn't sort of dispelled by that articulation. But sometimes the way the church says it is lacking in mystery because the way that this common sacred dynamic should work is that the experience with the sacred and the hidden should begin to show both the suchness of the thing and the moreness of what the thing points to. It's the difference between an idol and an icon, let's say. And let's look at the Mosaic Law about common and clean or there's clean and unclean, there's common and there's holy. And there's holy. The holiness of the tabernacle or the temple is that it is not exhausted in the finite nature of the buildings or the grounds. And in that, the tabernacle, or the temple are in some ways, portals, doorways, windows, icons into the ultimate and everything and that which is beyond everything. And in that way, the sacred nature of the temple functions as within the economy of our limitation. And what happens in the New Testament is that the, see, and I think this already happened in after the destruction of the first temple, where it's very interesting and you know historians differ on this. One would have imagined that with the destruction of Solomon's temple by the Babylonians, that the children of Israel would have started building temples all over the place, but they weren't going to do that because of everything that had happened in the book of judges and in Samuel. And in that whole issue in the kingdom between competition, between high places and the temple itself. And with the Deuteronomist, there's this severe drive to make the temple distinct and unique. And what happens with the Babylonian destruction of the temple is that all of that sacredness in a sense gets transferred into the book and into the commandments, and then even into the community of the people. And what Christianity does is take that another step further. Now this is going to get really tricky because you've got the Protestant Catholic thing with respect to the book. But the, the Peter and Paul basically say that it's the communion of the saints that becomes the new temple by the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. So, all of this, all of this stuff continues to, to go out and you don't, the, the issue of sacredness is connected with the frame problem, because you need the sacred in order to see the rest of the world. Once everything is common, you can see nothing because of combinatorial explosiveness. So, there always must be, and you know, Peugeot always talks in these ways and it's, it's kind of hard to understand sometimes, it always sounds so cryptic. There always must be something hidden because it is that, there always must be something sacred because it is through that frame of the sacred by which we see the rest of the world. Because we can't see everything because we're small and limited. Only God can see all. God needs no frame because God himself is the frame. And we sort of, you got, this becomes, God is the frame of all frames. God is the system of all systems. This is where you get in God and God number one and God number two, because you've got these two polarities for us. You've got everything and you've got person. And those are the two, those are the two poles. So, this probably sounded like word salad, but it's a, it's a really good and really hard question. And you're exactly right that there's a relationship between the hidden and the sacred and there must always be something sacred. And, but sacredness isn't arbitrary either. So, I don't know. I'm sure, I'm sure people are going to have some things to say about this. Throw some ranch dressing on that word salad. All right, we'll continue. It's a great question. Oh boy, the questions keep coming. I always think, I always think you all are going to get sick of me and stop asking questions, but it hasn't happened yet. Anyway, can non Christian golden, he always has such hard questions. Can non biblical literature entice one towards and perhaps even induce or mediate or facilitate salvage, sal, salvific experience? Absolutely. The earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. The whole earth is full of his glory. God, you. It's awfully, it's awfully difficult to bump into something good. And not have that goodness be connected to God somehow. So yes, and that happens all the time. CS Lewis wrote of George McDonald's fantastic someone, by the way, I should pull these up. Some of you out there keep sending me books. So, I don't know who sent them, but received. Now, if you saw my pile of books. And truth be told, I think I own at least one of these up there I've got got a lot of books. So thank you. Nothing was at the road of George McDonald's fantasies nothing was at the time, the time of the first reading fantasies, further from my thoughts on Christianity. Yet he reflects and notes that that what it fantasies did to me was to convert even to baptize my imagination. No question about it. Beauty, beauty, beauty, truth, goodness. That all comes from God. I just finished listening to your interesting conversation with Paul Baker wasn't that fun. You know, I was I was a little worried about you know about Anselman because Paul's Paul sort of came off as his own kind of heretic and you know I really appreciate Anselman and the and the and the guarding he does but Anselman's Anselman's comment was what a you know what an affable and something like what an affable and delightful. What an affable and delightful guy and I thought exactly that I loved my conversation with Paul Baker. What a delight. So maybe you know maybe I'll get the chance to see Paul when I when I get to the UK this fall. Really looking forward to it. It's such a lovely individual is the output of the systems you discussed emergent or emanation. This is so connected to the last question about good literature good art. The most real things are when heaven and earth meet. Because the. Certainly. And here also you have to remember that the God of redemption is also the God of creation. And so God is actually coming at us from both ends and this is the this is the fundamental difference between Christianity and Gnosticism. And this is part of why Brett's neo Gnosticism is just so fascinating. Because Brett basically says well there's an evil demiurge. Genetics not evil but genocide all yada yada yada. But then Brett with consciousness will simply say no to the gas chamber. Really is that easy. I think I think his position is woefully naive when comparing it to the fact that gas chambers happened. And many of the people that got sucked into them were good people who had consciousness. And that's why this whole there's good people and bad people. The you know and this is why this is one of the things that caught my eye early about Peterson because you know Peterson said you know if you're if you're if you're visiting Auschwitz. You shouldn't walk through there thinking oh what monsters did this. No you should say something more like there but for the grace of God go I not only in terms of the victims of it but also in terms of the perpetrators. Because if there's anything we know about ourselves we can flip that we can flip that role very easily. And just look at the phrase hurt people hurt people. We have this we have this bad idea in our culture that somehow the victims of oppression will be free from its temptations. Experience shows that no the victims of the victims of all sorts of oppressions wind up victimizing others. So often if you find let's say in a ghastly situation some some middle school child is is sexually abusing someone younger than themselves. The first question is not kill the monster or find the rapey genes. The first question is who did that to the middle schooler. Because it's a chain of corruption. So the Gnostics say well there's this basically Gnosticism there's this there's this lesser God and then there's a greater God in the Bible. There's one God the God of creation is the God of redemption. So that obviously sets up the difficulties of the problem of evil. Which is a which is a difficult problem. But that's that's how you that's how you get both emergence and emanation. It's from below and from above. And the power of emergence belongs to God just like the power of emanation. What do you think was the sin of Onan. The sin of Onan was he thought the sin of Onan was a sin against his brother. In that culture it was Onan's responsibility to maintain the line of his brother. And what that meant was that he had to you know cuckolding there's a fun word. Onan not only had to impregnate Tamar but had to then sacrifice his own time attention and wealth for a lineage that would not belong to him but instead would belong to his brother. It was Tamar's it was Onan's job to to to sacrifice for his brother's welfare. Now, Judah's initial sin of sort of avoiding Tamar was a similar sin but Onan was worse. Why? He wanted to sexually enjoy Tamar but not fulfill his obligations. And you know what's what's so rich about the story is that even before Tamar played the part of the prostitute Onan in a sense played Tamar as a prostitute. Because he basically said I'm going to enjoy you sexually but I am not going to fulfill what I owe to my brother and what I owe to my sister-in-law who is you. And so he just basically practiced an ancient form of birth control which they understood very well as the withdrawal method and spilled his seed on the ground. That's the sin of Onan. Onan refused to love his brother fulfill his obligation and in a sense bring his brother and his brother's line. That's why the lineage conversation with Bajon Weinstein was so interesting refused to bring his brother's line back from the dead. Now when Tamar you know plays the prostitute and Judah impregnates her and you know that's that's why in some ways this is this is why Tamar belongs in the line of Christ. Because Tamar brings her husband's line back from the dead. That's in the ancient world how death was thwarted through lineage and that's why the barrenness of Sarah and Abraham was so devastating. That was death and children were anti-death. Children were resurrection of a lineage and maintenance of a lineage and that's why when the Babylonian king first kills the the king of Judah's sons and then plucks out his eyes and keeps him you know in the court alive to only remember the death of his sons. That's the point and they all understood that back then. Today we obviously don't think that way now. And again back to Peugeot's sacrifice video. He made the point about you know about in many cultures one son would become a priest like in a lot of Catholic cultures. You give you give one son back to the church and that could be connected back to you know you think of the story of Samuel. Samuel was given to the tabernacle as service. And in fact the entire tribe of Levi was in a sense a substitute for all of the firstborn sons of Israel that were dedicated to the Lord. So this stuff this stuff flows through and so Onan. No Onan's responsibility was to resurrect the line of his brother. And if he had just refused Tamar refused to impregnate her that would have been bad enough but he went a step further and said no I'll get my jollies and not resurrect my brother's line. That's what makes Onan's sin so remarkable. Not the withdrawal method. So and I probably just triggered some Catholics but there we have it. Chad would you describe the events and experiences that have brought brought and kept this little corner of the internet together a miracle. You've been listening to my stuff Chad. How is it most how has it most well that miracle is a pretty fudgy word. Okay. Okay. And while I'm on one hand. I want to expose the way that our scientific thinking has corrupted the word miracle in a particular way. I don't think it's a I don't think it's a. I think it's a word that when we use it lightly we should recognize that we're using it lightly. It's certainly you know what has happened through this YouTube channel and through estuary and through this little corner of the internet. It's certainly a surprising and dramatic change in my life. I never anticipated anything of this nature. But here we are so that's sort of a miracle but it's a it's a minor miracle I'd say. How has it most impacted your life. It's very kind. That's very very kind Chad. Well obviously it's greatly expanded. My circles of friends and acquaintances. It's it's obviously been deeply gratifying. You know I've been a you know fairly obscure pastor of a local church for most of my life. And that's deeply gratifying. But there's a certain kind of validation that comes with broader attention. I'm also. I'm also a little I'm always a little concerned with that kind of attention to it doesn't come without its pitfalls and without its temptations. And just as all of the events that I talked about before the events in Chicago Grand Rapids Germany Netherlands UK. This I mean this is I never expected to be able to do these kinds of things. My father my father never got a chance to travel to Europe. I think my father would have loved to travel to Europe. My mother my father is a guy who loved to travel and my mother was a was a homebody. And so you know she she tolerated travel because you know you what you do in a marriage is you compromise. And so you do things you don't particularly want to do for the sake of your spouse. And but my mother's homebody nature meant my father didn't travel much as much as he would have liked. And one of the things that I do think about is my father died in 2013. All of this stuff jumped off in 2017. If my father were alive for this he would have loved it. He would have watched my videos. He would have commented I would have done conversations with him. He would have started his own estuary in Whiten's Ville. The kinds of stuff I'm doing now in many ways is an extension of my father. And the how he raised me and the parts of the parts of him that are in me. And so my father my father lives through through this stuff in some ways. Because the the charity the kindness the patience those are things that my father just had in spades. And so I wish I wish my father could have shared and participated in this. He would have loved it. And you know this this trip that Vendank and I are planning to Europe all my father would have loved to have come. And if you know if he had been in good health he would have come. And so to to make a tour like this with my father would have been great fun would have been great fun. He would have so enjoy it. So it's you know it's it's too bad he's not around for it. But it's it's impacted my life richly. You know the new friends I have you know Rick and John Vendank and Joey and the local guys here in Sacramento and you Chad and how many others of you out there in the world. You've you've deeply enriched my life. And so it's it's been it's been a wonderful thing. So I I feel far more indebted to you than I think you are to me. I really feel that way. So why do you say like and subscribe at the why do you never say like and subscribe at the end of your videos. Because I'm annoyed when other YouTubers say it. I'd rather say a verveky thing like thank you for your time and attention. Yeah if you like my videos though they'll get more views. I get that. But like I said I am a little I'm a little reluctant to. There's a lot of there's a lot that goes into this. Jesus of course teaches. When you when you come into the room. Don't take the don't take the the seats of high status. Because someone may come and say oh no that high status seat belongs to Jordan Peterson or John Verveky or Jonathan Peugeot Vanderkley you get in back. And and then you'll be humiliated. Jesus says when you come into a room take the take the back seat and sit there quietly. And then the the the master of the the master of the feast will come and say oh no no please take this other seat. And what that what that little parable says is let let other people let other people determine your proper status. And so if you like my videos by all means share them if you found it helpful. And so I would rather rely on that than sort of self promote with like and subscribe. You know as it is now that the whole subscription thing on YouTube is of limited value. Because I've been on for a few years there are thousands of people who have subscribed to my videos and never watched them. And I have subscribed to 600 some videos on my account and I only watch videos from a handful of those things I've subscribed to. So the whole subscribe thing is sort of kind of broken. Liking obviously helps sort of inform the YouTube algorithm that of your tastes and it'll show you ideally it'll show you better other videos. So this morning when I'm watching Peugeot's video on sacrifice there's that little like button. So I hit it. So I thought OK little algorithm you know I'll continue to let you know what I like so that maybe my the videos that you that you give to me will will be of good quality. So I'd say if if you like my videos share them but I don't I'd rather I'd rather have you leave a comment. Now that helps the algorithm to and liking helps but I I don't I don't need a million followers. I don't know if I can handle a million followers. I have I have difficulty handling the the amount of attention I get now. Manuel has you know is you know asking for some time and and others out there. I mean Joey said oh you should do a convo with with Greg and I mean I've got I've got so many demands on my time now that I don't often feel like I can honor you sufficiently with the attention that I can give to each of you. So add a million more. Oh yeah I mean you can you can get more money you can have more clout yada yada yada. But then but then many of you are just kind of a blur to me and part of the real joy of this has been at least to the degree I can getting to know some of you. That's fun and that's part of the reason I haven't done near as many randos videos lately as I want to partly because I just haven't had the time I've got to get ready for synod and we've got all these events coming up etc etc. But that's just the point. The busier I get the less attention I can give to too many of you and especially to the new people. And you know like my conversation with Paul Baker. What an amazing guy. What an amazing story. How much fun was that my conversation with Rod hair so Rod and I have been you know texting and talking on and off over the last four years. You know part of what why I do those conversations is these are amazing people and I want to share them with you. I want I want you to know what a what an incredible guy Rod hair is and and his vision for nuance forum and how he wants to make the world better. I want to share that with you. But the more followers I get the more I am buying I am bound and blinded by a hierarchy. And the less access that you know regular people have to me and then suddenly I'm you know and I already I already experienced this you know so. So you know I'll I get access to Jonathan Peugeot and I get access to John Verveke and you know at some point I'll probably have a conversation with Jordan Peterson and I get access to high status people and then there's there's there's us in this little inner ring. And we have to treat other people like like blurs. None of you are blurs. You're all image bearers of God and you have value in his eyes. And I can't give you sufficient attention that your value with God deserves. And and that bothers me. And so of course part of me wants the channel to continue to grow and to continue to get opportunities to go to Europe and sit down and chat with burn power and see the German estuary and see the Netherlands you know country that I've heard about all my life but never been to and visit the UK and maybe see some people there. And yeah all of that is awesome. But you know what else is awesome when and you know I've had this recently too I mean people come into Living Stones and I get to go out to lunch or sit down and have a conversation for an hour. And every single one of you has a story. And if you have eyes to see there's there's sacredness in that story and there's glory in that story. You know this is what Jordan Peterson said when he said if you really listen if you learn to really listen to someone. There are no boring people. But it takes a lot of attention sometimes to sort of get past the outside. And so, do I want the channel to grow and for estuary to multiply and for all these good things to happen. Yeah, I do. I think it'd be good and important. But, you know, CS Lewis. I think worked it sort of well. He, he had a flurry of attention in the 40s and 50s. And then it sort of died away. And he's far more famous after his death and when he was alive. And what that meant was he didn't have to get swept up in the kinds of things that the kinds of prisons that fame gets you. So, you know, you look at that Johnny Depp Amber Heard trial. And you just have a little window into the lifestyles of the rich and famous. And you get it you get a vision. You would think that Johnny Depp and Amber Heard beautiful people. People that the world sees on the silver screen and on their little screens. And, you know, Johnny Depp is quirky and charismatic. And, you know, he could, you know, he could have, you know, he's been lover to and husband to beautiful women. Made millions of dollars, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. All these things that we would want. And you look at Amber Heard, beautiful young woman. I can't think of a single movie I've seen her in so I can't speak of her talent. But, you know, how many women wouldn't look at Amber Heard and say, I'd love to look like her. And then through that trial you get this little window into their lives, you know, Johnny Depp passed out with ice cream melting on his lap and, you know, always. If you had a life that good, why would you escape it using drugs? Why is why are drugs so common for wealthy and powerful and famous people? Why are rock stars either dead or in rehab at 27? The world is not like we think it is. And so I'm in some ways my level of attention I have right now is in some ways more than I can handle at points I get. I get over I get I get overwhelmed sometimes. And so, you know, obviously. So then when you get more and more famous, like someone like Jordan Peterson, you know, needs to have a producer and he needs to have staff. Johnny Depp had all this staff. And you need to have an agency that manages your booking and you need to have travel agents that arrange the hotels. And you do all of those things, but all of those things become garments of skin that separate you from the world. And, you know, it's remarkable what what Jordan is able to do. And but I don't know that I would do as well as he does. If I had five million YouTube subscribers and bestselling books and and and and so like and subscribe. If you want to, that's fine. But not too famous, please. Let's let me let me live a life slow enough so that if you visit my church, we can at least have. Ten minutes together or maybe a lunch together and I can hear your story and and I can see some of the glory. And some of the pain that God has built into your life. Because really. The fame, the money, the power, the wealth. None of that compares to the face of God. And so when I can see God through you. Yeah, you can see God through wealth. You can see God through fame and you have access and all of those all of those beautiful things that can give you. But in many ways, each individual person is a more direct vision and view potentially of the face of God than of all of these things that this world esteems. There's a song that goes in about that, but I won't sing it for you now. But I believe that. So yeah, that's why I don't say like and subscribe. I'd rather say thank you for your time and attention. You are missing on higher numbers. That's that's OK by me. Thank you, Rick. Oh, thank you, Vixen. Oh, get that's right. Vixen's in the UK. I'll get to meet. I'll get I'm going to go see the Queen. I'm going to see the Queen. Looking forward to seeing the Queen. The Queen, the Queen of the Queen of the Firsties. Paul, what do you? Yeah, so that was beautiful and we all love you. Thank you. My question is, why? Why wasn't that a basically an Roman Catholic defense of the need of hierarchy? It's a good point. It's a good point. You need hierarchy. And what's interesting is that even in the Christian Reformed Church, which is very anti hierarchical, hierarchies always develop. I'm going to Senate. It's a privilege to be a synodical delegate. You know, I'm a alternate reporter for an advisory committee. It's a privilege to serve. If I'm called on to serve in other ways, I will serve. But I think the point of Jesus Parable is let let someone else determine your status. Don't grab for high status. And, you know, to put it in Peterson's terms, let someone else push you up the hierarchy. Popes don't elect themselves or name their successors. So I, you know, I. So that's. And, you know, you and I have talked about this, Jacob. And I, I dearly, you know, I love you and I dearly appreciate you. And I, I find you absolutely enjoyable. And if I had a million subscribers, I don't know if I would have had the joy of getting to know you, at least to the degree that I have. And there are many of you out there that would like to have me say that about you. And I haven't had the chance. And there are many emails that I haven't responded to and gosh, on the side of my. Discord links, there's all these messages that I haven't gotten to. And you wouldn't believe my Facebook messages that I never look at Facebook Messenger. And there's all these and it just, I just feel guilty about all these messages. Because every one of you is an image bearer of God. And if I have eyes to see, I can see my, I can see God's handiwork in each one of you. And when I get to see that. It's it's a joy and I love that joy. So. Young Art, Eric, Eric Art Young. Eric Young Art. What do you do? What do you do about the extreme hatred that some people have for Christianity? It's probably not a lot I can do. I'll try. I'll try not to return evil for evil. I know a person that I love deeply who considers themselves open minded and liberal when it comes to lifestyle and spirituality. They accept any cult, pagan ritual or foreign religion within their friend group, but do not practice anything or belong to any religious groups themselves. But when Christianity is mentioned, they roll their eyes and react with extreme disgust. I've tried to engage in nuanced conversation about these things, but any mention of Christianity at any positive sense is ridiculed and fought against. It seems like the more nuanced I get my understanding of Christianity and its practice, the more negative the reaction I get from them. I hold this person. I hold this person very well and I know they do not have any negative church experiences from their childhood, but somehow they still hold this extreme hatred for anyone who thinks Christianity is a positive thing. Have you encountered anyone like this before? And is there anything that I can do to help shift their perspective? If words are, if you find words are counterproductive to your effort, stop using them. Let your light shine in how you live. Because there is, if they're still in relationship with you, they obviously haven't found you extremely disgusting. And they may upon, if they're in their little clique that is anti-Christian, they might even say, well, my friend Eric, he's a Christian, he's not so bad. Let reality do its work. And what that means is to a degree you take on suffering. Yes, I have people in my life that are like that. Some people who are very close to me that are like that. And I'm a Christian minister. So they know where I'm at. So love them. Love your enemies. That's what Christianity, love your enemies is not advanced Christianity. It's basic Christianity. But if you practice basic Christianity with discipline and determination, you will grow. So love your friend. If words about Christianity bother them, then don't talk about it directly. Just let your light shine through your life and through your love. And as I say many times, we, you know, it's a, it's an, who's the guy that Jacob keeps talking to me about? Eric Bernays, the guy who, you know, how to convince people, talk, you know, brought women to smoke, et cetera, et cetera. It's a good thing that you. Yep. Yep. It's a, it's a good thing that human hearts are so locked away from each other that it takes a lot to really fit shape and form a human being because otherwise we would all be trying to manipulate and control each other. And so what we have in some ways in our hearts is this castle defense, just more and more defensive. And so quite obviously somewhere along the line, this person decided that they need to really be against Christianity. And so they've adopted all of these defenses. Don't assault those defenses in a, in an ordinary way. Love them. Love is the, love is the biggest influence that human beings have with one another. Because we just, we just are suckers for people who treat us well. We expect people to come and be in it, be a jerk, but just, just, just love this person. That's, that's what you're called to do anyway. You can't convert them or change them. You're not their master. Love them. So that's, it's, it's simple to say and it's terribly hard to do. Justice from Portland. Something I, given my name, think about a lot is the notion of justice. To use your language, justice seems to be quite fudgy word these days. It seems like most of us, including me, don't know exactly what it means when, when we say it. Yet whatever it means, I know justice is quite important to God and I wish to embody my name well. What is a good word definition of justice? Maybe a story illustrating what it looks like. Appreciate you and your pixelated epistole. So, Plato's Republic talks about justice. Justice is, is. So, there's a, the word in the New Testament for justice and righteousness is the same word. But we have tended to associate justice with public ethics and righteousness with private ethics. And in the Bible, it's the same concept. Private justice and public justice. Most of the time when people to a generation ago, justice was punishment for wrongs. And so in standard Protestant nomenclature, Jesus gives us mercy instead of justice. In other words, justice is a negative justice was a synonym for punishment. Now justice is being used much more as a synonym for shalom. Let's say life the way it's supposed to be. And so a lot of the public use of that word that I see is is rather deceptive. You know, people should be looking for for public shalom, for public well-being, for public peace. Peace is sort of life the way it's supposed to be. Justice really isn't that idea. Justice is what the king meets out when there's, you know, that's what kings did. So people come to the king and they have a dispute between them and the king decides between them. That, OK, you know, think of the story that Nathan gives David about one man had many herds and flocks. And a visitor came to the house and this man's neighbor had one little lamb that the family that the family raised and the children treated as pets. And because the wealthy man didn't want to take from his herds and flocks, he took that he took his neighbor's little lamb and sacrificed it for, you know, butchered it for to extend hospitality to his guest. David stands up in righteous indignation. That man should die. And of course, Nathan is talking about Bathsheba and and Uriah. And Nathan comes back. You are that man, David. You should die because you have wealth and women and concubines and wives. And you took the little lamb of your faithful servant, Uriah, and you took her to your bed. Justice demands that David die. David understood justice. That's what the king meets out. That's what the great king meets out. That sense of justice. People get all enthusiastic about if they imagine that the other person is going to suffer. So I think often when people say justice, they mean well-being or shalom or peace or life the way it's supposed to be. And we certainly want that. So public justice, social justice. What about private justice? So justice is justice is a very important word. That we are using poorly. And when we use important words poorly, we suffer because language is a commons. And if we don't preserve that commons, commons are delicate. You know, we're putting up the fence here at Living Stones. And that's, you know, we're working very hard and it's costing a lot of money. But it's, I lament putting up the fence. Because in many ways, the church grounds has been a commons. Neighbors have come and taught their kids to drive cars and ride bikes and shoot basketball hoops. And we've had homeless people camping here and, and, and. So commons is an important function in a community. But when commons is abused, fences go up. And so I think the little story of Nathan and David and Bathsheba is, is one of the best stories of what justice is. Justice demands that David die. David doesn't get justice. The son of David's adultery, David committed adultery against Uriah. Thou shalt not commit adultery. That in the, in the cultural mental mapping of that commandment, you commit adultery against your neighbor because you sleep with his wife. That wife does not belong to you. David deserved death for that adultery. And he didn't get it. The son died. So that's justice. It's a big deal. John S. What do you think of Archaofuturism? Should Christians view, how should Archaofuturism? I've never heard that word before. I can sort of guess what it means by the nature of it. You know, that Star Trek episode where you have all these people sort of living this little pastoral lifestyle and then people following the prime directive sort of spying at them, you know, thinking that, well, maybe these people will develop and come to learn that these people had already developed. And they said, no, we don't, we don't like all that technology. We want to, we're going to live like, We're going to live like Michael Martin, the sociologist, and we're going to have a little farm in Jackson, Michigan and practice biodynamic farming and plant cows horns and all of those kinds of things. So, This idea of technology though fascinates me and I want to get into it more as I continue on through my commentary on Jonathan Peugeot's work, especially when he intersects with people like Paul Kingsnorth. Jonathan made, you know, made a really, you know, really gave me something to chew on when he taught, when he, when he framed for me the reality of the Bible starting in a garden and ending in a city. And in Paul Schrader's movie, the Mosquito Coast, Paul Schrader grew up in the Christian Reformed Church and went to Calvin College and he's got an, he's an interesting guy, but he made this movie Mosquito Coast. And in that movie Harrison Ford lays out a little bit, a little bit of theology when he said, you know, God made the world unfinished. What does that mean? It means that there's clearly potential in the world that humanity was supposed to and is intended to fulfill. Part of what we've done technologically is rape. We've raped our sister and we sort of hold her at gunpoint and we say, give us your stuff, give us your goods, give us your blessing. We're going to take it from you via force. We sort of do that with technology sometimes. But nature is full of potential and we have to, it's our calling to figure out how to develop that potential, but always doing so with honor and respect due to God's good creation. So, John asked a similar question last week. It takes astoundingly wise discernment to know how to do this and part of, part of King's North's complaint about where the environmental movement went is it went sort of techno. The answer to technology is more technology, but there's a sense in which you build a house of cards that way. And one of the, so we had a meetup at Living Stones on Tuesday night and part of the conversation there was about medical technology and how, and I see this all the time with old people. They've got, you know, they're taking 14, 15 pills a day and every pill you have has side effects and you take pills for the side effects, but that new drug has side effects and so you just compile it on. So a lot of theorizing today is trying to figure out, well, maybe we should get off the drug thing and figure out how to live a healthier lifestyle. It starts with what we eat. We can't seem to figure that out. So, technology is not going away. In fact, technology, go again back to Peugeot's video on Enoch. Technology starts early. And at this point right now on the planet, we can't live without it. You know, let's say we decided to no longer use synthetic fertilizer. Some estimates say the world can support more than 4 billion people without synthetic fertilizers. Okay, so which 4 billion gets to die. So the other 4 billion can eat. There's a lot, there's a lot there. All right. Twirlyca 22. Captain Ruthie and I was looking at your question on women in the Bible. The only place I, the world where women are completely respected more than any others in the Bible. I will give just a couple of examples. So here's the answer to that question that she gives. I won't, I won't read it. But that's an answer to the earlier question. What is the Greek truth aletheia different from modern? You're asking, you're asking a Greek vocabulary question here. And so I'm going to have to reach back to memory. Greek sense of truth had a lot of beauty in it. The Enlightenment likes to see truth as sort of physical coordination or correspondence. Greek truth aletheia also had a sense of excellence about it. And, you know, there's, when you look at, let's say, wisdom in the wisdom literature of the Old Testament, that wasn't, it's not the same, but it's not disconnected from the Greek section of truth because they both had sense, senses of excellence to them. So part of the, part of the problem, and I think McGill-Christ is really helpful with this, part of the problem in our contemporary frame is that we tend to think of truth as correspondence. And let's say equations two plus two equals four is truth. Yeah, that's truth. But it's, it's a kind of a basic kind. There's lots of other sorts of truth. So the English word is even broader than our modernist imagination about it. Oh, we're almost to the bottom. Holy cow, Rick. Hello, Paul. What do you think of the fact that all of this, what do you think of the fact that all of this is about free will? That every single miracle ever is people of their own free will choosing Jesus as their Lord and Savior. That the fish, healing, blind seeing, dead rising are all really, really cool. But those are so easy for Jesus. These are so easy for the Father because he is the increase. But the only way one of these happens was to let someone see what God is capable of and turn their heart to Jesus. That's the miracle. The only miracle, the only miracle, because in order to not be a robot, you have to have Jesus as your rock. And the reason why God hates homosexuality and abortion is there is both the same reason. They both stopped the generations that would have been born that would have been to worship God. God is furious about this. He is. He was mad about it 3000 years ago when people sacrificed their children to Molech and he's mad as they sacrifice to Molech today. Anyway, yeah, big questions. Love you, brother. Have fun with it. Will be interesting to see your response. Vervecky and Rick Mapetti did a video on free will, which I found quite interesting. I've never really liked the term free will because I think it conjures in our imagination absolutist ideas of freedom. I like to talk more about real agency because it is in fact our ability to make choices, our ability to do one thing instead of another that in some ways is part of our image of God. We look at the consciousness of our pets. They don't seem to have as much agency as we have. They have some that's clear, but not as much. And so free will is so binary a language. And so I like looking at thinking about agency, which is more scalable. And I think when you get into these issues like same sex marriage or abortion, I think agency helps us orient ourselves towards life. And I think it's very much agency, the connection between agency and life and the choices we make with respect to these things that I think can help us to be more open and open to the world. Agency is a remarkably difficult thing. C.S. Lewis in his book, Miracles, sort of uses reason to tie all this together. It's fairly platonic. But the thing that I think is important is that agency is a very important tool. And I think when you get into these issues like same sex marriage or abortion, I think agency helps us orient ourselves towards life. And I think it's in many ways what life in Christ should afford. I love how Vervecki talks about addiction as reciprocal narrowing. And he says basically, if there's such thing as reciprocal narrowing, might there not also be reciprocal broadening? Then what is the path to reciprocal broadening? And that's where this word freedom gets very tricky. Because I am not free to play a beautiful piece of piano music. You say, well, is the government stopping you from playing a beautiful piece of piano music? No, the government isn't stopping me. Well, what's stopping me? So I don't know how to play the piano. What does it take for me to have the freedom to play the piano beautifully? See, freedom isn't the right word. It's much more agency. And that agency has to be developed. And that agency is developed over time. And so I think a lot of these issues that Christianity is wrestling with, abortion is a narrowing phenomena. You take this astounding gift, potentiality of bringing another human being into the world. And well, of course, there's, you know, bringing human beings into the world is what happens via sexual procreation. So you can not bring a human being into the world by not having sexual intercourse or having fruitless sexual intercourse. And I'm not saying that all sex must be potentially fruitful. I think, you know, in the Roman Catholic position on human sexuality has proved itself durable. I'm not fully convinced by it, but I see a lot of its wisdom. But if you use agency, you can, I think, begin to see how you can connect these things and perhaps make them intelligible to people. So that's part of the reason I prefer that word over something like free will, which seems so binary. I have free will to play the piano beautifully. What I don't have is agency. And for me to develop the capacity to play the piano beautifully will require sacrifice. And that helps that, I think, really tie this world together. OK, end of questions. By the way, I talked to so Manuel wants to do a conversation and because my time is so limited, I might do some of that next week. I'd like to continue to play around with, you know, Rick can get Manuel in via V-Mix and he and I can do a conversation and then we can talk about the conversation. I love doing one-on-one conversations with people. And I know, of course, because my channel is bigger than some of the other channels in this little community that it's always sort of a leg up to get onto my channel. That's some of the downside of status, too. But, you know, Manuel and Mark and Sam and so many of you have spoken about this. That's some of the downside of status, too. But, you know, Manuel and Mark and Sam and so many of you have so many good ideas that I can't capture right away. And many of you see other places on them. Part of what I want to see from something like the Bridges of Meaning Discord and the capacities of these is to open up the conversations between more of us. That's what we do in a room when we have an estuary meeting or a meetup or something like that. So part of this is to replicate some of those dynamics online if we can. So that's not a sure thing. But, you know, I do this question and answer format quite a bit, quite a bit more. Peugeot does it once a month. Fervecki does it once a month. And I think we could mix it up and try different ways of having, let's say, a one-on-one conversation for the first hour and then more open discussion for the second hour or something like that. I'm always trying to figure out how to shake these things up. All right. Last two questions of the day. Shane, in a recent interview you did with an author, Woodshed Guy, Rod, the topic came up of showing up where people can see one another in this context without shared spaces. How do you try to provide this context in your community? I mean, Church Sunday sermons do not, in my opinion, provide context for people showing up in a meaningful way, as it is primary spectator activity. Absolutely. I'm really wrestling with this because, so way back in January 2018, we started our local Jordan Peterson meetup. And the first week we had a dozen people. And the next week we had about 15 people. And a few of the people were repeats and a lot of other people. And that second meetup in February of 2018, that's when Joey came and Tyler came and James came. And so what happened over the next two years was that meetup became a community. And if I post something on meetup.com, because of the videos, we'll tend to get a lot of new people. But part of the way community has to work is that there needs to be a degree of stability because you want to have your friends and group together. But there also needs to be an openness so that new people can come in. And so part of what I'm trying to figure out is how we can do both. Because it isn't fair to the old timers to always have to be trying to figure out what to do with the new people. But it also isn't good to just cut it off and not let new people come in. You've got to figure out how to have it both ways. And we've tried lots of different things. And so I continue to try to think about that. And what you say about the Sunday worship service is exactly right. The worship service is participatory, but in a fairly narrow sense. So it has its place. But that's part of the reason why I have my Sunday school class the way I do on Sunday morning. Because that's more participatory. It's a different format. And it's why I continue to develop and try to work on the estuary model and to figure that out. Because I think churches need spaces where people can come for satisfying, meaningful, productive conversation. And I think increasingly in society, church is one of the few places that can actually host that. Because a lot of other spaces in society, politics, universities, the polarization and the disciplines aren't there to structure and host productive conversations. So that's part of what estuary is about. I got the sense that that was some of your motivation for estuary. Sort of the context that came up in your conversation, at least what I remember from it, was sort of connected to one of your other videos where there was this sense of sort of relational dynamics between men and women. And how can we know anything about a person's character unless we've kind of seen them over time in the context of how they show up to life? And I just imagine that that was sort of taken for granted in previous sort of agrarian cultures or places where there were more common community spaces where people gathered. And I get the sense that, well, so a lot of people meet each other at work. And it is, I don't know if there's any more effective way to vet somebody's character than by perceiving them over long periods of time, interacting with different sort of positions in the hierarchy. How do you relate to the boss? How do you relate to your coworkers? How do you relate to the new guy at work? How do you relate to different people? How can we observe somebody showing up and exhibiting their character in life? And I would just love to create a space like that or go to those spaces. Going to the grocery store doesn't cut it. Going to church nowadays is such a passive sort of spectator thing that it doesn't really work either unless you're very involved in the service activities or you go for a very long time. And so I was just really wondering, well, what then is there in modern life? And if nothing, what could we possibly create? I think the estuary is something, but there's still, in my estimation, just conversation happening there and for short periods of time. And so I just still find myself longing for something more. Churches have, with the advent of the megachurches, small groups were supposed to address that. And so right away you try to get people into small groups. Cell church models, house church models have tried to address this. But you're right that what we're dealing with is in some ways some downsides of urbanization. And if you lived in a village that you lived your whole life in, you'd have other issues because then you have limitations of potential and opportunity, et cetera, et cetera. So no, you're exactly right. And estuary is supposed to take a stab at some of this. And part of why I'm doing it and why I'm having that meeting on June 17 in Grand Rapids is to try to incentivize some of the clergy that are within my circles to say, open up your spaces and try this. It by no means satisfies everything. But churches have been trying to address this for a long time, and they do so with small groups, young people, men's societies. But part of it is just church and scale has really been struggling because the two size churches that are flourishing right now are churches under 50 and churches over a thousand. And churches in the middle have really been struggling partly because of economics. You can have a church under 50 and run it fairly inexpensively because the clergy is bivocational, but then you don't have a lot of training. You can have a church over a thousand, but then you've really got to lean into small groups. And I could talk for a long time about what's happened with small groups and mega churches. In theory, it should work, but in practice, it's not easy, partly because if you grew up in a village, you don't get the opportunity to act like a consumer with respect to the people that you share life with. They're your family and your neighbors. You don't get to choose. You're just stuck unless you decide to leave the village. What happens in our society is that there are potentially thousands of people that we could sort of cluster up with to share life with. Well, who do we want to do that with? Well, people who are like us, maybe people who if we're just starting a family and have a small child, people who have small children. And so that's sort of what happens. And some people are like, oh, I want to have a broad selection of people. But what you're going to have in any normal distribution of community are some jerks, some odd people. You're just going to get a random selection of people, and people are complicated. So your point is well taken. And the part. Yeah, there's so, so much to this conversation. And I'll tell you that pastors are having this conversation behind closed doors in staff meetings and in consistory rooms, council rooms, boardrooms all the time. It's a tremendous challenge. But there's no easy answers. And so some people do house church. There's your house church. A lot of people don't do house church for very long because it's really demanding. So no, it's a great question. And estuary is taking a stab at part of it, but it's by no means a perfect, a perfect thing. For what it's worth, my church community is very deeply invested in small group culture. We still have Sunday services and Wednesday sort of Bible study classroom type stuff where it's a little bit more interactive. But there's, you know, church staff there and helping people develop a mature understanding of the sort of the Bible and of our our specific culture. But really where the rubber meets the road is in people's homes where we're exposing ourselves to each other. We're getting to know and be known by one another. And it and it works. Well, it serves that purpose. And yet, unless we're very deliberate about meeting in a sort of almost an estuary type of mindset where it's not specifically geared toward preaching or teaching or praying or or whatever, it is more of a let's do life together. Let's help each other on physical tasks or I'm not even sure how to explain the difference between working alongside somebody and trying to do something that has a church label on it. But that's the territory I want to get into. And I know this, you know, we could talk for hours about this alone. Like you said, people are talking about it all the time. It's a big deal. I was just wondering what your immediate thoughts on that were. So thank you. Yeah, yeah. Now, it's you're right. You're right. And it intersects with a consumer culture thing, because let's say let's say the pastor assigned you all to small groups and said, for the next five years, you're locked into this group of people. I know you're going to do life on life, but is it the life you want? You know, but but then again, imagine if we were managing our marriages that way, and people are. So you sit down and you say, as long as as long as you continue to satisfy me and give me what I need, I'm going to stay in this relationship. But the minute I find something better or, you know, I'm out of this, or it starts to pinch the devilment of choice. That's where we're we've asked for it. Now we've got it. Now we don't like what we always get from it. So there's the other side of free will. So thank you, Shane. It's a great question. And it's it's something that, you know, John Vendock and I talk about a lot in terms of estuary and what we can do. So all right. Well, I think that's Chad has a little ending comment here about why the disciples went across the lake, I guess, to get to the other side and to meet a demoniac and to cast it out and to turn him down. Turn him down and he wants to come back to the other side of the lake. So anyway, so again, check out the I will put both in the so it's about one o'clock now. I got to chat with Rick. Rick's got to go back to work. We put together a NAS going to see if he how far Rick got on that, et cetera, et cetera. But check out the upcoming events and sign up for ones that are realistic to go to. And yeah, thanks for your time and attention. Like and subscribe. All right. Transmission.