https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=m06dhG8KOSQ

 Hi, this is Paul, and if you've been watching my videos because of my Jordan Peterson content, you probably know that I've been enthusiastic about Jordan Peterson fans getting together and talking with one another. And I started a meetup group here at Livingstone's Church, and we've been meeting once a month for the last number of months, and I've been deeply appreciated the group, the interactions, the new friendships, and it's been great. In fact, it's been so great that I've decided to up it, and at least for the month of May, to try two meetups. So this coming weekend, I have a week, I have a weekend meetup time, so this coming weekend, Sunday night at 5 o'clock at Livingstone's, we'll have a meetup, and it's a little early, so if you want to bring some food to share, maybe I'll do the same thing, and we'll have kind of a potluck, and we'll hang out, and we'll talk Jordan Peterson, and have a good time. And then later on in the month, the 29th, we'll have a Tuesday night meeting. And so we'll do the same thing on May 29, and we'll get together. And so far, we haven't had so many people that we've had to break up into smaller groups, so we've been able to have one group, and we've had a good variety of people. Some people have been able to come some weeks and not other weeks, or some months and not other months, and so we've had a really interesting variety of people, and we've had a lot of fun conversation. And so if you're in the Sacramento area, or somewhere in Northern California, and you're willing to drive, sign up for the meetup online, and come on down, because I'd love to meet you, and the other folks here would love to meet you, and we'll have a good time.