https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=SNluk9NTGO0

 Hi, this is Paul, and I know I'm gonna get a lot of jokes about my vacation I still haven't figured out my vacation might not even take it this week I'll talk to the wife and she gets when she gets back home but The ideas keep coming so the videos will keep coming as long as I have time to make the videos Which they don't usually take me that long I've been thinking about mentally Trouble mentally conceiving of God and this is very much a part of the atheist conversation Think a lot of the the function of this conversation is one of imagination What do we what do we conceive of God? I think there's often an implicit assumption with the atheist conversations that God Is should be available to our senses which That's simply an assumption. God is not available to our senses like a tiger or bear is available to our senses The Soviets went up into space Supposedly and said up. He's not there even though Yuri Gagarin was in fact an Orthodox Christian We're gonna see how this video goes because I have a dog and a cat in the backyard and the dogs gonna freak out at some point but that's that's kind of the way it goes with maybe that's kind of the way it goes with atheists and No boy, what's this dog gonna do the kind of way it goes with with atheists and God Say who's who and the dimension talk that I mentioned last week in the videos with Neil deGrasse Tyson This is this is what kind of put me in there and got my mind going on this because I thought he did a nice job Of of laying out the dimensions and so let's I'm gonna run through that kind of my own version of it a little bit What is a geometric point? Well, the geometric point has no mass. It has no area you can only imagine it and Approximately articulate some of its properties and Consequence how many points can fit in a pint? well an infinite number of points and I kind of differentiate between true infinite and I'd say common infinite true infinite would be The mathematical infinite often when we talk about infinite It's similar to what we talk about in terms of random. So often when we say random random means a Sequence of events too complex for us to track or to know and so we call it random and That's not true random. It's just Human random we can't know it so it looks random to us and often Too many stars. Well, let's say are there an infinite number of stars probably not There are there are a number of stars We just don't know how many there are and we can guess and we can put a number on it But it's not true infinite But we'd say oh there's an infinite number of stars or in the biblical and the biblical stories the number of stars or the Sands on the sea so on and so forth So how many how many points can you fit in a pint? Well an infinite number of points? Can you fit more pint? Can you fit more points? That's a tongue twister. Can you fit more points in a pint than a quart? Well, the answer for both is infinite and you sit and you think and you imagine you can you can realize this out Because a point has no space it is a point But yet a point is a very powerful thing if you're working with geometry a point is a very crucial thing and geometry impacts How we build it impacts the homes we have it impacts art it impacts everything around us So you might say well a point does not exist No a point very much exists but you can fit an infinite number and a thimble or a pint or a quart or a swimming pool That's the way it goes now When you start talking this way you begin to realize How our imaginations impact our assertions about being Now let's let's say we want to we want to represent a point well We might take a piece of paper and we might take a pen and we might Put a dot on that piece of paper and that dot would represent a point But if we pause we will have to realize the limitations of the representation the representation is extremely helpful to us Because it helps us teach a child what a point is but part of the difficulty is that a child will get confused between the representation and the point itself because if you make a dot on a piece of paper and you cut out that dot There's a limited number of dots that can fit into a pint and more dots can fit into a quart But that is the difference between the representation and the thing itself Now if you look at the The McGill Crest video he has a wonderful section in there on understanding and basically what he says is that We are able to understand when we are able to pull things into our three-dimensional He doesn't use three-dimension. I'm putting these two videos together pull things into our three-dimensional world And that's when we say we understand we understand them when we can manipulate them now we can manipulate points mentally But we can't manipulate them physically because points are not a function of our three-dimensional world They're a function of this imagined mathematical world or a geometric world Now let's take two points and connect them and now we have a line So a line is bounded by two points now again You can represent a line on a piece of paper and if you cut out that line if you even if you cut it out very Carefully you can put that line in a manila folder and how many lines can you put in a manila folder now you can put a limited number of Represented lines by paper in a manila folder But you can have well really you can have and you can fit an infinite number of Lines geometric lines in a manila folder even though of course you there are not actually any of them in a manila folder Because we can only deal with the representations We can't deal with the thing itself and the same thing goes with weight. I mean how How many lines how many how many geometric lines does it take to to get a pound of geometric lines? Well, it's a silly question. You can't answer the question the question makes no sense because Geometric lines just like geometric points They have no weight you you would need a manila folder a manila folder type structure to hold geometric lines But you know now we're now we're getting into the dimensions and again you can only imagine these things Now let's look at a geometric plane. Well. You've got two dimensions now You've got four lines and four points, and this is where Neil deGrasse Tyson's Illustration is fun because he says well now imagine you have a desk now pay attention. We're dealing with representations here there are a limited number of there are a limited number of squares or Rectangles that are required to cover this desk Okay, so basically you've got one rectangle, and you're trying to fill it with other rectangles or squares or other geometric geometric objects and So you can represent this in paper, and that's what Neil deGrasse Tyson does in his little illustrations, so Then he says but now pay attention if you have a stack So the two-dimensional ant as he imagines or a two-dimensional creature Looks at the desk and says well the desk is filled with those with those With those forms with those shapes now if you have a stack you can clear off the desk put them all in a stack and well in other words the three-dimensional being has far more power than the two-dimensional being and three-dimensional being would look would look almost godlike to a two-dimensional being in terms of what they can do because while the two-dimensional being has a very limited amount of space to work with on this desk, but the three-dimensional being has stacks and Obviously you can stack an infinite number of things there Now in CS Lewis's miracles he quotes a book called Flatland, and this is a book it was a satirical essay a satirical novella by a By a 19th century English schoolmaster Edwin Abbott Abbott first published in 1884 and It's it's a very interesting book. I've looked at the book and it's a it's a like he says it's a it's a satirical Well, so the plot revolves around a two-dimensional world occupied by geometric figures Whereas women are simply line segments all the patriarchy White men are polygons with various numbers of sides the narrator of a square Named a square a member of a cast of gentlemen and professionals who guides the readers through some of the implications of life in two dimensions The first half of the story goes through the practicality of existing in two-dimensional universe as well as a history leading up to the year 1999 on the eve of the third Millennium On New Year's Eve the square dreams of a visit from a one-dimensional world Lineland inhabited by lustrous points These points are unable to see the square as anything other than a set of points on a line Thus the square attempts to convince the realms monarch of a second dimension But is unable to do so in the end the monarch of lineland tries to kill a square rather than tolerate his nonsense any further Following this vision he is himself visited by a three-dimensional sphere called a sphere Similar to the points in lineland the square is unable to see the square as anything other than a circle The square then levitates up and down through the flat land allowing square to see the circle expand and retract The square is not fully convinced until he sees space land a Tri-dimensional world for himself the square visits flat land at the turn of each Millennium to introduce a new apostle To the idea of a third dimension in the hopes of eventually educating the population of flat land From the safety safety of space land because you're safe in space land from flat land from the safety of space land they are able to observe the leaders of flat land secretly acknowledging the existence of the sphere and And prescribing the sand Prescribing the silence of anyone found preaching the truth of space land and the third dimension After this proclamation is made many witnesses are massacred and imprisoned according to cast Including a squares brother a squares brother B. So a square and B square After the squares mind is open to the new dimensions He tries to convince the sphere of the theoretical possibility of existence of a fourth and fifth and sixth Spatial dimension, but the sphere returns his students to flat land in disgrace The square then has a dream in which a sphere visits him again this time to introduce him to point land Where of the point soul inhabitant monarch and universe of one? perceives any communication as a Thought originating from his own mind solipsism in other words you see said my teacher how little your words have done So far as monarch understands them at all He accepts them and his as his own for he cannot conceive of anyone except himself and Plumes himself upon the variety of his thought as an instance of creative power Let he let us leave this god of point land to the ignorant fruition of his own of his omnipresence And omniscience nothing that you or I can do can rescue him from his self-satisfaction Now if you read this and you're listening to me you can begin to listen to all of these Conversations that we have about God now is this What what am I doing here am I asserting that we have point land and line land and flat land and space land What this little exercise does is allow our imaginations to conceive relationships? Amongst dimensions and again, we're only talking dimensions. We're talking a fairly simple Framework by which it is not hard to imagine that yes the one creature of point land is a solipsist and he remains a solipsist because this is the only world he can imagine and So anyone from line land or flat land or space land? Coming to try to interact with the monarch of point land Well point land can only see what point land can see and again This isn't very different from what Neil deGrasse Tyson's point is in the video that he makes The square I don't know if Neil deGrasse Tyson ever read flat land So is Neil deGrasse Tyson with respect to this conversation the monarch of well Maybe Sam Harris is the monarch of point land and the disciples are apostles of flat land and space land and even line land Are futile in terms of talking to him because he is restricted to point land Square recognizes the identity of the ignorance of the monarch of point land and thus line land with his own and the spheres previous ignorance of the existence of higher dimensions Once returning to flat land the square cannot convince anyone of space lands existence especially after official decrees are announced that anyone preaching the existence of three dimensions will be in prison or Executed depending on caste Eventually the square himself is imprisoned and thus And for and for this reason with only occasional contact with his brother who was imprisoned in the same facility He does not manage to convince his brother even after they have all both seen several years after being Imprisoned the square writes out the book flat land in the form of a memoir Hoping to keep it for posterity for a future generation that can see beyond their two-dimensional existence so and You know even the illustration here of the point the monarch of point land and the ignorance of flat land Well, maybe you've never heard of flat land You've never heard of the book flat land and so then you read this book and you discover. Oh my goodness This analogy sort of works this analogy helps me see different things So here we have three dimensions and My wife caught me making a video and she's taking a picture of me making a video So my wife didn't yell at me for making a video. That's a good thing So master so I've got this right now. I've got this little kitten running around in my yard It was a stray. It's a feral cat that my daughter's adopted that I know I'm gonna get stuck with But so this cat is right now creeping through the garden Learning to stalk and you can come here kitty. I want to be on the video But this this little kitten is learning to master the three-dimensional world and the kitten is quite a master and one of my sons just came out a little steak and was playing with the kitten and Teasing it and we are masters of three dimensions and we can manage Infinite planes when I infinite but we can stack paper up and this is an amazing amazing thing for the flatlanders a Stack to a being to a stack to a flat lander You know This is this is the whole point of flat land that well the the people of one dimension have difficulty Imagining or seeing people of another dimension That stack can hold infinite planes Although the representation can't hold and then you go to a cube obviously which has six planes and eight points and We can easily master three dimensions. This is what we do. This is where we live This is how we see and as again Ian Gilchrist made the point What you don't understand something until you in terms of metaphor Can bring it into this world that we have deep bodily connections with you're gonna come visit kitty gonna be on the video See YouTube is for kitties. Hmm. We say there kitty. Are you a little scared? This is your first video This is my first cat video. This is a milestone in my life as a youtuber Oh Kitty's about nine weeks old And my daughter is desperately trying to She's actually pretty tame You got all the fleas off her but kitty I should probably stick to the video kitty is a master of three dimensions and kitty in some ways You know, she she climbs and she jumps I'm sitting next to a swimming pool here So, I don't think she's gonna jump in that direction You know, you're gonna make the video with me. You're gonna distract me so much so that I can't think you're gonna jump down Say this is this is this is reason to see the video and not just listen to yeah Oh now you're hey now you're on the podcast to look at that. Hmm. You know meow. Are you getting a little frustrated there kitty? Yeah, you get a little frustrated. Yeah. Yeah, are you a little nervous? Oh No, you'll jump that's not that high you can do it Kitty is very much not a flat lander All right, I'm gonna move yeah, yeah, what are you gonna do? What are you gonna do? And kitty has claws, oh that's it for kitty So two-dimensional creatures would appear like gods we have trouble with the fourth dimension Well, what is the fourth dimension the fourth dimension is time? This is where some of the and maybe you math people out there can Figure this figure this out or illuminate me why Neil deGrasse Tyson talks about fourth dimensions it's nice in terms of the sequence, but the fourth dimension is time and Here's the thing how we struggle with time as we're very much three-dimensional creatures But we struggle with time a lot in in time, you know In my theological work I often call this the age of decay and I get that from the New Testament where Things decay in this world moth and rust consume now time is an interesting thing and we struggle with it We don't have the same mastery over time that we seem to have mastery over objects in three dimensions And so we we struggle with knowledge of time now. You might think of a time Lord You might think of dr. Who but even if you watch dr. Who? Our limitations in terms of thinking about time are Are significant and I think in some ways obvious even in our imagination a time Lord That's not that imaginative when it comes to time and we think of a time machine where it can Drop in and out of certain points of time. Well, that's a that's a relatively That that's a relatively simplistic Manipulation of time. Well, why do I we limit our stories to it in many ways? I'm sure there's good science fiction out there that isn't limited in in those kinds of ways to that Think about consciousness and time you think about how consciousness is this cloud with which we interact with the world? But think how timeless? Consciousness is in fact, we only really seem to be able to manage time within Consciousness via memory and so we have short term and long term memory but Our our relationship with time is is is not very good And it shows our bias towards three dimensions and then in the sense when we use the word moment We punt because moment is kind of analogous to a point, you know How many moments can you fit in a pint? How many moments can do you need to make up a pound of moments? Well, well, they don't these are these are different planes of existence. These are different realities and And yet, you know, we kind of manage the intersection of them all Now I know I want to pay attention to the fact this this monarchical vision that I began talking about Objects in space in a timeless moment What is what is being or what is reality it is? well, it's objects in space and this is beginning of maps of meaning and of the Easter lectures where where Peterson begins reading maps of meaning time or you know Two ways to conceive of reality one is objects in space and the other is a form for action Now what separates a form from action and objects in space is really time It's the fourth dimension. And so the relationship between these two is is another dimension So we've got the desk and paper illustration with time. Well, how would a time master appear to us? well, whereas let's say you can stack up a limited amount of paper on a desk or Go back to Neil deGrasse Tyson's you have a room with boxes now in three dimension You can fill up a room with boxes. Okay But once that room is filled with boxes, it's filled now add the fourth dimension, which is time Well, you can empty boxes out of the room and put boxes in the room And in fact, this is what we do with rooms all the time A room is not a timeless entity things come into the room things go out of the room And this is how the fourth dimension interacts with the three dimensions of time now Let's imagine that you are a merely three dimensional being and you cannot interact with the fourth dimension What happens? Well things would appear and disappear according to us just as we things appear and Disappear in flat land and points become circles and larger as a sphere interacts with flat land now we have trouble storifying this and boxes we and that's in fact how we manage the Relationship between the third and the fourth dimension. I brought the box in the room I brought the box out of the room. I am playing with time But for us obviously time is is running linearly in one direction moving forward and again Imaginatively we play with cyclical things as someone noted the Bible doesn't like cyclical things The Bible tends to be much more of a progressive book and that's how the Bible manages time But we use story actually To manage the interface between three dimensions and four dimensions now What if a time master could see and manage things in time as easily as we manage things in 3d space? Now even just a little bit of imagination with this says that Hmm, how would reality look to us who are solidly in 3d? But struggle with time How would a true master of time? interact with this Would such a time master bother with us now the to the inhabitants of flat land To the inhabitants of space land the people in flat land look terribly dull. They look rather uninteresting they look rather ignorant and they look as ignorant as the the monarch of point land looks to the to the to the people of Lineland or flat land Would they bother with us well, maybe they would just mess with us to mess with us and actually if you go back and you look at mythology a lot of the gods they just kind of mess with people and In fact even in the Bible, you've got a lot of interesting characters You've got you know always this this conversation the Old Testament about how to think about the gods of the other nations Are they gods are they powers now you get into the New Testament looking back on the Old Testament and you've got Principalities and powers and Paul talks about them and these these are something which we tend to in our culture Culturally exclude from the conversation Because we don't know how to fit them in in other videos. I've talked about Missionaries have for a long time talked about the excluded middle what happened in the history of Europe is that we took out the middle where you have angels and we kind of had God on top and then this material around here whereas most cultures in the world have a rather vivid middle realm and Then when missionaries would come in and talk about the creator God they would often hear stories Well, we knew there was a god up there But that God was so far away. We didn't bother with him and for the most part we bother with the gods of the middle realm the gods that are you know plaguing us and spooking us and haunting us the witches and the ghosts and The spirits that are governing the things around and for example, if you look at say the bales those that level of gods that that very much possessed the conversation of the Let's say the book of Kings what I'm preaching through now You know the bales are kind of these local bosses these local spiritual bosses and the assertion is Somewhere between the bales don't exist. They are gods of wood and stone That's what has a Kaia said when he's dealing with the Assyrian and the Emperor who's claiming jurisdiction over? Judea and trying to get Jerusalem to surrender are those gods wooden stone or are those gods? Lesser spiritual beings that when you get into the New Testament realm Christ Christ captures and Paul talks about that Christ leads them in triumphal procession imagining the drama of a Roman Caesar Leading through Rome the captives that he has taken in his in his conquest and again You can listen to Tom Hall Tom Holland on unbelievable talk about this So they're messing with us would appear actually quite dreamlike because of our difficulty in Storifying them we would try to storify them as best they can but they don't really fit into our story And again, we have some experience with this if we think about our dreams time is a very complex thing in our dreams and and identity and persons and things come in and out of our dream and and even Three-dimensional things get weird in our dreams, and so you know what to think about this well, it's what to think about this What would our representation of them now remember paper look like in our stories? Well, they would be beings of of incredible power Now we'll follow Neil deGrasse Tyson and talk about well is this the fourth dimension. It's an additional physical dimension I'd rather not displace time. I'd like us to keep time in the midst or this this a fifth dimension So then we toss about talk about a tesseract that tesseract has eight cells And four cubes and if you go to Wikipedia you can find some really neat drawings about About tesseracts the difficulty we have just as Ian McGillqist would say is that we have difficulty well we can we can articulate we can say well if a Cube is bounded by squares Then a tesseract is bounded by cubes But pay attention once you say you can say the words But try to conceive it mentally and so a variety of artists on this page are are trying So here's the on the on the on the diagram. I'm showing here. Here's the configuration zero Dimension is a point one dimension is a line two dimensions is a square three dimensions is a cube And four slash five dimensions and then up from there and again we can kind of mentally process this with one Schema or tool which is kind of what we're playing out here on the Wikipedia page But mentally we can't grasp it. We can't understand it. We can't manipulate it very well because all of our tools for thinking for storifying for manipulation have all been built in this particular Context of three dimensions plus linear time at least culturally other cultures will have circular time or spiral time And you know part of the great fun about this whole YouTube thing has been You know all of the cool information many of you have sent to me now Get into science fiction and of course It's the glory of science fiction writers to play with these ideas And so a very popular one was of course Q who made a variety of appearances on Star Trek I remember one episode in the original Star Trek where there were beings that were moving at considerably faster pace and nobody could figure out why they were configuring the enterprise to their Satisfaction and they kept hearing things that they thought were mosquitoes and what they learned was that These were actually the voices of the beings that were moving very quickly and so even just shifting in the fourth dimension the speed of the fourth dimension has Impact on the three dimensions, but then when you get up to higher dimensions such as Q well, you get something similar to a you know a Greek God and Q was popping in and out of things and Q was making himself troublesome and Basically all of the dimensions all the people in our time space were like playthings to Q and You imagine that maybe there are other beings, but how would those beings be imagined by us? Now it's really hard for us to imagine all of this why because of how we've grown up and this is the main point of Neil deGrasse Tyson's video that He's making the point to Robert Kroll which that It isn't just a matter of us someday figuring this out We are limited by how we are and now you can go into Yuval Harari which homo Deus his book is almost science fiction in terms of saying well Maybe we'll become this or maybe we'll become that and you've also got let's say brave new world Which I think is a little bit more limited because of the technology available to his imagination but Here we are. We are limited now let's talk a little bit about time and choice because Again, my Calvinism often comes up in the comment section and one of the big Difficulties that we have with choice is in time and you can see how in many ways choice is a function of time We manage time with story and if you look at Jordan Peterson's Okan talk with the Activists Peterson notes that one of the one of the powers that we have is taking this Incredibly, you know Peterson uses infinite now is that true infinite or common infinite this this this world with too many features and factors and elements and players for us to manage and Then well, how do we manage it? We manage it by Story and it's within story that we begin to limit the scope Of what we're focusing on we have to do that because we're limited creatures but but story and narrative are a very rich way of essentially showing relationships relationships within time relationships between actors within time and And very much choice and I think this is part of the difficulty that we have in coming to terms with choice I think this is part of the reason that for the the naturalist materialists That that choice becomes such a difficult thing and narrative becomes such a difficult thing Because in the monarchical vision basically in order to in order to develop this Vision of oh here comes the dog. There goes the cat. We'll see how this goes You're gonna come visit me Mookie. You want to be on the video Mookie? Come here Mookie. Come here Mookie See he comes nicely. Come here books. Come here books So here's Mookie have anything to say for yourself Mookie Hmm and you say for yourself Yeah, yeah, you're you're considerably easier to deal with in the cat and Mookie is Mookie's about blind. He's never had good tear ducts but Mookie's got a bad back. He's getting old and he was a rescue dog and In need of doggy need of doggy health insurance, where's Obamacare for my dog, huh? I need Obamacare for my dog There you go Mookie. Stay away from the cat You kind of smell bad, too So back to the talk One of the interesting things about the the monarchical vision is that in order to do this you in many ways you kind of take Out time You really you really don't Because most of the scientific processes we have involve time But we control the process which is which is critical or we try to Explain the process but obviously the way this works is we do it by limiting Variables and so we limit and we limit variables in 3d space and we limit variables in 4d to 3d space Space and we limit variables in 4d time But again as I mentioned earlier the monarchical vision or outside of time and action is a powerful tool for three dimensions but breaks down with four and so Imagining the world as a space for objects. It's very three dimension Imagining the world as a form for action. That's very four dimension you stalk that dog at your own peril kitten Now I know you can outrun him you can get into little spaces that little kitten is trying to master 3d space with this blind dog and We've had we've taken in other stray cats and back when I had rottweilers one of our cats came to a particularly gruesome end anyway Naturalist and materials get hung up in the determinism because they are always basing their vision against time in a way Well now you're trouble cat you're out in open field you're gonna have to run because you can't see you you know See I've got 3d I've got 3d stuff just all over the place so Jordan Peterson's form for magic for action better integrates time and and I think that's again part of the reason that that Peterson is Peterson's just got a better he's just got a better conception than Sam Harris Objects are time sticky or time resistant via dimension. So so they beget one state to another via moments Now let's talk about the Bible a little bit. The Bible doesn't deny this reality. There are many stories many stories don't and this is how stories We make up often fail that we're Stories are that one of the chief ways that we try to interact between the third and the fourth dimension in time That's basically the vehicle we use that can do so but again our limitations show and and I think when it comes to the question of time and determinism and And choice and all of these issues that we have when we talk about free will and election determinism and choice I Think fundamentally the Bible is compatibleistic. It tries to have it both ways and I don't think that's that doesn't necessarily bother me Because again if we had to imagine the kind of being that That God is in the Bible. Well, he's a master of all of these dimensions He's the master of creation John Walton in his book the lost world of Genesis one notes that in many ways the what what gets what gets What gets created on the first day is time Because he called the light day He didn't call the light light and the darkness dark. He called the light day Well, what was what was being differentiated and ordered? What was what order was being derived out of chaos by the logo will bring in John John one? Well, it was time that was being ordered and a being that can Manage time as easily as I can manage this little stick that I used to attract the kitten so I could put the kitten on video all such a being can deal with time in ways that we can't imagine and Ways that our stories can't finally Function. Well, does that take choice away from us? Does that make choice an illusion? Well, I don't think necessarily CS Lewis actually has tries to grapple with this at one point When he has this illustration of lines I'll have to find this again where he tries to Basically be a compatible list between our choice and God's choices and actually I've I've illustrated this and and blog points if you Might my sons for a while. We're playing this video game Uncharted and as I was watching them navigate this video world. It seemed at each moment Bookie Bookie Well, that was scary but the kittens just fine so like I said the we've had other incidences where the or the dog could took out the cat so I Was that was pretty hard on the kids back in? Back when the kids were little when the dogs when they're one pet took out the other but little lessons in nature Where was I time Bible and story? Yeah, so we have we have agency 3d creatures moving through time But not mastering it and God is a master of time obviously and the Bible talks about that in many different ways It's very interesting to me as a as a more traditional Calvinist the Armenian solution to Solution I put that in quotes the Armenian solution to the the Calvinist dilemma about agency and time and choice and God's agency and our agency Involves time because the Armenian solution essentially was that God could look into the future and see what we choose and therefore elect us on the basis of our future choice and in the Nuts the dogs back out that dog is totally outclassed by that cat even a kitten anyway He'll never find it if the cat doesn't want to be found So so the Armenian solution to Calvinism was basically altering time And that's a that's a very interesting thing and the up and I found it. They can't get at it That basically the Calvinists Didn't like the didn't like the assertion because it took they felt it too But took too much away from God and placed too much on on this side of the line And again, this is this is always the line that these conversations come to and the same thing with you know Sam Harris trying to deal with the line of determinism and and Agency but a God So if you look at this you look at this problem from the perspective of flat land and space land and point land You can see that this might not be a problem that we can resolve Just because it's it's not something We're fully going to be able to articulate or understand within the frame of reference with which we've developed So for Christians God is the master of every dimension he made and how many dimensions does this reality have How what what our angels angels appear to be able to come into? Into and out of our space upon their will and when they come in the most common reaction in the Bible is that people lose their stuff when they see an angel and And this gets into it. I had I've had a variety of questions about Judgment day and some of these kinds of things and maybe I'll make a video about some of my thoughts on some of those issues and how we can articulate in story and narrative as as the Bible does Ways within our culture that we can understand These narratives that the Bible gives us, you know We can't see or apprehend a being that has mastery of the fourth dimension Much less any other fourth dimension meaning time, you know our imaginations of a time Lord and dr Who I think are really rather crude human accounts of witnessing heaven all appeared as It's incomprehensible now we have Most of us have common experience of incomprehensibility via dreams But if in fact, you know dealing with God we can't even imagine a tesseract Which is a basic figure that we can imagine adding another dimension to the three that we experience You know what? How would we imagine a being that is master even of the four dimensions that we have a fair amount of familiarity with So Then you get into the resurrection and what's interesting about the resurrection stories are the are the ways that Dealing with post-resurrection Jesus is almost dreamlike. He appears in and out of Closed rooms yet. He can eat a fish now to me One way of thinking about this might in fact be dimensionality that Jesus is master of when Jesus in his incarnation is limited to and limited by the same kinds of things that we are limited by in the resurrection, which is the template for our resurrection it seems He and by extension therefore we will be greater masters of other dimensions He clearly masters three dimensions in a way We can't now see us Lewis talks about in miracles and these are some of my I haven't gotten to these parts of miracles Yeah of the book these are some of my favorite parts of the book where See us Lewis talks about miracles of the old creation and miracles of the new creation where where nature is in a sense she's kind of our mother, but she's also our sister and when we think about time space time is a function of Creation and so time as part of nature is also our Mother in a sense that we are birthed in time yet also our sister and when you look at Jesus miracles and his miracles of the new creation how How nature obeys his lordship and recognizes his lordship? So we imagine his behavior as a master of four dimensions. Well, what if he's mastering more? What does this do with respect to our past another one of the big questions if you read say Miroslav Wolf's exclusion and embrace part of what he wrestles with in that book is Within our framework we think okay. Well, let's imagine Let's get some should probably do a video on some of the thoughts that I have on On what the age to come? Involves in terms of what we can imagine and what judgment involves and what exclusion and embrace involve but It's it's when you start when you start even just including these very basic ideas of dimensionality all kinds of other Possibilities open up and when you read the Bible in the light of even some of these basic simple thoughts some things Become a little bit more intelligible and understandable How does for example? There's language You know even even by Dostoevsky where and Tolkien where in the redemption of Christ the you know our sorrows are healed and and this is this is represented in the Old Testament prophets in Elements of the world that they have but but when we think about well, how how can God heal? the wounds of the past well in a sense forgiveness is Is one way in which the wounds of the past are healed but but in another way when we think about forgiveness There are ways in which The past isn't healed because the past isn't undone and those hurtful harmful things endure Well, what if in our in our perfection and in the work that God does in our redemption We begin to master more dimensions. What does that do to our past? We can't begin to answer these questions and we don't know the answers to these questions, but the the ideas are Interesting the ideas bring joy into my heart You know, what if he's mastering more? What if what if all good things with what if all bad things will become undone? It gets it gets very very interesting and what if this inheritance that's the the word that the Bible uses what if this inheritance Awaiting us that's that's the language that's used and now inheritance is interesting because in the Old Testament your inheritance was this In a sense this two-dimensional plot of land from which you could grow fruit food and have a degree of Have a house to live on have a degree of economic security It was analogous to the the promise not given to the slaves of 40 acres and a mule By General Sherman trying to figure out what on earth to do with all of those free slave Well break up the plantations and give them 40 acres and a mule. They never got there 40 acres and a mule But okay, so you have the in this inheritance all these are the terms that the Bible uses to describe this inheritance Well, the the inheritance Travels through time in a sense and that's what the year of Jubilee is about in the Old Testament that that every 50 years You get your inheritance back. What do you mean you well, it was your father who got it well in a sense all of the ways that the Old Testament talks about family and being cut off or Living living into the future through our children and then you add the dimensionality of let's say our genetics or our inheritance the the words are evocative and they go in many different directions in many different ways and so Why does the New Testament use then that word inheritance? Linking us to the Old Testament and this rich metaphorical Evocative system and then how then does this get tied into the resurrection and what we can see in glimpses of Jesus so Again to me. This is all interesting stuff and this is all rough draft thinking and this is just Trying to bring the elements from the top of my head. I'll leave the Well, you can find the links to the to these videos in the videos that I set out You should watch over my vacation and whether I'll do my vacation this week or not Well, I'll talk to my wife and we'll decide because I didn't get a preacher on Sunday for Living Stone So I could easily jump in and preach they were gonna watch a video instead which was We've never had to do that before and that wasn't a really a nice alternative. It's much better having a live preacher. So We'll see if I do more videos this week. It's suspense. It's it's thrilling suspense. That's going on Will will you get more videos this week? but but take a look at flatland and even just look at the Wikipedia entry because even just reading this imaginative fiction from the 19th century of These these creatures living in different dimensions and the biases that they have It's it's interesting stuff. And then when we begin to apply that imaginatively to our world some of the again some of some of those who say well, I you know, I Can't imagine a god. Well, is that a is that a product of science or is that a product of a rather limited imagination? So there's a little video now I'll render it is it under an hour and we had cats and dogs in this video and we even had a cat dog fight in this video and Well vacation is being fruitful so far