https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8o6VDx5H4HY

 Hi, this is Paul. I've gotten a lot of requests to talk about the end of this conversation. Sam was one of the first people that sent it to me, and on Twitter a number of other people have sent it to me. And I, after Sam had sent it to me, I was just completely, I was fascinated by it. I might do a longer treatment of it, but I thought it would be a good piece to do, like I did yesterday with the Scott Adams video, just a little snippet, and then I will drop into the Bridges of Meaning Discord and talk about it with some of you. Now I have to be done in an hour and fifteen minutes, and so if you'd like to discuss this with me, you should probably get into the Impromptu livestream room. The link is here. I'd love to hear some of other people's thoughts on this, but I'll play it through first and maybe offer, I'll try to keep my comments to a minimum. Here we go. ...to crow about having been boosted by Fremont. So the discourse is just entirely dishonest. I haven't listened to the first part. Sam said, well, it's probably exactly what you would expect if you've heard Sam Harris and Glenn Lowry separately on matters of race. But the end of it is interesting because Glenn Lowry has been writing a memoir, and I want to read that memoir because I'm sort of fascinated with the man. I saw Jordan Peterson's conversation with John McWhorter and loved it, and sometimes I see things that I really like that I think I'll definitely want to make some commentary about. I'm not sure because so much of it I so agreed with, and my experience is similar to John McWhorter's in that I too was very much raised in the school of, at least as John McWhorter says, second wave anti-racism. And so a lot of his experiences and viewpoints I very much agree with. There's not a lot of disagreement between myself and John McWhorter on a lot of these matters of race. I did think it got quite interesting because maybe I will do commentary on it at some point because Peterson really explored with him, Peterson really explored with him, okay, why is this a religion? And you can sort of get at John McWhorter's views of religion. But now McWhorter has always sort of lived within Blue Church. And Glenn Lowry, as he says towards the end of it, had a lot of experience in the black church and he had a Christian conversion and joined a black Pentecostal church and found it, you know, it transformed his life. But then the death of a young woman and the way that the church responded to the death of that young woman really brought another crisis of faith for him and he left the faith. But he's so still so clearly haunted by it. And so then he asked Sam Harris about God. And I found Sam Harris's response fascinating because again, I think modernity is receding and you even see Sam Harris now sort of groping for a religion that won't embarrass him. I mean, he practically goes there around these issues. I think we talk about God for a minute. Is belief in God irrational? Well, it depends what you mean by God. I mean, you know, there's something. Sam has a good mic here. I have, he's probably working from the mics in the ear thing. So there's no excuse for the sound being this horrible. You could mean by that, which I think is entirely rational. But if you're talking about a personal God, a sectarian God, you know, the God of Abraham as opposed to some other God, you know, and maybe some specific construal of the God of Abraham and anything else is is anathema and likely to send a person to hell. And once you start adding layers of doctrine onto the claim, then I think it becomes irrational and untenable. And I think we I think we've lost the right to our provincialism on that front. I just think it's we know we know too much about the world. We know too much about how these books came into our possession. We know too much about the merely human origin of the text that tell us that every word between these covers is inerrant for all time and cannot be edited by human hand. And this is just your typical Sam Harris reactivity to, you know, like. But but it gets it gets stranger. Still, we know that we have just too many of these books, each claiming to be the sole word of the creator of the universe. And so therefore, I mean, this is the point that Bertrand Russell made the comic effect, you know, that just just just by the sheer numbers of religions that claim to be the you know, not all of it could be true. You know that every every believer, even if you are a believer, you have to expect damnation purely on probabilistic ground. I mean, we just there's more than five of these things, you know, and each one is going to hell. You say a specific tradition which makes very strong claims like Christianity or Judaism or Islam. You know, you don't want to take these texts as infallible or whatever. So that notion of God you would reject on grounds of rationality. But what would the thin version of God that you might think acceptable to a rational contemporary person look like? Well, so if you want to say, as I would, that consciousness, you know, that in you, which is it makes your being in this world something to consider in the first place, right, the thing that adds value to anything, right? The experiential part of now what's amazing is just how so so so Larry's like, okay, Larry's of course heard all of this kind of stuff before he says, well, come on, Sam, give me something a little bit more interesting. Tell me you've already told me what you don't believe in. Try to use words to say what you do believe in the cosmos that is resident in you at this moment, right? This is something we don't understand. You know, this is obviously we don't we don't we haven't explained this yet. We don't know how it's arising and therefore integrated in the physics of things. We don't even in the end, we don't even know that it is arising on the basis of the physics of things. That's not something we can say about the mind. But I think that is something we can still say about consciousness. So consciousness is a mystery and a miracle. And it's the most important. Now, now, now suddenly, now suddenly, we're going to be all you're going to be just as religious as your fundamentalist pastor right there talking about the Bible thing. Right. And I'm not saying, you know, as a matter of science, we should we shouldn't seek to explain it. But I think there's good reason to wonder whether we will ever explain it. And there's there's certainly good reason to think that any explanation will in fact not be deflationary. Right. I mean, even if we even if we perfectly explain consciousness in the end, we understand exactly how it's arising on the basis of information processing in complex systems like brains, say. And we know what the necessary and sufficient conditions of it are. It is still the thing that matters. Right. It is still the source of all beauty and all moral goodness and all apprehensions of truth. And it can be explored on its own side. It can only be explored on its own side experientially in in contemplation, in meditation with psychedelics. You know, I mean, like the big. It's so funny because he says it can only be explored experientially. OK. But you're trying to talk about it. You're in some ways should be better off being a far eastern guru that would say. It would be futile to attempt to express the ineffable. Any attempt at expressing the ineffable is F. That's that's all you would say. And then maybe hand them some DMT or say it must be seen have the red pill. Good stuff of life is on the it's on the first person side. Right. The experience. Hold on a minute. I just want to I don't want to get lost here. Sure. What is what is consciousness now? I mean, literally, is it self-awareness? What when does the complex system, which is our brain, is the fact that the lights are on at all. Right. So self-awareness is an added. I think he wanted a scientific word. And basically what he gets here is is the Motel six of religion. Capacity within consciousness. But it's the fact that there's something that is like to be you in this moment. It's a fact that you're the fact that that the lights are on. That there's a qualitative character to experience. And there's not, you know, it need not be need not have been the case. Right. You know, given what we think we know at this moment about the brain, it seems that not every aspect. The amazing thing is that this guy has spent a career out of debunking religion now. Basically, as he said to Jordan Peterson, spends all his time making an app so that people can engage in the non-religion that he is sort of failing at describing beyond. We'll keep the lights on for you. The fact of our minds have this character, right? That the brain is doing a lot that does not seem to be. Experienced consciously by any part of the mind right now. This is. Example, it's regulation of our breathing and the beating of our heart. Yeah. And even stuff that is closer to what we can consciously apprehend in each moment. It's a princess. I'm speaking now. I can't consciously inspect how I'm following the rules of English grammar in so far as I'm able to do that. And I can't consciously inspect my failures to do that. I'm just witnessing this product of unconscious information processing. I don't know how I get to the end of the sentence. Right. And when I fail to get to the end of the sentence. But that you have a sense of you. Excuse me again. You're speaking, but you're not as it were aware of exactly how it is that your brain is causing you to speak, but you're doing it nonetheless. But there's a you who is aware of the fact that this is happening somehow. And that's the mysterious dimension of being the lights around that you're referring to. Again, this is a question. Yeah, but I wouldn't put it. I wouldn't. A lot turns on what you mean by you there, because I do think the self as it is generally perceived is an illusion. Right. And I think self-transcendence is the actual core of our religious concerns. Right. It's the experiential core. It's what made Jesus, Jesus, right? If Jesus, I don't know. I don't know who the historical Jesus actually was, but assuming. It's amazing to me that Jesus, he pulls Jesus into this because it's what made Jesus, Jesus. He existed more or less as described in the Bible. And the same with Buddha and any other matriarch or patriarch of our great religions. How about El Ron Hubbard? Did he have that thing too? The aspect of human experience that they were testifying to that made them interesting enough to gather around and form religions. The aspect of human experience that he testified to. And it's like, Sam, did you ever read the gospels? Is that what we're talking about? Because as fascinating as Jesus was, he at least was in some ways understood. This. Upon relates to qualities like self-transcendence and unconditional love. And they go to the far end of the distribution of positive human psychology, which is rarely all too rarely experienced by us, but still experienced by millions and millions of people, if only in moments. And there are ways to experience it more and more. Right. And this is the valid ground. Now, what's also amazing here is that so much of his critique against religion is morality based. And there's zero morality in there. And so morality is sort of set aside from religion. I mean, Schleiermacher, Schleiermacher comes to mind and maybe I'll have to return to this and use, I caught a really good, someone sent me a really good video on basically liberal, the rise of liberal Protestantism. And I think it was Alec, Alec Reiry from Gresham College, you know, has really some terrific lectures on that, which are a lot easier to understand than this. Our spiritual concern, right. Personally and collectively and intellectually, right. I think we should want to understand this scientifically, but personally, I think we should all want to experience more and more of this good stuff before we die. Right. I mean, that's what is the point of life? What is the point of having more years on this earth together? Right. What, what, what is the missed? If you die today, what is the missed opportunity of tomorrow? And you propose it. And so again, this, this, this fascinated me because basically it was the point of living is to maximize the meaningful experiences before you die. This is completely disconnected from morality. It sounds completely selfish and in a strange way, hedonistic, unless of course your hedonism seems to bother your guilty conscience because your guilty conscience would get in the way of this, this, this, these, these religious fields that are, are what make life meaningful and important. That's basically the religion that he's saying. So that's, that's God. And, you know, in a weird way, he's sort of saying, seek God, but God is of course defined as some sort of pleasurable, meaningful experiences that make life work. So yeah, I guess he's saying seek God now. Now, Lowry isn't going to have it, which, which is, I do want them to talk again. And here's the thing about Glenn Lowry. I love listening to Lowry talk as Lowry will tell you what he thinks. He is now at an age when he will tell you what he thinks and he will be honest. And I, I, I know I have some friends that they're not quite Lowry's age, but they have a lot in common. They're, they're not, they're not conservatives like he is. They're, they're progressives, but they're, they're like Lowry in that he will, he will just, he will just say it with authority. The answer to that question is experience. The moral. And you proposed that the answer to that question is experience. Experience of love and self-transcendence and the depth of your being in, you know, So, so basically again, and this, this is where I go. So it's Soma in Brave New World. So, so, so give me a comfy bed and a catheter and a feeding tube and an oculus. And a, and, and if, and if you can just, because myself, I mean, if you listen, I've listened to some of his meditation stuff. So the answer to any problem is the elimination of the self because the self is the locus of the problem. So if you can get rid of the self, then you get rid of the problem. So just, so, so let me lie in that bed with my oculus and my catheter and my feeding tube and my drip. So I can have experience. And of course, the irony is that right outside my door here, there are, there are men who are, the women don't last long, but there are men who are in a sense, living the dream. Now you might say, well, that's not no, no, they're living for the experience and the experience that they're having by, by what they're putting in their body and nothing else matters. But we don't look at them and say, Oh, wow, look at the junkie and their religious experience. That's what life is all about. We should all be like them. No, we don't live that way at all. And we shouldn't. Cosmos is illuminated where you stand. Right. It is what it's like to be you and what it's potentially like to be you when you really get your head screwed on straight. No, I think you're right, Chad, that he is being honest, but he hasn't, he hasn't thought it through. This is basically Peterson's critique. He hasn't thought it through and he hasn't really devoted himself to others who have thought it through. It's, it's, it's, it's the kind of thing you might hear. You know, he used to make them sounds of a really smart 14 year old. Now he makes the sounds of a really smart 21 year old. I don't think his maturity index is going to catch up to his biological age unless there is a conversion and don't count that out. Right. When you're no longer transcendence is an illusion. I really am trying to understand. No, no, self-transcendence is real. The self that is transcended is an illusion. The self is generally the cramped self of, of, you know, otherwise known as the ego, right? The, the, the petty self, the fearful self, the self that feels confined in each and reducible to in each moment, the stream of discursive thought, right? That the voice in your head that feels like. And this of course is what his meditation app is, is designed to first contain and then potentially eliminate, I suppose. In each moment, that is what is to be penetrated by any valid form of spiritual inquiry. Right. I mean, when you're talking about, when you're talking about this back to your question about, you know, God and the. It's so funny because we start out with dogma. The problem is dogma, but he also then says, no, here's my dogma. Here is the valid form of spiritual inquiry. Not this, but that, which is exactly what every dogma is. The reality of religion, the baby in the bath water that we should not want to throw out is this range of positive human experience. That is what. Once you can differentiate baby from bath water, you will have a dogma. It is this range of positive human experience that is what it is. It is the, the experiential back around which every religion is crystallized. Right. It's why we have religion in the first place. The reason why you have a Jesus, right. Who was so charismatic as to get people to make, you know, vast sacrifices. But, but he didn't, he didn't, he surely didn't claim to be. What Christians believe he claimed to be. Just to live by the lights of his message and the way you have. Again, I'm just, I'm just fascinated by this, by the, by the positive Jesus talk to live by the lights of his message. Where would we, where would we find, where would we get the information about the lights of his message? Could it be in that book that you're always talking down? No, don't read it in there. For thousands of years, uh, some number of, of Christian contemplatives who've had deep experience trying to be more and more like Jesus. And this is what sort of, so I listened to this. I thought, okay, ready. I've heard a lot of Sam Harris. I've heard what he said. And then, and then he kind of goes here and it's like, well, this is surprising because you spent a lot of time complaining about the book and the dogma and, and now you're sort of pointing to Jesus and say, well, I could point to other religions too, but you're going to be dogmatically cautious about which religions you're going to be talking about. But you're going to be dogmatically cautious about which religions you point to. You're probably not going to point to Joseph Smith. You are going to point to Jesus. You are going to point to Buddha. You're probably not going to point to Muhammad. I would suspect there's a dogmatism down there that's guiding these preferences. But I mean, I was just, I was just sort of surprised that, oh, so. I, I, I'm just confused by it. The way you have a Meister Eckhart say is the, is that it is possible to have fundamental insight into the nature of your mind that, that are transformative, that it's possible to be very different than you were yesterday based on something you can do with your attention. Right. It's possible to not suffer the way you used to suffer over ridiculous things. Right. It's possible for you. So, so it's yeah. So it's basically avoiding suffering, eliminating suffering and Jesus and Buddha and anyone that agrees with that. And again, how Jesus gets in that list, take up your cross and follow me. I don't know. I don't know. I, I just completely fascinated, bewildered by this little talk he gives Glenn here. You not to feel divided from, from, from the world and from nature and from other people in the way that you tend to feel divided when you're just lost in self-directed self-talk. So in other words, sort of the, what's really interesting is if you take, say Harris and you can compare them to say Rousseau, you know, Rousseau is like, well, it's, it's, it's the natural as Rousseau conceives it, not the sort of second secondary thing. It's the, it's the satisfaction of having your appetite satiated by the food and any interruption that comes later with society. Now with Sam, it's, it's now what's all of this positive stuff that sort of interrupts the, the normal brain working. And again, it's, it's, it's avoidance of suffering for Harris suffering equals evil. And where he gets that from Jesus can only be found through a long migration of self-consciously religious people, you know, he brings up Meister Eckhart. So, okay. So, so mysticism is now good, but mysticism untethered by moral precepts. But, you know, Sam has plenty of moral ideas and those are simply the product of rationality. Those should be kept away from religion. Religion should be sort of spiritual Disneyland. And that, and so I think, I think all of that is valid and more than valid. I think that's the most important project in life. I'm speechless when he says stuff like this. And it is traditionally, it has only been given a religious framing. I just think we, at this point in our history and for, and for probably a hundred years, this has been true. Now, if, if, if nobody knew Sam Harris at all, and they just heard this little thing, and you said, oh, he makes a meditation app about spirituality. Someone would have zero consciousness about, oh, he's a new atheist that's always trying to banish religion from the planet. He seems like a salesman of religion. We have to recognize that what, what is being testified to there is not the unique divinity of any one God or the unique veracity of any one religious tradition as organized by. So it's the, it's the common divinity of all of these thoughts. Is that now the definition of divine? Completely untethered from, I mean, is it just Gnostic? Christ has brought up likely because to him, Christ's message boils down to just another example of the golden rule. But, you know, why have any golden rule at all? You know, let, let's imagine that the, um, the drug dealer down the street, who I know supplies these guys has the best drug in the world. And, and let's imagine that they just lay here on the corner in absolute bliss. 24 seven mission accomplished specific literature. It's that there is a universal, uh, there, there, there are universal facts about the human mind that need to be understood in general universalizable nonsectarian terms, very much in the terms of 21st century science. But again, the 21st century science that explores this can't discount the first person side of these questions because the answer at the back of the book of nature is not going to be, you're just a bag of chemicals and you know, love is just a certain compliment of neurotransmitters. There clearly I'm in your wheelhouse. Glenn's about to go. Tiered. Yeah. And our time is limited. Maybe we can have another conversation. I don't know, Sam, would you be willing to have another conversation? I really like to, uh, uh, I'm going to warn you, Glenn. I've seen Jordan Peterson have one, two, three, four, five, six conversations with this guy. If you hope to make something along the lines of progress, I'm deeply skeptical and by progress, I mean intelligibility or something like a give and take conversation. I mean, here I am, uh, a, uh, lapsed Christian who, uh, was baptized at the age of 40, was deeply immersed in an African-American, uh, charismatic, uh, fundamentalist congregation. I mean, not cultish, but you know, uh, very traditionally, uh, religious. And that's, and I have thrown all that over, but I still found meaning in the prayer, the ritual, the community, the, uh, the, the practices. In other words, everything, Sam, that you said should be banished from the earth, I received what you have just said is the most meaningful thing in the world. In other words, it's like saying you should have all the highs that drugs can offer, but I'm totally against drugs. But you've done it in a way that creates a life, which is something that I far more respect than a junkie lying next to a church. Of that, of that faith, that, that meaning felt very real to me and it was outside of myself. It wasn't just experiential. It, it, it wasn't only about my mind. It was somehow being a part of the flow of being integrated into a web of mutually believing people. There was a community. In other words, it wasn't just between my ears. It was between us and it had ethics and it had beauty and it had dance and it had life and it produced something. It produced generosity to the people living on the streets and it produced care for those who were suffering in their homes in tangible physical ways. And it, and it did all of those things. And again, I find Glenn Lowry story so compelling and I really, if he talks to Sam Harris again, I want to hear Glenn talk. I mean, most of the Sam Harris stuff, I don't know. Maybe they can help each other. Something, as I say, meaningful there. And I don't, I don't see any room for that at all in the vision that you just sketched. Well, well, no. Wow. Wow. And that's what I love about Lowry. Lowry will tell you exactly what he thinks. People, there was a community. There was something, as I say, meaningful there. And I don't, I don't see any room for that at all in the vision that you just sketched. Well, no, there's definitely room. But you, so you're, you're asking to add to the baby in the bathwater, the variable of community and organizing beliefs and ritual. Dude has made a name for himself for calling out belief and ritual. And now, well, oh yeah, those things should be added too. But what we don't want is belief and ritual. I mean, that's why, that's why talking to him just never goes anywhere. It's always seems the same. I would grant you that all of that is very powerful and for many people necessary. And I think we, we suffer a deficit of it in secular society, right? But I, I, I, I listen to this and I just think, but I would argue that we, what we need are non-embarrassing, non-devisive, not, and therefore non-sectarian and non-dogmatic approaches. But what if, what if the sectarian and the dogmatic actually achieve that, which you just finished saying was the purpose and the meaning of life? In other words, there's a hierarchy and he just finished saying that here's the purpose and the meaning of life. It's all of these experiences, but it must be dogma free. Well, can you, is it allowed if you get dog, if, if dogma is a part of it? No, or yes. Community building and ritual and, and profundity. And I think we want all of the good stuff. We want good, we want beautiful buildings in which to gather for high purposes. This is exactly what I want from people in theory. I want all of the good stuff and I want none of the bad stuff. I'm going to go home and I'm going to tell my wife tonight, honey, I have a new vision for our marriage, all of the good stuff and none of the bad stuff. And then, and then what? Then whenever she says or does something I don't like to say, uh-uh, all of the good stuff, none of the bad stuff. And she'll look at me and say, um, yeah, I'd like that too. So, um, are we going to be able to edit each other? People aren't edited like this. Right now. It just so happens that the only bill, the only architecture currently devoted to that stuff at the moment is specifically denominational, right? The only people who could raise enough money to build a beautiful building in the middle of Manhattan. Have you been to the map? Have you been to Lincoln center? People are raising money. And he says this as if religious people are walking around like the monopoly man, just money coming out and it's like, then why does living stones look as bad as it does? And why do we have these homeless people here? I guess they're living their best life now. I mean, even this is like, well, religious religion is just fat with money. Really? Have you talked to pastors in downtown Manhattan and talk to them about the fact that for the most part they rent like college dormitories for really amounts, expensive amounts of money because they don't have enough money for this? This is insane. Are the religious dogma, you know, are the Christians and Jews and Muslims who got those buildings built, right? So now you're now if you're a secular group, it's because they got there early. Wanting to meet for purely rational, secular, but it, but nevertheless, ennobling reasons on a Sunday. He should listen to my, I was on unbelievable once and talk to a dude who basically said to me, a pastor who's been doing this from Sam's point of view for, in a tradition that's been going for 150 years, complaining. It was, it was really fun talking to him because he said, basically, you would think right now these would be fat times for us, but he has no, he knows nothing of Lyle Schaler that basically says, no, it's usually the counter cultural groups that actually they might be small, but they have cohesion and they have sacrificial giving because they really believe in it. And actually, you know what people really believe in? Dogmatism. It might be stupid dogmatism, it, but that is human because people love their little dogmatisms. And they, you have to figure out which church you're going to rent. Otherwise you're going to wind up in a bad hotel banquet room. No, you see, Sam, to tell you the truth, most church plants wind up in a bad hotel meeting room. They really do. I've been to a lot of church services in those. If you go down to Manhattan, count just how many churches there are, and then just pop in and see just how many people are in those churches. A lot of times those churches are huge with hardly any people. And if those churches are surviving, they're doing so because they're living off an endowment. Right. You know, it's just like, so the question is, what does that 21st? No, that's exactly right, Nathan. That's exactly right. Exactly right. He grew large and popular because of his dogmatism against other dogmatisms. And truth is on YouTube, nothing sells better than being dogmatic against someone else's dogmatism. Dogmatism works. We love it as human beings. It's like catnip. Century temple of wisdom look like, and who will, who's going to build it? Right. And how do you, what songs do you sing that aren't embarrassing in terms of their intellectual content, but then also that phrase really got my turn that aren't embarrassing. And, and part of what I saw, again, there's a Dallas Willard video out there. That's really terrific. Basically what he says is that are, you know, in so many ways, our worldviews, at least the ones we are publicly willing to recognize are the ones which we gain status for and not lose. In other words, if we're in alignment with the zeitgeist, that's what we seek to do. Oh, guess what? We want to gain status. Surprise, surprise. Aren't embarrassing for their, you know, having been totally denuded of beauty because you know, bad secular writers got their hands on them. Right. And, you know, created bad songs, right? But it's a hard problem to solve culturally and we haven't solved it. But I just think, I do think we have to recognize that sectarianism, real sectarianism in the 21st century doesn't make any intellectual or moral sense. No, but you don't understand it makes great human sense and you can drive, you can create a huge church from it and you will even get songs and buildings and all of those things. The religion he proposes. I'm sure Sam's doing pretty well on his app. All right. I've done this long enough. Part of me doesn't even want to do any Sam Harris things because I always wind up in the same place and maybe it's a moral defect on my side. But let's see, let's open the, let's open the, someone in the comments said, your link to the symbolic world discord server is out of date. It's like, it's not only out of date, it's non-existent because this is the bridges of meaning discord server. So let's say, let's go into that. Where's that little room? Anybody in there? Nobody's in there yet. Holy cow. Yeah, you know, my plan just is completely failing because the plan is, well, if I jump onto the live stream, then you'll know what I'm doing. Then you'll get in the room and then we'll be able to get off the ground because I will have set. Ah, Mark. Mark is so faithful. I knew Mark would be here. What a whiner. What a whiner. We're sitting up there in the other room. I'm listening on my phone. I got one thing here. I'm talking to Joey and Adam and a bunch of the guys and they're like, oh, no one's here. I'm so sad. All right. How are you doing, Paul? I'm doing good. So your take on Glenn Lowry and Sam Harris, you want to defend Sam? What's your t-shirt say? If things get any worse, I'll have to ask you to stop helping. It's appropriate when I'm on bridges of meaning. Christians everywhere. All right. So what's your take on Glenn Lowry and Sam Harris? I'm always fascinated by Sam taking a different route around the key. It's always like, no, he settled it. And then he's like, no, he goes back on that statement and covers over here instead. It's like sliding tiles where you get that one hole and you just keep moving it around. Like a slide puzzle. Yeah. Yeah. It's like a slide puzzle because that's interesting. Yeah. The last time he did this argument, he had a different hole covered. And I was like, wait a minute, you've opened up these holes. What are you doing? Because he can't make it work. Everybody. They can't make it work. So they keep... There's different holes every time. But yeah, it's interesting. I thought that Lowry... That statement that he made about, I don't see any place basically for meaning in your vision. That was just devastating. I mean, that was devastating. It didn't even affect him. He's like, well, no, I mean, there could be, maybe. It's like, no, no, he just told you he can't see it. That means you can't make the case. Maybe you should think about that, dude. Like that sounds really important. Do all Sam Harris conversations go this way? I haven't listened. When he talks about other things, he seems to be... He can talk about things, but... I mean, his Jordan Peterson conversations all go this way. Well, Sam Harris became Sam Harris by arguing against things. He didn't become Sam Harris by making stuff. He became Sam Harris by deconstructing things. And maybe he was deconstructing things that needed to be deconstructed. But now he's left with single story buildings and there's no lower to go. And so he's trying to build something back up, I suppose. We can call it silly, but like you said, maybe his app has a bunch of subscribers and they're all building something, I guess. And sure. But like, okay, why? Why choose Sam Harris's app as opposed to any other? It's that he ends up in the same... His structures can be deconstructed just as easily as all the other structures that he's both successfully and unsuccessfully deconstructed. Yeah. Because you don't have to actually be successful in deconstructing something. For people to believe that it's been deconstructed and say, oh, it's debunked. You know, we saw that plenty of times with media stuff. No matter what side you're on, you've seen stuff that says that's debunked and you know it's false. Or you know it's actually true and they say, oh, that's false. Well, now what? You know, it's the... Well, there's a term for it. When you're reading the newspaper and you believe page one, you believe page two, you believe page three, and you get to page four and it's something you actually know about, you say, well, that's all garbage and BS. And then you believe page five and you believe page six. There's a term for it. But like, yeah, why not? It's like the Gell-Mann effect. Yeah. Yeah. It's not a hard trick to do. And you know, I mean, one of the things is as Americans, we were talking about kind of like American culture a little bit earlier today. And like as Americans, it's your right to do that. You don't have to join any existing church. You don't have to stay in any existing institution religiously anyways. You have to stay in public institutions, but that's a different conversation. So why? Why Sam Harris instead of Calvinism? Why Sam Harris instead of Catholicism? Why Sam Harris instead of Orthodoxy? To me, as an aviast, Sam Harris's stuff is just his bunk. So, you know, and like, why would I follow Sam Harris or John Verbecky down any path? Right. I can't, you know, I can't have Sam Harris's life because I didn't grow up with, you know, super rich Hollywood parents. And I'm not even sure I would want John Verbecky's life. It seems fine for him, but it's not what I want to be doing with my life. So why would I follow either one of those guys down any path? Like, what's, what is there to hold up as something to aim to? Besides absence of bad things, which, okay. But how? How do you aim at absence of bad? Yeah, that was the really good point that was made in the video was, yeah, you're aiming at absence. Where's the vision? Where's the meaning? Where's the, and, you know, to, to steel man Verbecky such, such the extent that one can, he doesn't want to be followed. Right. I don't think Harris wants to be followed. They want you to magically come to the concept that there's a better thing out there. We'll call it in the material world. Right. My definition of materiality is all about material primary, right? Not that there's no non material, but material is primary and somehow it's self evident. Right. Even though interestingly, there's no self to Sam Harris. Yeah. Yeah. He's transcending something he says doesn't exist. And I was like, that's an obvious contradiction, but also now the meaning of self evident goes away. Like you lose all kinds of things when you do that. Like, I don't understand that move at all. I don't think I've ever heard him make that. I mean, I've heard him, I've heard him at the end make the claim that, well, you know, you have to remove your, your, your, your selfness. Right. And when he's describing it, it sounds like ego. It doesn't, I don't know if he didn't read Buddhism correctly or like, he's just misunderstanding what they're talking about or, you know, I don't know. Faber destroys self using evident in Seeker or something. I don't know. I was, I was fascinated that he wanted to go back to the, you know, the, you know, the atheist Sunday service and that type of thing, which has been, you know, tried many times and continues to be tried. And, and when, you know, I was having a conversation with Kale Zeldin about how, you know, when you sort of follow establishment Protestantism and at the beginning of the 20th century, it's starts to get nervous about some of its sectarian aspects. And so like with FDR, FDR begins to bring a diversity of backgrounds. You had Protestant Catholic Jew. Basically the first move in America was to bring in the Catholics and the Jews. They were sort of the safe group and the, the idea. The idea, and then, so part of what develops in the 20th century too, is sort of the English department. And so university humanities are intended to replace the, the churches and the religion and the Bible. And so now with humanities and Jordan Peterson sort of does that too. Now, you know, Dostoevsky is supposed to sort of re it could be alongside the Bible, but that sort of replaces it. And the division behind secularity is actually, you don't need a church building because you have the concert hall and the arts and you have all of that in the city. And that's supposed to replace this religious sphere. And then Harris just is like, well, all the churches are taking all the spots in downtown Manhattan and all the religious people have all the money. And it's like, no, there's the Metropolitan Museum of Art and there's the Smithsonian and there's the Guggenheim and there's Lincoln center. All of that in the secular realm was supposed to replace the cathedral that had choir and preaching. And the university was basically supposed to dispel the church, but the university is cracking and churches are still muddling along. Well, it doesn't solve the transformation problem. Like I said, you know, this is transformation is a whopping big problem. Everybody's ignoring, right? Like they're, they're just not taking it seriously enough. Transformation is not something that most people can do by themselves on their own. Like it just isn't. And it's in every single wisdom tradition ever written down that I'm aware of. Right? Like don't do this by yourself, right? You know, not, not nobody ever, but unless you're the Buddha. And then if you, if you think you are the Buddha, you actually go off into a cave with nothing. So you're not on the internet talking about it, guy. You're off in the cave where you don't have to bother me anymore. And you basically have to park your life for the rest of your life in order to pursue this. And maybe the village will support you. Maybe. Well, and most of them aren't anywhere near the village. And the worst part is half of them off themselves. Like if you read the Eastern tradition, it just, you can go off and live in a cave and find enlightenment. Absolutely. But most of them just end up killing themselves and not doing the right thing, which is to bring the wisdom back to the village. Right. And what's that wisdom? What is that wisdom that the Easterners are talking about? Paul, what do you think it's like to live in a cave by yourself and feed yourself? Would you, would you classify that as some form of at least struggle if not suffering? There's a reason, there's a reason in Christianity, we tend to one of the most reliable places to make Christians are prisons. Yeah. And I can see that. It's true. I can see that. In a community like this, a lot of the, a lot of the preachers in these little storefront churches that are, that are rescuing, you know, former gang bangers, that's the path they all walked and they all lived in a cell. I just, I want to know what, what Eastern texts he's reading where he's missing that part. Cause I read some of these things and it's rather clear. Like I don't, is it, is it a literacy problem or a reading comprehension problem? Or did he just erase the bad parts from his brain? Like I don't get it. Well, he has basically segregated said, I can't read anything that's dogmatic. So that is going to have a selection on your text. Oh, here's Sam. Sam's the one that pointed me to this video. So there, there it is, Sam. What are your thoughts? You're the one that pointed me to this video. Um, that Sam Harris is a Unitarian Universalist who doesn't have an afterlife. Yeah, yeah. And that his ideas on the subject are surprisingly uncreative and also kind of old, right? It's sort of like when he, when Glenn Lowry was like, basically, okay, Sam, you don't like what they say about God. What do you say about God? Could you say anything about God that you wouldn't disagree with? Right. That was basically, which is an excellent question for someone as Sam Harris, you know, you put forward your own positive definition of this God word, please. And I think that, you know, it was basically like what you would say, Paul, it was a God number one without a God number two, not a big surprise there. Right. And that the, the problem is like all of these exclusivist accretions that have tried to explain this God, but ended up creating exclusivist groups that have a language of authenticity to use a verveci word that includes texts and individuals and histories and those sorts of things of which they put divine importance on, right? Because how else can you have a religious tradition without some combination of those sorts of things? And you need to treat your own tradition and some form or another as, you know, divine in the lower case of the word. Right. And so the problem is, is when people try to do that. And so I think that this move has happened a lot of times in history where people are like, look, there's all these religions, they have something in common, but they have all of their differences. They're all feeling the different parts of the elephant. Right. And so all we need to get them to do is to realize that they're all touching the same elephant, but they only have a piece of the puzzle. And we can come to some sort of thing that will unite the things that are currently distinct from each other. Right. But basically every time that happens, it creates a new thing. It creates a new elephant grasper. Right. That has been the same thing with coding languages that try to combine all the other coding languages. Yep. Yeah. And then you face the inevitability of particularity. So right, like Unitarian Universalism was one of the, or even before it was Universalist, was one of the first attempts at this. Right. These liberal Protestants up in New England were like, hey, we got these Congregationalists, we got these Presbyterians, we got these Anglicans. This is dumb. And some Quakers. And some Quakers. And a lot of people that are kind of like, I don't really want to go to your boring church. Right. And so here's what we'll do. We'll just, and when I think another big piece of this is like science had some success in this endeavor in the material realm. Right. Like, oh, we have all these different claims about which medicines work. Right. The Chinese use weird things, the Europeans use weird things, the Arabs use weird things. All right. Here's what we'll do. We'll use the scientific method and we'll try the bunch of the things and we'll see what works. And then what works will disseminate and unite these previously disparate fields of Chinese medicine, Arab medicine and European medicine. And we'll just have medicine. Right. Which should have worked. Which kind of worked. Right. It needs to be respected. So the science in that sense need to be respected because it did develop things that were replicable that prior to their inventions would have been miraculous had we not known that we ourselves figured it out. So. Right. Right. And it's not even like everything that China did was wrong. Maybe China had some of the things figured out, the Arabs had some of the things figured out, and the Europeans had some of the things figured out. Right. And then we invented new things that were even, you know, past that. So it's like, wow, that kind of seemed to have worked. Right. It worked with physics. It worked to some degree with medicine. So like, let's just do that with religion. But how do you have a scientific process on metaphysical questions? Right. And that, like, Theosophony was like, hey, we'll just, you know, use this rational method to explore the esoteric spiritual realm. And, you know, it'll come up with incontrovertible truths. And these incontrovertible truths will unite the people and it'll get rid of all the sectarian exclusivisms and will bring everybody together into the incontrovertible truth that's incontrovertible based off of our method. Right. But we haven't figured out any method that reliably generates incontrovertible metaphysical religious truths like that. And so every time someone tries to do this, they just make a new elephant feeler. There's Unitarian Universalism, there's Baha'i, which was basically the same sort of thing from Persia. And, you know, like all these different things, and, you know, etc. So and Sam Harris just seemed like he still thinks that that could work somehow. He's just new to it. He's just new. I think he's just giving people what they're asking for of him, too. Again, his thing was he came onto the scene post 9-11 to talk as kind of a counter to the neoconservative George H.W. Bush. We need to fight the terrorists, but Islam is good and Christianity is good. And like all these religions are good. And it had nothing, don't look behind that. It had nothing to do with religion, nothing to do with religion, guys, to 9-11. And sure, you could make that argument, but darn, there's some good arguments that religion did have something to do and dogma did have something to do with it. And somebody needed to make those arguments. And Sam Harris was one of five people, 10 people that made those arguments the best. So but that doesn't get you through 30 years of output of content. So now he's doing something else. And he's probably not really qualified to be doing what he's doing, but he's doing it. And, you know, if he's helping people, then to the effect that he's helping people, great. To the effect that he's hurting people, not great. How the heck are you going to measure that? I have no idea. Yeah, and to give him his due. I mean, the thing that he did, when he doesn't stray into the question of religion as such, he uses his moral landscape framework. And the moral landscape framework is fantastic to compare two things. If there aren't two things, the moral landscape framework doesn't work. It's a relativistic framework. So you can put two things in the framework, and then you do do a little magic, right? I don't want to, he's still doing a little magic about what the good is. I'm not sure if relative is relativistic is the right word or very subjectivist subjective. Well, he's got both. Right. I think that his attempt at the universal method of how we can do the religion spirituality thing is right is it's all about this personal, it's all about consciousness, right? He talks about consciousness a lot in that Glenn Lowry thing. And it's all about trying to like maximize conscious well being, right? Those are, I think, his phrases. And so we just explore around in this spiritual landscape. And you tell me how you're doing over there, I tell you how I'm doing over here. And I do these personal experiences that are trying to go up the goodness of conscious religious experience. And if I go down, then that's the wrong direction. And then that that's something like the exploratory universal method of religious experience that will hopefully lead to greater unity or something like that. If you don't believe in an afterlife, and you don't believe in reincarnation, then the best thing you can try to do is to try and bring about essentially, thousands of years of what Christians thought heaven was bring as much of that as possible to earth and bring what's the Buddhist term Nirvana, Nirvana, yeah, bring as much as much possible Nirvana to earth as well. And like, if you don't believe in the afterlife or reincarnation, that makes sense. It makes sense to attempt to do. But his arguments, his arguments when he compared Islam and Christianity, he never straight into that, Sam, he never straight into that. He just said, Look, again, there is some subjectivity at the bottom, because, like, murder is bad. Okay. But that's definitional, right? Is killing bad? Because that's the real lesson. So some of it, right? Well, and that's the thing, like, he never did. And like, fair, now on Facebook, you can talk about, you know, wanting Putin dead on Facebook. Right? Well, now you can. Yeah. But he never, he never straight into in when he was making those arguments, I never saw him stray into these larger issues, he never straight into the consciousness stuff and the good versus bad. But, you know, you're on the other hand, you're giving him a little too much credit. Like, the way he does it is he doesn't say up and down. He says, imagine the worst possible pain and suffering. And he says, go in the opposite direction. And that's it. And it's like, that's ridiculous. That's an absurd way to get at the good. Right. The junkie, the homeless junkie is an upgrade. Right. Well, and especially paired with his determinism, right? You know, that's an extremely weird pairing of beliefs that we need to explore around. How do you explore without agency? Right. And yet also, we don't have free will or agency, right? Our consciousness is just the rider on a roller coaster, right? Let's hope it's a good roller coaster. Right. You know, that I don't see how he really fits those two things together very well at all. But he doesn't. And I think that's the thing that got brought out in this talk was, give me the positive version of your argument, please. And he can't, because it doesn't exist. Right. It's all based on negating the bad thing. But like, let's define, let's try to define the, you know, the worst possible suffering. It's like, that's a fool's errand already. Like, you're not going to do that. Would you like to try that with me? Because this will take hours for sure. Because I can always make things worse. That's an easy enough trick. I'll play that for days if you want. I think you'll get tired eventually, but we can get out of that. I don't think Sam Harris gets tired. He seems like you can just go keep going with him about these things. He's kind of a hall of mirrors in that way. Yeah. And he doesn't realize that even if you do the trick, even if you get to the worst possible thing, it's not a binary, you can't just go in the quote opposite direction to get to the good. That's not, that's not how it's a, it's a, it's a triangle and the good is the top of the triangle and all the bad triangles, but back to triangles, triangles. I saw in the thief in the night the other day, I think Sam Harris has this approach has two kind of weaknesses. One, especially like what Joey said with no afterlife or anything like that and no God number two, right? There's nothing that you're accountable to other than sort of the laws of nature. What Paul, and you're, you had a really good talk on Romans two the other day about sort of divine judgment and like divine judgment, number one and divine judgment, number two, right? Sam Harris doesn't believe in divine judgment, number two, but he still thinks that there's, you know, if you go 150 miles per hour on the freeway, that that's risking divine judgment, number one, right? So he agrees, right. So he agrees with divine judgment, number one, but the only thing we have to fear is the end of this life, right? And so there's no personal accountability above the self. And I can't tell if this is a desired outcome of which the metaphysics are flowing downstream from what you want to be true, or if this is the metaphysics first and so that's the logical conclusion. I think there's a lot of people like Eric Weinstein, you know, I don't, I wish there isn't a God because then I'd have to worry what's on his mind, right? You know, are we not wanting there to be a God number two and a God number two judgment because we don't want to worry about what's on God number two's mind, right? Or is it we just don't believe in God number two anymore, so we're left to our own devices, right? And that's like Nietzsche's death of God sort of thing or something like that. So I think that's one of his big problems. And I think his other big problem is that religion is a group thing, right? One of the things that religion really does is it helps to trust other people better and cooperate better and to do things as a group that you can't do as well as an individual. And if I know that you guys are doing all the same religion thing that I'm doing, and you prove it because you're doing costly demonstrations of that, which is part of the role of sacrifice, I see Paul is showing up every Sunday and I can even tell that he's tithing and I can tell that he's foregoing all these moral, all these pleasurable things for the, you know, that he could be doing but isn't doing. All right, I can see he's taking this religion thing seriously with me so I can trust he's not like a free rider. Okay, well that means I can trust Paul way better. I can cooperate him with way better. I can connect with him way faster and we can be part of a group that has fewer barriers to trust and cooperation than a group that doesn't have those things, right? And that requires all of those particularities that Sam Harris hates, right, to really get there. And that's part of the role and the purpose of those particularities is so that I can tell that Paul's on my same page and part of my same group so I can do these extra trustworthy things with Paul that I can't do with Joey over there because, you know, I haven't seen him show up to church on a Sunday yet, you know, like, etc, etc. But then, you know, Paul cross checks my code and it turns out I don't believe in the Trinity so now he's trying to figure out if he can trust me or not, right? Because he does all the behavioral things but this propositional thing that I normally use to check if people in my group isn't working and yeah, you know. Yeah, but it's still what can you trust them about and I think that there's a fair amount of evidence, archaeologically speaking, that religion precedes trade. See you, Sam. For us to trade, we need a religion. Part of the reason I think everyone around me gets so frustrated by Sam Harris is I think you guys are asking questions that he doesn't care about. True. Like, if you don't have, he's using the same words maybe, but I don't think he's asking actually the same question because when somebody who believes in an all-powerful, all-good being is asking a question about what morality is, they're trying to line themselves up with something that in their mind is objective, like, loosely using that term, so forgive me. But like, God has an opinion, how do I get closest to God's opinion? That's generally what a religious person is asking for. Sam Harris is asking the question of there is no God, so I'm looking for some utilitarian peak in the moral landscape, as he would probably phrase it, and how do I get as close to there as possible? And then he's, you know, he's working backwards from there. So he, again, he's not looking at anything in particular. Which peak is Sam Harris trying to get to the top of? He doesn't know. Like, he knows that there's multiple peaks in the moral landscape, but he doesn't know what mountain he's climbing, so how does he know that the mountain that he's on is going to be the tallest one? How can you? Like, how do you win a game that you're not playing? Or a game that you know you are playing but are unaware of, or games that you would want to play if you knew about them. I mean, a big part of this is, actually the video that's going to release tomorrow morning, I sort of compare an electric car company to religion, because we, this is what I got into a little bit yesterday, in that we want something, but Sam can sort of say, sort of like a math equation, well the absolute worst. And it's easy to say in theory, but you might look at someone like Howard Hughes and say, well if we're going to do it like a math problem, well billionaire, check. Sleeping with Hollywood starlets, check. I mean, you just do a lot of big checks on Howard Hughes that a lot of people would say, I'd give a lot to have his life, but looks like the dude is suffering horribly and there's very little that can be done about it, even given, not only even given, but because of all of his wealth and status and fame. So this problem that he's trying to address is partly complicated by again, the fact that the huge thing that Vervecky and Peterson and Peugeot keep saying, which is that the world is too big. And so, you know, Sam might be living his best life now, as far as Sam has it figured out, but just like you can say, it could always be worse, Sam would even be able to agree, it could always be better. And I'm sure if you would sit down in a private meeting with Sam and say, Sam, tell me how your life could be better. He'd be able to start with a list and he'd go just fine. But yet he doesn't know, you know, how many lottery winners wind up bankrupt? How many NFL players wind up divorced and bankrupt within two years of retirement? The answer is 75%, at least the last thing I saw. It could always be better. Well, I think you can actually predict a lot of who's going to end up bankrupt after they win the lottery. Like there's factors that lead into it, there's behaviors that lead into it. And so what makes somebody not go bankrupt after they win the lottery? Well, they had some kind of structure in their life and their upbringing and their culture and their genetics that probably all work together to say that if you're the type of person that wins $40 million, in 10 years, you'll have $35 million or more. And then there's some people that say if you're the type of person that has that wins $40 million, in 10 years, you'll have negative $5 million. Those are real things, you can't get around it. So Sanjay in the chat brought up what I had said about Sam Harris not having a moral hierarchy to point to. He said that the same things can be said of Jordan Peterson. And here's why I think that's not true, is because Jordan Peterson doesn't try to destroy the structure that he knows that he's a branch coming off of. Sam Harris denies that the tree of Christianity exists and wants to go back to ground level and grow a brand new tree, but he's got probably a festivist pole. Jordan Peterson realizes that there's a tree already and he's on a branch of it and he doesn't know how high or how low he is, but he wants to make a healthy branch that bears fruit. Let's keep going with the analogy. When you have respect for long-standing institutions that still exist that have permeated through time, you're probably able to do more of the things Sam Harris wishes he could do by working from the base and going outwards. Logic doesn't have any inherent utilitarian superiority to illogic beliefs because that's not what you're measuring with utility. Utility doesn't measure, oh that's practical, love's not practical. A lot of the things human beings do with their children that other animals don't do with their children is not practical. Sacrificing yourself to save your child is not practical, maybe in a Darwinian sense. There's so many layers to all this stuff. So we know that institutions like churches and Christianity specifically have utility in Western society. You all know that I'm not a believer, but it's probably one of the things that's holding up society and Jordan Peterson understands that we shouldn't remove that pillar because the whole structure could come crashing down. Sam Harris doesn't know that. That's the danger of Sam Harris. He thinks he can rebuild that pillar. I have my doubts. Vervecky, same thing. He thinks he can rebuild that pillar. I have my doubts. And sure, the pillar's not perfect, but I think it's that's dogma, that's all the little scratches and skiffs and graffiti along the way, but like it's there and it's holding stuff up. Don't mess with it. Don't mess with it too much. Yeah, change it slowly. But I mean also to be fair to that point, I don't think when John Vervecky is talking about the good or even Jordan Peterson that they're talking about the same good that Christian is talking about. I just don't think so. And it's little things like two and a half minutes to answer is being good. That should take seconds. Like this is one of the things I really like about Christians who say who aren't terribly into the intellectualism and well read is that I can ask them a moral question and I get an immediate moral answer just like that. I don't care if it's right or wrong. Like they don't have to think about it. That's actually really important because when you need to do something in the world, it turns out that not taking two and a half minutes to figure out the answer that's going to lead you to the action happens to be really handy from an evolutionary perspective. And it's just they've lost all that. They're not getting it. Like you should be able to tell me for a given set of circumstances whether or not somebody needs to be hit, for example, or I need to take an action to protect somebody or I need to defend myself because it's appropriate because sometimes it's not appropriate to defend yourself because you did something wrong. There's all of these ways in which the religious people are very able to answer these questions fairly quickly and with what sound like reasonable answers and they're not right all the time, but at least they're not sitting there stewing on it and calling on Aristotle and come contrasting that with Nietzsche to kind of come up with an answer that might lead them to an action or a reaction that they needed to make at the beginning. Like yeah, makes sense. Well guys, I've got to, I said I've got to bug out. So sorry to the three new guys but those of you who are watching who want to continue. Yes, Mark and I do all the heavy lifting. But the guy knows, go ahead Eric. All I know is that Mark was calling me out personally about being indecisive and just waffling on stuff. So I felt that like I had to make an appearance. And great to see you, Richard and Weston. And again, anybody who's watching this on the live stream, I'm going to end the live stream. But if you want to join in this conversation and talk to these really awesome people, just drop into the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and there's always lots of conversation going on. So we'll see you guys later. See you Paul. Thank you.