https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IK0MTQ7uqkk

 Alright, I think we're live. Just finished recording a video on, should, if I don't have any copyright issues on YouTube, I always get a little nervous when I do that with Hollywood stuff. This will be tomorrow's video. Saw the Batman movie over the weekend and found it very thought provoking on a variety of fronts and this morning watched a few reviews. I watched Ben Shapiro's review, which I thought went a lot deeper than a lot of the other reviews, but it's a few other reviews too. And so through some things together, I think actually the Batman movie shows continued a Vixen Dixon. Welcome shows continuing evolution in this space. And so that will be tomorrow's video. I thought when I was making it was going to be two or three hours long, but it was only it was less than two hours. So sorry, Jacob. I thought I was going to have a nice big long one for you. And here, here I failed you. So sorry about that. I'm going to try again today, similar to what I did last week in terms of start a video with something of a small subject so that it won't be a very long video. And then after I sort of wrap up what I'm doing here, I'm going to go into the the live impromptu live stream room in the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and we can talk about it. This afternoon I got on Twitter and Fox Sakes says you might find Scott Adams fascination with Jordan Peterson's view on religion and interesting. Listen, Scott seems very interested in speaking with Jordan about this. I think Scott Adams Jordan Peterson conversation would be quite interesting. I see that just today he released a conversation with John McWhorter. So I'll be interested in that. I've been following John McWhorter for for quite a while. He's a he's quite a brilliant guy. So I'll be word vomit salad. Huh? Is that what it was, Jacob? Well, we'll see. We'll see what we'll see what happens there. Well, let's let's take a little listen to Scott Adams take on Jordan Peterson. Let's let's see. See if I can get all the settings right. Hopefully this will this will all work well. See when I do it live, I'm tempted to reach here for the button to pause while I set everything up because that's what I do when I record the regular videos with dressing Vixen says. OK, let's see if I can hear this. Yeah, Jordan Peterson. That would be interesting. And I wonder what he said before that. There would be no spark there to produce like any headlines. I think I would just agree with what he said. You get them. That's why he has two shows. First, when the job, you know what I mean? As soon as the professionalism is more important than the product, then the product suffers. But he does product first, professionalism second. So you get them. That's why he has two shows. Interview Ben Shapiro. Yeah, I don't know that me interviewing Ben Shapiro would produce like any headlines. I think I would just agree with what he said. And then there would be no spark there. You know, the evolution of Scott Adams is an interesting thing because I first sort of became acquainted with Scott Adams after the Trump election. And I wanted to find someone over on the left who wasn't just lighting their hair on fire. And then I came across Scott Adams and he basically said, well, I'm a Northern California left wing sort of guy and I knew this would happen. And I called it and I thought, well, maybe he did. And that sort of got me interested in who Scott was and what he was doing. And then I read his book on the one with the big, the one with the feet up there. I forget the title of it. And I really thought the book was interesting. And Scott's view on religion and the world and his two. I mean, I found a lot of what Scott said interesting. A lot of I'm also I also get fairly frustrated with Scott because he just tends to be flippant. It just tends to be flippant. That's that's sort of his character. And I don't know that necessarily serves. He doesn't I don't always find I don't find he treats his audience with a lot of respect sometimes, which I think that's helpful. Anyway, the John McWhorter thing with Jordan Peterson was Jordan once again mislabeling Jonathan Peugeot as a Catholic. He's taking suggestions for interviewing guests. Do you think of D.W.'s children? Disney, D.W.'s Disney's D.W.'s children. I don't know. Anyway, on with Scott Adams. Yeah, Jordan Peterson. That would be interesting. And I'm especially interested in his religious interpretations of recent, which I want to look into a little bit. I want to hear it in his own words because I'm considering that one of the most, let's say, unpredictable. Evolutions that I've seen, I would not have predicted Jordan Peterson's. Is it a change? I don't even know if it's a change, really. Maybe. I think I suspect Scott Adams is of the atheist. Correct me if I'm wrong, and I'm sure you will in the comments section. Yeah, exactly, Rob. Scott Adams can sit. Oh, Daily Wire. Okay, Daily Wire's children's channel. Thanks, Vixen. Yeah, Scott Adams, the smartest guy in the room as he crowns himself. And the thing with smarts is smarts is not wisdom. Again, if you listen to Vervecky's or Peterson's, you know, what is general intelligence? It's sort of quickness of the brain. But there are so many other filters and biases and aspects to getting things right that it's not just processing power. And so, yeah, and I think that's part of what goes into Adams. My frustration with Adams is that just some arrogance, some hubris. And, yeah, that is Cassidy in the thumbnail. That's from the one of the last times I did this. I usually take a thumbnail from there and then create a generic thumbnail because it just helps. So, the chat room's really bad because I'm so ADHD. I just keep reading the chat room and responding to your questions instead of following my stream of thought, which is already chaotic enough. You just kind of get the idea that for Adams, well, smart people have long since seen through this religious thing. Oh, so, okay. It's just something we're hearing more about. But I think it's an evolution to a more religious frame. And I'm going to say frame because I think he puts it in terms of living it as if it's real. Is that true? I hate to try to paraphrase other people. Yeah, Scott is in a simulation theory, which simulates some... What do you all keep saying? Simulation theory is theism for atheists, something like that. Because, you know, once you're... This is part of the same thing behind the whole egregore idea and why it provokes, I think, a much more open religious imagination among people of high status. Because, you know, okay, so if we imagine or we sort of imagine that general intelligence is sort of like processing power, and as Jordan Peterson says regularly, general intelligence is something that is very much going to contribute to success, and success will contribute to status. Well, among the high status people, you're going to find a fairly good sample of highly intelligent people, at least intelligent enough to have high status, but not so intelligent that they become depressed and sort of off balance. So, you tend to get... Your view of the world is also impacted by your status. Now, let's not fall prey to the vulvarisms of wokeism and how many other vulvarisms that are around that we just simply dismiss high status people as being motivated to keep their power. That's just a terribly cynical idea. On one hand, you shouldn't dismiss the fact that people do like to keep their comforts and power. That is something to very much keep in mind, but you can't attribute absolutely everything to those motivations because part of the truth is that the comforts and power once established by people are often found to be not what they'd hoped it would be. You know, Tom Brady wins the Super Bowl and I'm going to Disneyland. Well, after he's been to Disneyland four or five, six times, it's just another amusement park with a mouse. So, you'll often find that high status intelligent people get way up there and then they find some of their status hollow. I'm sure at some point, Scott Adams really wanted to play the game of social media and see how big he could get his Twitter following and see how many followers he could get on YouTube and you know what, however he's monetizing this, but you know, he's got... Scott Adams has Dilbert and all these various monetization methods. He writes books and so the guy's got plenty of money. Then what happens is that people just look for a new frontier to cross. Oh, Frau Katz says she doesn't find Scott arrogant. He's done videos listing his numerous failed projects, also his book. I watched the last Peterson video, but I suspect it's highly predictable. The McWhorter-Peterson conversation was excellent and took some wonderful meanderings. I thought Peterson was on top of his game. Good. I hope Jordan didn't interrupt him too much. Disneyland is amazing. I like this. I like the size of... I say this all the time. I bet the size of the channel is about right because you don't want so many chats coming in so quickly that I can't read them or enjoy them. Howdy there, Chad. How are you? So yeah, so thanks. You know, General Intelligence is about processing power. A good network. What do I mean by that? Good relational connections with other processing units, with other experiences of the world, plus a character that actually helps you listen to others, plus filters developed over time will actually make you much wiser than just simply raw intelligence. In other words, having a high IQ or let's just say a fast processing unit between your ears isn't as good as actually maybe not being quite so fast, but living within a network and constructing a network of a really high quality network around you because the network is far smarter than any of the nodes. And that will in the end not only give you a better perspective of the world, probably a happier place in the world, and also just the emotionally satisfying community to live within. I made a video that will come out, I did a conversation that the person just has given me the green light to share, so that will come out at some point. But it's all these different layers that we actually want to have work. You can be super smart and super rich and terribly miserable and have your relationships be a complete disaster. Look at Howard Hughes. A number of years ago I read a biography of Howard Hughes. Fascinating. Smart guy, wealthy guy, life was a mess. Relationships were a catastrophe. No amount of smarts is going to mean that all your relationships actually work well because the kinds of things you need to actually maintain healthy relationships are much more networking protocol. protocols fairly slow. You know, listening, talking, understanding, negotiating. High intelligence can help, of course, but again, having been formed in a helpful network probably does better. Well, I've, Kermit meets Dilbert, there we go. I've disrupted, I've interrupted myself so I've got what, just 10 minutes of this video to go, probably not even that. So let's hear what else Scott has to say. He says he doesn't believe it literally, he just has, he likes the utility of it, is that it? Because that wouldn't be far from my own view. My own view is, if you don't know my view on religion, is that I'm not, personally I'm not a believer, but I'm very pro-religion because it's just so obvious it works. I mean, why would I be against something that works? Now, now that's interesting. I've heard him say many more negative things. This again could be just part of the ongoing evolution of, I think in 9-11 there was sort of a shock to the system that energized the new atheists and suddenly everyone was anti-religious, but that wave seems to be changing again and that wave goes back and forth actually. I don't know that there's any science behind that, but the only studies I've seen are that people have a faith-based view of the world seem to be happier, seem to be more prosperous, seem to do fewer drugs. And that again I think is part of the network because if there's anything that your religion should help you to do is, again as I said before, having a very smart high-functioning processor between your ears will in fact not do as well long term as being an important node in a network that are all actually moving together because the network is far smarter than the node. If you look at say what's going on in CPUs and PCs right now, Apple is sort of putting all these CPUs onto their chip, but it's actually the network that gives you much more power just in the raw processing of one thing. Scott Adams seems to believe we're in a simulation. I think Adams is mildly entertaining but ridiculously arrogant. That was sort of my view. Compressed network thinking. Oh I like that. I like that. Chez-y sparrow. Wisdom is compressed network thinking. That's good. There's something about thinking that somebody's watching you all the time and loves you and is judging you I guess that probably has some guardrail effect on your behavior. Good for thee but not for me. I'm smart enough to have all my life in order and to be successful at everything and to know what's right all the time. As long as people have a choice, they can enter a religion, they can leave it, which is the beauty of America. Religious people have a sense of entitlement. That's why you should be a Calvinist. That'll beat it out of you. As long as they have a choice, if they're picking a frame that works, that works for me. In the old days, when I was younger and dumber, I used to say, whatever it is I'm thinking today is right and all those other people, how dumb could they be? The older you get, if you do it right, your humility should increase not decrease. I started out with no humility, meaning I was pretty, pretty sure I had the whole God situation figured out and other people didn't and there was something wrong with them. But the longer you live, you realize that more and more things you thought were clearly true, they just evaporate. If I could tell you how many things I believed were absolutely true five years ago, and I'm talking about a lifetime of having... Wow, five years is not a long time. Now he's got my interest. I'm going to back this up. I'm going to listen to this again. This is good. ...truth ago, I just realized that didn't and there was something wrong with them. But the longer you live, you realize that more and more things you thought were clearly true, they just evaporate. If I could tell you how many things I believed were absolutely true five years ago, and I'm talking about a lifetime of having truths evaporate, every year something that was true disappears again. Really big stuff. I'm talking about really basic things about even who you are. Like a belief about what happened to you in the last five years. Just really basic stuff. The longer I live, the more humility I get because everything I think I believe, now I have a little message that says, yeah, yeah, you're pretty sure this time, aren't you? I like this, Scott. I'm much more impressed by this. Now, this is really interesting because this is not what I expected to hear. I'm happy to take correction. I'm happy to be wrong and I'm very happy to hear this. Now, for me, a lot of this again has to do with the value of the network and the value of the network that you live in and create around yourself. As I said to in this conversation that I'll post in the next week or so probably where part of what happens, part of ideally what you want to do, especially with a religious network and a religious institution is you not only want to be networked into people who are alive today, you want to be networked into the people who have been the most important over time. You have that Lindy effect of filtering them over time. And again, I mean, you're going to have some Orthodox that say, ah, Augustine is a Johnny come lately who didn't know his Greek well enough. We love Maximus the confessor. But those conversations are alive in religious communities. And part of the real poverty of many things today is that the communities are so shallow. So thanks, thanks, for sending me this video. This you were right. And even what I've learned in the last four years, a little bit more visibility for myself has brought more followers on Twitter. And many of you are very generous. You put links in the comments on my videos. You put links over on Twitter. You email me links. And of course, I can't talk about all of them because you send me more stuff than I can even watch at a given time. But I didn't find this. I don't have enough time to listen to Scott Adams every day. But a bunch of you have different jobs. And so you listen to a lot of content. And you've sort of over the last few years gotten to know my mind. And so the network is clicking. And you hear that say, oh, Paul will like that. And it's very generous of you. And you shoot me the link. And then I just click on a bunch of them. And oh, I've got interest in Scott Adams have for a long time. Made a few videos about him a few years ago. And wow, this is interesting. So let's go back and hear some more of this again. How many tests have you done? Again, I mean, like really big stuff. I'm talking about really basic things about even who you are. Like a belief about like what happened to you in the last five years. Just really basic stuff. And so the longer I live, the more humility I get. Because everything I think I believe, now I have a little message that says, yeah, yeah, you're pretty sure this time, aren't you? Do you know how many times you've been sure before? Yes, you do. Yes, you do. You do know. You do know. Don't change the subject, Scott. You know how many times you were sure before and then found out you were totally wrong. Do you remember that? I'm not trying to think about it. You just think about it. Think about it, Scott. Don't not think about it. That's how you get cognitive distance. Think about it. So that's something you can do as you get older. If you do it right, right? If you do it right, you will remember how many times you were wrong. And that was one of the motivations behind that book behind you, behind me, where I'm pointing. That's the book that I liked. And that was a good book. There was a lot of, again, I've got my critiques of Adams, but I really liked that book. It was a good book. I thought there was a lot of wisdom in that book. And I actually recommend that book often to younger people and some of the ideas in it. And saying, hey, you know, when you're young, use your time to get a diversity of skills. And I think I would also say use your time to cultivate and develop a really healthy, good network on the world. You have to build relationships. This is one of the, yeah, well, there's just so much to talk about. Keep going. Yeah, Farah. Farah, I don't know how to say her name. He Hartcliff. Yeah, I, yeah, a lot of people I want to talk to, but I've, we've not, I've not had near enough conversations with Muslims. So it's, it's true. I mean, my network, none of our networks are big enough or good enough. And as I often say, hierarchies bind and blind. So if you have too many people trying to talk to you, you can't always get a chance to talk to everyone who, who wants to talk. I mean, all the things that I'd failed at, it was both a reminder to myself how many things I was sure about that didn't work out, but also a way to tell other people that even people who, you know, for whom life worked out fairly well, that we're wrong all the time. I mean, the, the number of times we're certain and wrong is just shocking. No matter how successful you end up. So, and that, that helps people understand that their, their own certainty is worth questioning. That's a good answer. I don't know where it goes from here. I think this is the part that was recommended to me. We'll listen to a little bit more and then maybe I'll jump, jump into the Discord server. And again, the, if you look in the notes here, let me check on the page. Um, yeah, the link, I just refreshed that link, so it should be good. So if you want to talk about this or something else, you can drop into that room in the Discord server. And I don't know how many people will be in there. Again, the channel's not been so large that these have been unworkable, which has been nice. Because having a conversation, especially with three or four or five people is takes patience and you never will not necessarily get around to exactly what you want to talk about. So let's hear what else he says and then maybe I'll click over there. So watching me, watching him, watch a chat feed as he skims it, probably sort of filtering through to something that's relevant. How sad to take the substance of God out and just embrace the utilitarian aspect. Well, I don't know, is it sad or is it just a frame that works for some people and not for others? Now, for me, the simulation hypothesis is the most predictive. Right? So here's another prediction. There will never be anything true about our reality, whatever you call this thing, that is not also true for a simulated world. For a simulated world, meaning that a simul- Anything is a really big term. And part of my issue with the simulation theory is in fact the same word simulation because what most people, why most people I think use it is the idea is that there's another world in which people have beards and chairs and computers and relationships and so then we make another little world like the sims to sort of reflect the big world where in fact most of the games that we play are not sort of rote simulations of ourselves. I just did the video today on the Elden Ring game. Well, that doesn't look like my city. In fact, it would- I would be horrified if my city looked like that. What we're fantasizing about usually have a lot more, has a lot more to do with, well, we don't even know, a lot more to do with our dreams, the good and the bad ones. And so in fact, we're always running simulations of sorts. As I mentioned on my tomorrow's video, we'll deal with the Batman movie. And in some ways, all of these movies are simulations of the Batman movie. And in some ways, all of these movies are simulations that we run. Now, they're not necessarily like a computer simulation in which we, like computer modeling, let's say, in which we set up the program and sort of let it run to see if we get surprising answers at the end of it, but they are simulations of sorts because here we have the character of the Batman and we've got some standard elements to the Batman. We've got Commissioner Gordon, we've got Gotham City, and we've got all of those things. And what we tend to do over time is we play around with the variables in the Batman simulation, and then we see how it comes out, and then we see how we feel about that. And so the idea that we ourselves are in some other, some other being simulation that they're basically running things through this program, but it's a tremendously in-depth simulation that somehow the, it's a very attractive thing, that the maker of this universe, this simulation is sitting back and saying, all right, well, let's, you know, maybe it's a Calvinist up there and let's, you know, let's set Scott to do this program and let's PVK to do that program and let's have Chad the alcoholic run that program. Let's make Chad an alcoholic so that, you know, Chad has to, you know, find church some way, but let's make sure that for some reason, Scott Adams, I mean, he can, he might experiment around with drugs and he might do this and do that, but alcohol never gets ahold of him. And well, we can see how this simulation is going. Let's go to Wikipedia and let's see, let's see what we can learn about Scott Adams. Oh, there he is. Well, you know, of course he's been running the Dilbert simulation and again, a comic strip is in many ways a simulation. He's 50, he's 64 years old. He went to Hardwick college, got his BA there, got an MBA at University of, um, um, at Cal Berkeley. He, let's see, he's had two marriages. Oh, this is interesting. He never, he never married until 2006. Why so late Scott? And then that lasted eight years and then six years later, married again and that lasted two years. Interesting. Very interesting. Oh, I guess you can subscribe on Wikipedia. I didn't know that. So the simulation theory. Yeah, we're always running simulations, but we don't necessarily run simulations that look like ourselves or they look like ourselves, but we play with the variables. And, and again, I think it's not just in computer games that we're running simulations, movies and fiction and, um, um, cooperative stories. I mean, every, every book that has an editor's in a sense of cooperative story and they, and they put that together. There you go. Node. Absolutely. Node's an early one in this crew. All right. Right. The simulated world would have simulated where you would call this thing. That is not also true for a simulated world. Meaning that a simulated world would have resource constraints. It wouldn't have infinite memory. You know, it'd be a bunch of things that would be true, true for software. So my prediction is there will never be anything true in, in our so-called real world that isn't just as true for software. Cause we can never get out of that model. Part of the problem with a simulation theory is just like all of our other theories, it's just as much bound to the now. And he just finished talking about how often if you grow, if you live long enough, you grow to realize that you better have a bit of humility because you don't know. And all of our frameworks about software and hardware, all of this, all of this, this computer stuff that we've sort of imagined. Futurism has been dramatically unreliable science fiction any better, but again, science fiction is sort of a simulation into the future based on what we know and see now. And so if you listen to what he just said, it will never be anything true. Never is a very long time. And any postulating we make about never is always based on the limitations of now. So it's, they'll, they'll never be anything beyond. I remember 30 years ago thinking, yeah, well, we've got phones, we've got cars, we've got rocket ships, we've got everything's been invented. How can we invent anything new? We're still going. And in our so-called real world, that isn't just as true for software because we can never get out of that model. Very specific prediction. Okay. So we'll see. Somebody says God is utilitarian. Interview Sam Harris again. Did he talk to Sam Harris? I don't know. What was it for anybody? Anybody listened to his conversation with Sam Harris? Would that be interesting? Sam pointed me to the Sam, the Sam Harris, Glenn Lowry conversation, just at the end of it, they got into God. That was interesting. That could probably, I could probably do one of those for one of these because Sam Harris, he was a disaster in that. And Glenn Lowry basically says, you know, what you're describing is of absolutely no attraction to me. What's attracted to me is sort of the religion I left because late in life I was baptized in a black Pentecostal church and I really loved it. And you can listen to Glenn Lowry tell the story. He tells it really well to what's right. Bob Wright, who has the, you know, a couple of those channels that Glenn is on. And, you know, Glenn Lowry, I mean, he bought Christianity hook, line and sinker. And there was a lovely young woman in his church that had all this promise and she died of cancer. And the way the people in the church celebrated just, it just, the problem of evil just smacked him all up all, all up and down. And he, like many I've known, left the faith wanting, wishing he could continue to maintain it, but despairing that he couldn't. And then, so then when Sam Harris comes around with a very incoherent telling of some of the, of some of what Sam is passing off as religious now, Glenn Lowry just looked at it and said, same hours, you know, Lowry basically said, I've, I've, I've lived in the, I've lived in the religious dream and I loved it. And what you just described is a cheap imitation. So yeah, Robert Wright, that's it. Blogging heads, blogging heads. And also it's like meaning, it's not meaning heads, but it's the meaning of life TV, something like that. He's got two channels and you know, I, he puts out, he puts out really interesting stuff. There's not anywhere near enough time to watch everything that's interesting on the internet. Yeah, you know, I'd love to. It'd be good. It's utilitarian. Interview Sam Harris again. Yeah, you know, I'd love to. That'd be good. Kanye would be good. Maybe Kanye would actually do it. I mean, it'd be more, more of a resource question. He can't be everywhere and do everything. All right, that's all I got for today. Oh, Bill Maher. Oh, wow. Wow. That would be interesting. Imagine me having Bill Maher on and having a video prepared to debunk the fine people hoax and the bleach drinking hoax and just say, just two things I want to talk to you about. And that's it. I just want to show you the full video and then tell you what, show you what you saw. And I'll tell you, I literally personally interviewed people who attended the Charlottesville thing and found several of them who claimed that they disavow all racism. And they were just there about the statues and the part of the problem with high status people talking to each other is they don't tend to be terribly humble. And when they're on a stage, which is what the status is all about, they have considerably, they have a lot to lose by saying they're wrong. So yeah. Historical element of it. And just see what he says. Because here's the thing. The thing that I keep saying to Bill Maher about why he's so dangerous is that he's a shapeshifter. Well, that sounds negative. I mean this to be positive. This is interesting because I've followed Bill Maher for a very long time. I used to watch his show. I used to watch his show a lot when he was on network TV on ABC, Politically Incorrect. And then I didn't watch him for a long time. But like I said before, I got, if you get an AT&T phone with the right thing, then you get HBO Max for nothing. And so I was just watching him this morning, in fact, the Andrew Yang show. So it was quite interesting. He is capable of entering your bubble and looking around. Who can do that? I mean, really, who can do that? Not many people. It's a really small list of people who can just walk outside their bubble if they choose to. Right. It's the choose. It's funny that most women don't question much. That's pretty broad. I know a lot of women that question a lot. That is where that little challenge is. But if they want to, and they have a reason to, and somebody alerts them to a good reason to do it, they have the ability to open their little door and walk out of their little little bubble and knock on the other bubble and go inside and see what's happening. There's only a few people who can do that. And he's one. So a conversation with him, if I could invite him into the other bubble, just to look around, just to check out the furniture, it would be pretty interesting, wouldn't it? That would be really interesting. All right. And if there were anybody I thought I had a shot of getting to the man cave, I would think the odds would be pretty good in this case. See, Scott, they told us creationism was unfalsifiable and therefore unscientific, and then they promote a simulation. That's right. That's right. All right. So I think we're off to a good start here. Let's see who has decided to drop into the Bridges of Meaning Discord. If you want to join the, oh, nobody's in there. Look at that. Nobody's in there. How about that? I'm all by my lonesome. So if you want to engage and you'll have to show your face. So I've got two cameras here. I've got the little camera on the computer. Oh, look who showed up. It's James. Hey, James. Can you hear me all right? Yeah, I hear you fine. Perfect. Let me know if you have any echo. I had to readjust my office, say the least. Well, how are you doing? Good. Busy as always. Finished Homer's stuff. Now I'm on Virgil's stuff. Oh, wow. Yeah. So that's fun. Learned about the Virgilian prophecy. I knew nothing about that and how impactful Virgil was on the medieval literature. I've been in some interesting conversations as of late about, I think, certain communities and their disdain or projection or local system. Disdain or projection or local skepticism towards religion and the church or a church. And other than that, about to go on three weeks of vacation. So where are you going? That's that. Well, spending one of those weeks in Florida, taking on and then I have two weeks from not really doing anything but it's called a stay vacation. Hopefully I can get some more videos edited and ready for publishing. But yeah, I was listening to the conversation and your monologue and there's a lot there for sure that I think is useful to kind of wrestle with and how what we know about ourselves and what we know about the world changes so rapidly, depending on how aggressive you are and your, I guess maybe your personal learning endeavors or your growth mindset or something to that effect. And maybe it's not the facts that are important but the processes that are constant. And that's what I was kind of brought to mind is the processes seem relatively constant. I'm not going to say 100% certainty, but if we sit there and we read a book, that's a process. And we reflect on that book and we go out and do X and we do that well or poorly or something like that. And then we reflect on that and we write and we do these like those seem to be the constant processes that remain even after the facts change. Well, there's always nouns and verbs and the facts, it's like, like I said, I made the video tomorrow about the Batman movie. It's sort of the Batman and certain Batman, Gotham, Commissioner Gordon, some of these things are sort of the facts in the story. And you sort of always need both because you can't see the processes without the facts, which are sort of the constants. Or if you're paying attention to the facts, you won't notice the facts without the processes. So the two are always working together. So yeah, I would, I can agree with that. So Chezy, you're new. I don't think I've ever met you in this space. No, we've never met. I've reached out like a few years ago, but it was a long time ago. Recently, I've spoken to Jacob from your site. It was a very fun character. And, and Yosef, I've spoken to Yosef a little. But yeah, I've been following on this little corner of the internet for a while, but coming from a Jewish perspective, a religious Jewish perspective. So it's been just fascinating to see. And really, to be honest, it's, it's in a, it's a lot of going to be coming from like this corner, but it's, it's tough. I've been talking actually to Zevi Slavin from Seekers of Unity. Oh yeah. His channel. He lives in Israel, just moved actually to my neighborhood over here. And I've been just talking to him about like this whole fascinating corner and it's really God's work. Wow. So it's, because a lot of this meaning crisis is, is manifesting itself in its own way within the religious community in Judaism. And I'm always looking to see sort of where, where I could, where I could grab wisdom, where I could grab information and like where I could find these points of agreement. And many times it's also the jargon. Your agentic God and arena God has been, has been so helpful when I'm discussing sort of religion with my contemporaries that are sort of on the fumes of, you know, their parents and like, they don't really have lost sort of meaning into it. And then having them realize that sort of they've been looking at the world with these dichotomies again, I mean, there's a lot of different ideas to flush out, but it's been very, very helpful. So I want to, again, just, just thank you. Thank you. Thanks for, thanks for swooping in. I, I, I was talking a little about this with Jacob, but I, and this has to do with his conversation about the rabbits, what he calls them, rabbi Walpy. All right. So I, I do, however, I was trying to, to, to, to sort of flush out with him that the attitude of let's say a Haskell Kaufman or his student Yisrael Knol, I would like to try to fuse a more scientific view of religion with, I mean, a more scientific view together with religion. And I don't necessarily think we need to be scared for that, but it doesn't have to be done very carefully. But I gave an example of, let's say we found out, scientifically speaking, that, you know, the Exodus, the story, the Jews, the Israelites were in Egypt only for 50 years. And it's a group of like three different groups that got together. Now I understand the gravitas of the, the, you know, Passover is coming of the tale. I'm going to tell my sons, my three, my, my boys, and why that's important, why that narrative is important and how much that message carries. However, as Elon Musk works closer to putting like chips in our brain, eventually we're going to be having this information flow to us. So I'm not going to be able to put a quote unquote, protect the religious bubble and tell people like, no, it was 500 years, it was 400 years. They're going to come and say like, well, what is Freud saying about Moses? And why is the tabernacle the same size as Ramesses II? Like, what are these comparisons? Who are these other heroes that were also in a basket? And instead of sort of shying away from that, perhaps we need to embrace that while still preserving the divine significance, inspiration. And I want to use the word origin. I use that carefully, but, and this relates also sort of to Sam Harris, like he's attacking this one specific version of God, but I just feel like I just finished the conversation with Glenn Lowry. And while I think at the end of it there, he does give this very soft version of what, how he wants to, you know, have us all participate in religion. However, I look at that as a bridge. Like you're saying you want a church, you want a song. So, okay. So you're saying you don't want this one specific version, how it's been interpreted by specific people. I just, I look at that as a way more understanding Sam than, you know, he was 10 years ago or his conversation with the four horsemen. This is someone that is whether he wants to admit it or not, just he's like, he's coming closer or he's realizing, like Jordan told him, you know, you could be that one righteous person, Sam, with your intellect, but the system, all of us, we need more than that. We need a system, we need a song, we need a hall. And he also realizes that psychedelics is our hack. So I'm not getting into whether it's wrong or right. I'm just saying that's one path, but I spoke too long. I'm sorry. No, no, thank you. And I really enjoyed that. And I think, you know, where James started us in terms of sort of facts and process, you know, when you say, I think we have to be very careful with this word scientific, because when you described, if we could find out, historians would say historically, but what we're really looking at is, okay, physically, but you can't have, let's say you had three groups in Egypt, but how do we, all of these categorizations of these groups, okay, let's talk, let's call them Hebrews. All right. Well, are they Hebrews genetically? Well, certainly there would be some genetics, but would they have to be, at what percentage would they be Hebrews genetically? And so, you know, this gets into, you know, I love the way you brought this in because there's a long running conversation in, you know, in the Hebrew scriptures about who is Israel? Is Israel, and this of course, Christianity, of course builds on this too, is Israel the genetic, the genetic descendants of Jacob, or is Israel the keepers of the covenant? And the covenant and the keepers of the covenant is, you know, they're always of course bound, but it's very much upper register because, and it's where, and part of the real contribution, I think, when you look at ancient Near East neighbors, everybody there was into the ritual, but it was the God of Israel that says, you know, I prefer obedience to sacrifices. In other words, what's happening in the temple has to happen in the home and has to happen at the city gates, and it's really the Hebrews that bring this entire life view where upper and lower register come together, and that very much complicates this scientific conversation, which always wants to say it's the lower register that, it's via the lower register that we can track everything. And now part of the problem with Gnosticism is that, you know, then your upper register just floats away, and you know, you don't have anything, and it's always the upper and lower register. Reality is where those two registers meet, and so, you know, that's again where it gets back to what James was saying in terms of facts, which are sort of lower register and processes, which are sort of upper register. I mean, they're always like this, but the questions, because there's lots, there's lots in the Hebrew scriptures that, you know, Solomon's Palace, Records of David, there's plenty of, there's plenty of stones and validations of Hezekiah and wells and places. I mean, we got, we have plenty of that. I mean, we're not, we're not, okay, so we got questions about Egypt and Exodus and, all right, but we got plenty of validations all over the place. Does that change how then we interact with the upper register? And then it's always a question of authoritative, because that's really the upper register coming down and shaping the bottom and saying, here, oh Israel, you know, here is your God, this is your covenant, you know, you shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself a graven image. And, you know, that's when, do I make a graven image? Can I, if I make an image, can I get a handle on the upper register and somehow wield life? It's everything we're talking about. I hear what you're saying. I want to focus for a moment about something you said, like, you know, the temple of Solomon and, you know, we have these wells, we have these elements over there. And whether fortunately or unfortunately, these are elements that are sort of, these are relics that we could say like, okay, these people were also already part of that story. What if we want to like dig down to the origin, right? And, and if it's sort of, or specifically let's say in modern orthodoxy, like looking at the story of Eden and let's say the story, looking at the story of creation, very much like Jonathan Pujol's looking at it, like looking at it as more as whether it's a pattern or whether it's an allegory or like, I understand those things are different, but not looking at them as literal things. So that's already baked in. However, there's other things that are still, you know, sacred, right? We're not going to be touching those elements. And I think that in some way, you know, abstracting the conversation, if I could abstract it as much as possible, if I'm okay with having my relationship with God, even if Moses doesn't exist, I'm not coming and saying that I don't believe that I'm saying, if I could build myself a version where that's, regardless of that, that I still hold is true, then reading Freud's, you know, Freud's attitude towards Moses isn't scary. It's just more information. It's just interesting. It's just more elements to take on. I look at Jethro and his combination with Moses and them being iconoclasts as well. So like that doesn't scare me then being like, well, who was first? And what does this mean? It just means that this is a collective larger story. And even if I look at a story like the Sargon of Akkad, and, you know, and does that mean that Moses wasn't in like, you know, his little cradle? Yeah, yeah, yeah. The answer is like to recognize the importance of that pattern, and realize like the truth in that. And this sort of relates to Jordan Peterson with his hyper truth. Now, I want to create a version where Sam Harris could come and say, do you recognize the hyper truth value? And that should be enough for you to celebrate the religion. Now, as religious people, we could come and say, it's true on multiple levels. It's true because it's factually true. It's true because it's allegorically true. But if we could, if we, if we could reason and show that we could be more flexible with our understanding of what's allegory, what's pattern and what's literal, to then invite the rest of the world and to realize that they're already living a lot of this pattern. This is already signed that they're participating in. And, and I think Jordan doesn't realize when I mean, he probably does realize when he says, atheists are, you know, they're not really atheists, because they can't, you know, they can't help it. Their, their whole framing, their language, the context, it's all happening through that prism. So I just think we should highlight those patterns to them. But I'm sure that's what everyone in, you know, on this corner of the internet is trying to do. What you're saying just reminded me of why I think it's the way in which we claim ownership of the mystery of the gospel and all things. I feel like that's why it's dangerous when we, we basically appropriate what is God's. Because I mean, ultimately, that's when atheists and others both are pointing back and saying, Oh, hey, this is just manmade. And they, and they start trying to locate the structure of all reality within the, the historical timeline of humanity, as opposed to God having created all things integrated all things. And we're all working with what he gave. We're just trying to carry out a very specific, holy, you know, part within creation. I think they never start with creation. Right? I think that's the problem. They never start with creation. They always start in the middle of the story. They start with, well, see, we're here, and there's a hammer and I was born and you know, things like that. They never go back to, okay, but where did it start? Because the starting point matters. Like the starting point matters a lot. Yeah. Middle out thinking, right? Well, what if there was no starting point? What if it just goes on forever? What if it's turtles all the way down? It's not. We decided, we decided recently that it's girdles all the way down, in fact. And Paul heard that last time and cracked up. But I think, you know, there's this reliance on this lower register. And I think when we think about this materialism problem, that's what materialism is. It's the reliance of the primacy of the lower register. So it's not necessarily denying the upper register, but it's saying, oh, it's primal, it's this lower register. And then, you know, it's relevance realization at that point. Like, well, what's real in history? Well, that's relevance realization. Is it the line? Is it the deed? Is it the interaction with the place? Like, there's lots of different ways you could say, no, no, what's relevant to the religion or to the tradition is, you know, in Peterson's case, Bruce and I were just talking about this, by the way. We were right on this topic earlier. In Peterson's case, what's relevant is evolution. And so he starts from evolution. And, you know, not to criticize, right? Because I'm fine with it. I actually, Bruce is not as fine with it as I am. So that idea that you can know the historical fact is the tying of the material reality back to the past. Because you weren't there. So you have, there's no material way for you to know who made it with whom and where the line of succession actually is. And there's no way for you to know where those cities actually were, right? Maybe we've got, you know, a few areas where, you know, it says city name here, you know, and we've roughly dated the rocks to this period. But that's rare. And most of what we're relying on is this relevance realization to say the material reality was this. And then we're drawing that line of relevance, right? We're saying this is what's most relevant material reality here. We're drawing that line, that story, right? It's a scientific story, though. So it's not a real story. It's a science story. So it's fine, right? But that's all materiality. That's all lower register stuff, right? This history, all of that is lower register stuff. That's what I think is what I'm talking about when I say materialism. It's that primal thing is the material. And then, you know, to the other point, that puts us on top, because the science knows all about material science, right? Like materialism science. So now we can control it. We can decide, oh, well, this is how it should work, or oh, this is how we can make it work, or, you know, oh, this is what this means. Like, we can put the meaning in the material, which I don't think is possible, right? I think it's, you need upper and lower. And then the lower, the meaning pops out, right? Yeah. Yeah. I think there's some, one of the things that I find happens, at least in my experience, is many people have started to worship the means by which the way things arise, as opposed to the genesis of the action or meaning, versus how the means come. So for instance, like, and I find now me being a Protestant, it's much easier for me to make this argument, but, you know, people tend to take Mary as the means by which Christ came to be, and Mary becomes that which we must worship, venerate or otherwise hold high, as opposed to the meaning behind the means, or the reason for the means. And so, what, to me, that's just a materialistic way of viewing the gospel, right? This is looking at the means and putting value in the means. Well, I guess the thing that I would maybe ask here is how, so we kind of led it with facts, and then I kind of brought in processes, right? Which I think you're kind of going into, that's a mean, right? Like that's like, and people can worship that mean. Like, I mean, let's look at, you know, some of the self-help gurus and coaches out there, like Tony Robinson, that like, that has its own like cult-like following, and then above that would be God. And it's not just like above that, it's like above that. Yeah, yeah. I mean, what it would, the means are inconsequential when it comes to the decree that's been laid out, right? I mean, what are the, man is fallible, right? So why would we worship man? We can't. But man is used by the grace of God to act out the means that he's declared and decreed. But that doesn't somehow put man in the place of God. We get to participate. Yeah. And I find that to be a difficulty for many people in and outside of religion, because we're constantly focused on the means. Well, that's the thing, like, the folks that would call themselves secular or atheist, I think, or at least the principal, not even the people. But the thing is, like, on one side, you have people that basically claim ownership of creation and disassociate God from all the creations. And then on the more religious, Judeo-Christian side, we have the, I think, the fault of sometimes trying to basically own God's words at Revelation as our own, and basically seek to proclaim our full understanding of the totality of it, as opposed to taking it out to give a special revelation, but being humble with our interpretation of it, and always having a slightly open hand with the very simple, simplistic stuff that has been handed to us that we can understand, but also always ceding ultimate authority to, well, in the Christian's case, Christ. Whether or not you're Christian or not, he still has all authority, in my opinion, but whatever. Great. I think there's still a tension, though, when physical things and material things are infused with meaning and sometimes through religious decree. So this is a no way to get to a political discussion, but if you think of Jerusalem and you think of the Temple Mount, right, that's a very materialistic thing and creates a tremendous amount of tension on me. And you're like, hey, come on, why don't we all get along? And everyone's like, yeah, yeah, up until this special, very important thing. And you want to, I work as an architect, and a lot of the labor in Israel is Arab. So I interact with Arabs and Palestinians all the time. We have these discussions about religion and God. And there's so much tension about such a physical thing. And I want to quote Solomon. I'm like, eventually it's supposed to be a house of worship, not even sacrifice. And it's supposed to be a house of worship for all the nations. So at some point we get to this point of, you know, we're all orienting together towards this thing. But, you know, it's people have a very hard time, you know, disconnecting those things. And specifically if being told by those texts that these places are holy, right? So, you know, when it's just words, I hear what you're saying about, you know, there could be people saying that we're taking them out of context. But when you have something that has carried such amount of weight on it, and then you have so many ratifications to it, it sort of behooves us to come and point out from quote unquote a scientific point of view or a historic point of view, like, you know, what are we even doing? Because then we're looking at sort of science as a crush to be like, well, we need some sort of reason. It's more than just saying, these are the beliefs and ethics I have, and I want a reason to live my life this way. But it's, you know, it'll ultimately boil down to, you know, do I have to explain to my son? Am I occupying someone? Am I not? Like, what's my story? So these things obviously carry a lot of weight with this regard here. But again, this wasn't to get into like a political discussion. It was just to point out, like, It's not political to us. I'm actually thinking about, like, the now kind of thinking about, like, what is it? So like, the Temple Mount or these sites become symbols, right? And those symbols then have to be engaged with in kind of the same way as we could be potentially engaged with stories and guys, it definitely helped me out with this. But like, there was a term, Verveke talked about, which was imaginal. Did I get that right? Yeah. And I think that it's in that, that we're like, it's not quite imagining, but you're like, you are you you start inserting yourself and interacting with that symbol in the right way. And again, I maybe need a little help fushing that out. But that's kind of where my mind goes with with that and why we do need we still need some of the material symbol, but the the marrying of science to that is kind of gonna be a problem anyway. So I mean, I think part of it is just we all live particular lives, lives, right? We aren't just out there in abstract, super general land. I'm a particular person in a particular place and a particular time. Turn your volume up, Sam. Really low. A little hard to hear you. Can you hear me a little bit better? Yeah. Where is it? I've got you up all the way, so I can't put you up anymore. All right. Here, one second. I probably have the wrong microphone. How about that? Is that better? Much better. All right. Okay. Sorry about that. All right. We all live particular lives in particular places, and we're not like the abstract, unembodied observer from no man's land, right? Like even in secular space, right? I vote in a particular state, right? I vote in a particular country. I pay taxes to a particular town. I pay, you know, I have a local police department when I call that comes to, you know, help me, right? And that like, you can't just live in super abstract land. Like why do I root for the Chicago Cubs? Okay, well, I live in Chicago. Oh, and I specifically, I live in the northern part of Chicago, so I can't root for the White Sox, right? That would be heresy. That would be heresy, right? And so, you know, Wrigley Field, it might not take on the full symbolic resonance of, you know, the Jerusalem Temple Mount does for some people. But, you know, when I go to the, you know, the IV covered confines of Wrigley Field, I get the magical feels, you know, I get my special hot dog, I get my special beer, right? And, you know, it does something for me in the meaning place, right? And, you know, that's well, how religious a sports event is, is an open question. But I think that, you know, all of that particularization, if we just abstract meaning from, if we take away meaning from everything that is particular in order to try and prevent conflict or something like that, then you're going to just devolve into nihilism. You need the particular to have meaning in it to make anything worth doing. I, I would respectfully disagree, but maybe, perhaps I'm not disagreeing, but hear me out for a second. Like, we have this, we have this interaction way back with God, right, on Sinai, and it's too much for the Israelites to handle, right? So they, Moses is a little late, and they go build this, this calf, right? And then they're not even looking at this as idol worship. They're looking at this as like, you know, this is your God, like, this is just like another version, like, we need this, right? And God's like, you know, okay, fine, I get it, Moses, they need, they need something more than this, we're going to build this tabernacle, we're going to start building this down. And I'm going to start abstracting myself and my wisdoms, my ethics into the, you know, the, the menorah, and we're going to build, like, the, all these different intricate things are, you know, compressing this wisdom, this information, how to act. Even this house of worship, where we're all get together to get to this place where we're all worshiping, once the temple leaves, right, that turns into specific in Judaism, that turns into like, you know, into the, what they call the Beit Midrash, the house of learning, into, into the book, into the, the synagogue, which in his Hebrews called Beit Knesset, a house of gathering, right? So, and then eventually that's into one praise at home. And we hear the prophets telling us like, you know, that God is not really interested in those sacrifices. At some point, we need to internalize these things. Now, it might sound too utopian to go to the Arabs and the Jews and be like, you know, kumbaya, we're all supposed to internalize this. But I do think that, I do think an internalization of when the Arab is praying and the Jew is praying, them to just realize it's the same orientation, and we're praying towards, like, the same good, whether it's the Buddhist that's rubbing his food or the Jew that's making his blessing, these are mechanisms that are, are, are, are trying to orient us. Now, even the house, the house of prayer, and now the Western wall, these are relics of, I believe, an older technology. Now, there's signs still so, so iconic about them, so they're still, they still grab us. But however, I think to move forward, even in that, at some point, sort of has to be left behind when we realize that, like, at some point, that temple is within. And it's less about us praying, like, the vertical analogy is not great, us down here praying up, but it's rather us praying in and how deep we could go in and how true and down we could go, like, you know, that echo from the voice, like, that voice from below. These are just thoughts that are coming from, I really, we should move away from materialists, I think, but it's still very hard to do that. Yeah, and I think, I think that's the, you know, we talked about this before with dogma, right? Dogma is too bad for him. It's making a noun, something it shouldn't be, right? It's dogmatic thinking, to your point, Pastor Paul, I think that's the, that's the real problem. But this, this goes back to what is dogma? Dogma is an idol, right? And you can't get rid of it. I like the, the sort of Catholic conception, right? It says, get little lights along the path. So you need the little lights along the path, just you can't stop there, you can't get stuck there. You see that in the Lord of the Rings, don't follow the lights. So you got to stay on the path. The lights are there, they're good, but you got to move past them. You've got to, right? And that keeps the idol of the light out of the picture. It makes the light into an icon, into something that's pointing the way or opening up to something bigger. And that I think is really where that is. I think dogma is the same. That's what dogma is to me. It's just idolization of something that need not be, but you can't do without it. You can't undo it. But it's your relationship that matters. It's your relationship to the thing that determines whether or not it's an idol or an icon. And that means Jerusalem might be an idol for some or an icon for others, right? It's because it's their relationship that matters. It's not, it's not the materiality. And that's where the materialism gets pernicious. It's like, oh, well, this material is bad or, oh, you know what it is? Dogma is a function of the church. So if we just get rid of the church, people won't be dogmatic anymore. Of course, they tried that, right? And then it didn't work. And now all the same people who said that are like, oh, they're scientific dogmatists. Well, the dogma is in the people. It's got nothing to do with the material. That's what happens when you're a materialist. You're primarily focusing on material either as the thing you can control or the thing that is controlling you. And you have little, you know, little choice, right? You kind of pick and choose, well, no, Amazon's controlling me today, but tomorrow I'm going to build a platform that takes over. Right. This may sound, do not take this as a criticism, anyone. Has anyone here actually been a materialist? Oh yeah, absolutely. Yeah. I mean, a proper materialist. There's a reason why I asked this question just because like we can criticize them a lot, but it's like, I know I'm not talking about Mark, Mark, I'm just an exception myself. Like sometimes criticizing materialism is like fine, but if you don't understand how they think, it's very hard to criticize them, I would say. Like trying to step, literally walk them out in their shoes and then you've got their shoes as well. But yeah, yeah, I just find it when, if you can like a philosophical, yeah, I can, I can attack it, but sorry, where am I going with this? Sorry, I know where I'm going with this now. I find that if I'm trying to argue something, I always try and see if I can steal mine as much as possible. Like if I could make the argument and the person who believes it suggests that's 100% I agree, then I'd be fine with making the arguments against it. But sometimes when hearing things here, a materialist I know would go, what the heck are you all talking about? I don't think like this. Don't say anything like this. What are you doing? It's like, because I know how, again, I'm hearing the criticisms and I'm like, many of them are good. Very good. But a materialist will literally not understand a single word you're saying. Literally not a word. Yeah. And it will just like, I agree. But I think Sam did a good job. Yeah, I would disagree. They wouldn't understand a word. They have no choice but to operate with the words that they have. So I would disagree. No, I actually, I think you can make them understand to a certain extent, but then literally the point to get on point to that is that you can't go any further. Because to understand another word, you've had to experience it. That's unfortunate reality of it, or at least a superset of it. But that's what Sam did to me is he said particularity, right? I'm in a particular place, a particular time. Sam is right here. But I think for materialists, they may not even, it may not even think that way, say, because it's also still assuming a very like realist view of like, let's say I'm not sorry to go too philosophical, but universals. So the weirdest ought to be about materialists in general is they have this contradiction usually, where there'll be, there'll be nominalists about universals all the time. But then they'll be like, Oh, no realist about certain things. And it's like your contradiction yourself here. You can't be one or the other. You either had to be, if you're a materialist, you pretty much have to be a realist about universals. So I know people don't know about universals like, Oh, redness or greenness or furriness or hot. I don't know. I'm not hot. It's not universal, necessary, but stuff like that. The quality of something like this is a pen. I will say this has the quality of a pen. I'm not saying the other word because people say, I'll say that wrong. But here's the thing is that the problem is materialism materialist will go to the domilist approach. They always keep saying, Oh, this is just what is this really a pen? Okay. What if I break that? They take the lid off. Is it still a pen? Okay. What if I take the ink? Is it still a pen? It's like all these little questions you ask. And again, where am I going with this question? But the point is like the particular thing is like, yeah, if you go down that route, you can, you get to this idea of like, Oh, this is metaphysical nihilism. This is also neurological nihilism come in there as well. And then all these different forms of nihilism pop up. And I think many materialists don't take their own views seriously. And they have these contradictions, but you can take their views seriously. And it will lead to nihilism of many different forms, metaphysical, moral, neurological. I know I'm doing the philosophical terms. I apologize again. But like, I think sometimes pointing it out, they'll go, yeah, of course, that's fine. What's wrong with that? So Sam Harris talked with Glenn Lowry a couple days ago, which was mostly boring, but the latter half was interesting. Glenn asked Sam to make a positive definition of God that he could believe in, which is always an interesting exercise. I don't know why more people don't ask him to do that. But you know, it was based. What was that? Actually from Glenn, given his backstory. Yeah, yeah. And Glenn said, you know, I'm like a lapsed charismatic, black evangelical more or less. So I know what it's like to be there, but I'm not there anymore. But he was also sort of like, you know, Sam, sometimes when you describe them, it doesn't feel like you're hitting the nail on the head because, you know, I've been there. And when you criticize it, that's not what it felt like to me when I was there. But Sam's, you know, I think his basic point, right, is that religious tribalism is the source of violence, and violence is always a bad thing. And then they always make rules about what you can and can't explore, right? And limits on exploration is bad. But really, spirituality for Sam then is like this arena of possible experience, some of which is good, some of which is bad. And there's a unexplored moral landscape or spiritual landscape of possible experience. And we need to be free to wander around in it to find the best places in it, right. And that's our goal. But when he says that it's very individualist, right, and it's also very therapeutic, right, the goal is to have positive spiritual feelings, right. And it's for me. And I need to explore around to do it for me, maybe you can give me some guide on, you know, what the right direction to go in to help me get to a better place if you've already found a better place. But at the end of the day, it needs to happen in my head. And at the end of the day, I kind of don't really care what's going on in your head. I really only care what's going on in my head. Okay, Sam, well, what if the best place in the spiritual landscape is being part of a community that does not view religion as an individual enterprise, but views it as a corporate enterprise, does not view it as a therapeutic exercise, but views it as a role of worshiping a god. And it has all of these distinctives, such as pointing to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob as four founders of, you know, the same sort of thing, and is willing to, you know, go to fight with other groups should the need arise. What if that is the more pleasant corner of the spiritual arena? What do you do then, Sam? And so I think that he doesn't understand the group based nature of the thing, and doesn't understand that the ones that work best, even by his own definition, do not have that definition of their own self understanding of what they are. And so then what do you do? I think he does understand the group based nature, especially the way that he conducts himself in the social justice camp. He's very aware of how that manifests, and he's manifesting his life in that way. He's taking sides on these issues and not being objective or materialistic about them, been political in many of his stances. As a result, you know, basically choking discourse at the altar of his political and social justice leanings. So he's aware of it very well. He has a blind spot. We all have blind spots. I believe that's where he is. Yeah, I mean, he's deferring to authority and expertise within the structure of university and hierarchies of whatever the pop world leader situation is. And so, I mean, it's defensible for sure, to a certain extent, but that's assuming that all these people are correct, and they're not just, you know, patting each other's backs and, you know, helping each other up to stay in power or whatever. But anyway. Yeah, that's the objective material world view. Right. Oh, I'm objective. I can stand in the middle of these two things, and there's only two of them, apparently. Right. It's all dualism. There's only two of these things, and I can stand in the middle and make this happen. But I think, look, Verbeke and Peterson suffer from the exact same problem. And I think that's the part of the materialism and the individualism. You know, I don't know how they're related, but they're definitely related because you see these things together, right? Well, we've got the beat on this, and so we can speak authoritatively about it, right? They understand groups. They understand that groups exist, but they're lacking in the intimacy. And this is an excellent video on the intimacy crisis that I did with Andrea with the bangs that I know Paul is going to watch soon. You trolled me on my channel, sir, so I'm going to get back at you now. So yeah, that is it. Like, this is what Pagio was talking to Peterson about. Fans are not community, right? Saying communitas three times, John Verbeke, does not make a community. Getting on a platform together does not make a community. But Bridges of Meaning estuary, right? The estuary that is the Discord of Bridges of Meaning is a community. That's interesting. It's on a platform, but other attempts to do the same thing, not all of them, but most of them have failed on Discord, right? And the same thing happens on these other platforms. The platform doesn't make the community. There's something else going on. And if you're a materialist, the platform should make the community. It's like, look, add material and mix, right? Because they have the mixing. They're not denying the upper register. They're just disconnecting it, right? That's the loss of intimacy at that point. They're disconnecting the upper and lower registers and saying, what's primary is this lower register. So yeah, this is here. We acknowledge it, but it's not that important. The relevance realization is all needs to be here. It's down here. And then we can stand on it or we can stand under it, right? We can get moved by it or we can move it with the science. One of the two. That's not working out for them ultimately, right? That's what's failing. And so yeah, there's a way in which they acknowledge these things because you can't not acknowledge them, right? But there's also a way in which they're materialists and they're denying the primacy of the upper register or they're misbalancing the upper and lower register if you want to be really generous about it. But I think that primacy, which is primal, which is the prime mover, which is the thing, right? Which is the most important? Where is the most relevance? It's not in the lower register. It can't be in the lower register because the lower register is subject to this thing called entropy, right? That's the age of decay, right? That you talk about, Pastor Paul, right? That's the age of decay. So you don't want your universals down here because they'll all get destroyed. They'll all die the heat death of the universe. Your universals need to be up here. This is what you need to have in common. Yeah, but what if there are no universals then, Mark? That's the problem. Well, maybe it's a partial joke, but like, what's wrong? Didn't you just make it universal in that statement though, right? It's difficult to make the statement without making an accident. Yeah, but it could be a word game. It's not a word game. We've got full conviction dying here. Go on. I mean, then everything's word games and then you're also back at the same position. Right. Yeah, self-reverential. So, just the same kind of trope that I constantly get thrown into the bus for, but I'll keep saying it is by what standard. That's really where we're at. By the way, I'm glad we're into this argument, but yes, I'm going too nerdy. I should stop this. I understand what you're saying though. I'm kind of playing devil's advocate a bit, but it made my point. The thing that keeps striking me about all this is just that we can't center something that is universal on something that is too particularized, that isn't essential. And it's like, again, in Christianity, the person of Jesus is the source of everything. And so people can rally around the central figure in history that basically was the source of all things and and speaks through his spirit to all people. So there's this part that can pull out every little particularity and diversity throughout humanity across time and pull it together. He's both a person but also not so attainable that he can be owned by anybody except by when he lays himself down and all that stuff. But I don't know how I'm trying to say what I'm saying. Other than that, like, like Vervecky or Sam Harris and all them, I mean, it's noble in that they're trying to find something that brings people together, which is great. But the problem is they're doing it through everybody's individual selves, which that's the issue is we all have to sacrifice something of ourselves to be able to come together. And it has to be something that is not self-interested to something that is corruptible. And we're all corruptible. Jesus was the only one that was I mean, he could have been I guess, technically as a human, but he didn't. And so that's the issue that we're all corruptible. And anytime we try to lead something, we are going to corrupt it. And so I think that's why the that's why he is in the very least in a symbolic sense, as Peterson would probably say, the best thing to rally around why he is the crux of all things. And why that's why it worked. Part of part of what I find interesting in conversations like this going all the way back to to Shazi, am I saying your name correctly? As he is short for Ezekiel. Oh, he's sort of Ezekiel. That's my goal. As far as far back as I go, I am as far back I can go in the Jewish patronomic system. It's a it's a seckel, which I think is probably short for Ezekiel as well. Yeah. What's interesting to me about a lot of these conversations is that we're we're we're trying to go somewhere, whether it's the temple, the tabernacle, the philosophy of trying to get a handle on the upper lower register, we're trying and I don't have better language for it. We're trying to get somewhere. We're trying to go somewhere. We have a sense that where we are right now here and now is not enough. That there is and and it's it's it's a it's a truly strange thing about human beings. And I'm always haunted by that that phrase in the Book of Ecclesiastes that in a lot of the contemporary English translations, they like to translate it. God has placed eternity in our hearts. And I always see that as kind of this this restlessness that we have. And, you know, you see that you see that in Jacob, because Jacob, you know, right right from birth, you know, he's a heel grabber and he's constantly struggling with Esau. And, you know, he's he's there ready to catch Esau when Esau's as as as extremities to sell his birthright for a for a a pot of red stuff. And she's so red in that story is just back and forth. And then of course, eventually, you know, he and Rebecca get into Isaac and put on the skin and get the birthright. And of course, Esau is goes ballistic and runs away. And he's he's trying to get the better of Laban and he tries to get his wives and we're so restless and and we we have an ache in our center. Now, what for? We try all these words on and often I just use glory. Another way of saying is God or everything or the one thing or we just have this ache in us and we're we're drawn to it. And so, you know, we try well, maybe if we can, you know, maybe if we can find the right book. And so in the Renaissance there, if I can speak Latin like the like Seneca could, if my Latin can be as good as as Cicero's and so then we're looking for Latin and we're looking in books and then that that sort of breaks up after the Reformation. And now maybe if we can get to the bottom of this material reality and that will be the way to to to and you just want to stop the human race and say, can you pause and ask yourself where are you trying to go? Even the fact of using the word where is it's not exactly a where but that's part of it. It's not exactly a when and and is it a who? I mean all the romantic notions are maybe it's a who and so if I find that that who that will that will completely, you know, that I will completely fall in love with. So and and I find that this just stalks us because we are all we're all knowing that we're trying to get to some place together. But if we just stop us and say no no exactly what are we doing here? And and and is this a communal thing? Is this an individual thing? Is it? So that's that is my little I think this this brings up continuing with your story of Jacob. I think it's an individual thing but I'll get to why the estuary in the group is important. But Jacob after all the turmoil you're discussing, he you know he passes his family he's getting everyone ready for the big meeting with Esau when he's coming back there's going to be this big war and after you could assume everyone's very nervous everyone's very tense. He goes out and you know he goes out to go out he leaves the family behind and goes alone and some of the sages say that he went to pick up like these like small little these small pots that he left behind. But if you think about it doesn't really make sense that he's risking all his family to go back to his pots but potentially it could be these pockets of guilt these wrestles that he's dealing with. He's like I lied to my dad I tricked my brother this whole thing with uh with with Laban what am I doing? And then suddenly at you know before before it's daytime in this little hour of the night this wrestle starts and and the who is because if he's really fighting an angel why is he not losing? And then he if he knows he's like why is he asking for a blessing? And he gets told like you know this is your name and it's almost like looking in the mirror and saying who am I? What am I doing? And only then does the name change to Israel and when you're asking like what are we doing perhaps you know this is part of that wrestle and the the wrestling is to eventually come out of there knowing that you know your name has changed and you're in your new you in your new garments. Now he ends up limping he goes off limping and we as as religious Jews we don't eat that part of the body but that's that's another thing to remind ourselves of this constant wrestle. There's this constant uh unease but that unease is ultimately allow you to to in a certain way that unease is restful. It allows you to constantly be in this cycle of conversation and and and and and moving forward in evolution. So I do think it's a who but I think we we get to there as a collective and and like groups like this allow us this is like uh broadcast wrestling right? So you could call it circling uh but this is our us allowing to take our ideas some of them die in the process some that come back some of us walk up limping or or hurt by the other person but these allow these people here to die here and we emerge not all new Israelites but all of us is our new characters. Yeah what strikes me about what you were just saying is that I I don't I appreciate all of that and and what through all of that is kind of our child status before God in that it's what are we doing as part of it but what really catches me is the child question of why the insistent why am I doing this? What is the reason? What why am I here? What why am I going through this? Why does the world exist? Why do I have this relationship? I mean it's it's that very yeah it's and that cuts through all the different things. That stupid little why that can really annoy you can't it? Why why why it's like you're a four-year-old. I'm actually on a little journey to re to revisit my why and make sure the why is still consistent because I came across new information I have a I guess another process to kind of go back and validate maybe that that why or something to that effect and so that's something that that I find really interesting and I really liked how Jesse you broke that out and the importance like the the little fights right I can say this often um I think anytime I've had a conversation on here and anytime I've had a conversation on my channel MeaningForge I walk away pretty I don't see broken but a little messed up right because I learned something you know I'm exhausted but I'm also energized by that because that is a sign I think that you're doing the right thing you have to let the old things die so yeah that that ties together right that that idea that there's distributed cognition out there we're not doing it alone because we can't we're not you know this is bigger than us whatever whatever created us whatever we're whatever wherever that why is located and maybe that's a t loss right maybe maybe John Vervicki doesn't understand what the big deal in t loss is but I think that's it like what is this t loss yeah it's a good question what's going on with t loss all right but we need that distributed cognition to understand the t loss because the t loss has to be bigger than us like just basic Aristotelian logic here okay not going out on a limb right so what what is yeah what is that where is that what do we do about that how do we wrestle with it uh because we can't do all the wrestling by ourselves right we're just not smart enough we're not big enough we're not good enough and and we do you know James to your point we do have to burn off the dead wood and you know when we're doing that that's painful and if you have to burn off a lot of dead wood to change your worldview you better have people around you to help you right to help you with the recognition is it the right stuff to burn off or should I keep so how much should I keep how much should I get away what should it look like when I'm done like that's the that's the transformation and while I'm doing that I need I need people to support me like I can't just do that I'll be in freefall and and that's why I think people don't take transformation seriously enough it's a big deal it's a really big deal slow transformation maybe not so much but if you if you're if you're going through something maybe it's transform or traumatize and you need people to help you with that you need that distributed cognition you need people to lend you their agency while you're going through the process right you need people to help orient you while you're in the process and on the other side of the process you need all that you can't get you can't do do this stuff as an individual unconnected by yourself with your fans or whatever that's not that's not going to cut it so one thing about the why question that I find that is that it's at least means multiple things um I remember reading this is years ago when Richard Dawkins was saying like well may plus ask the question why what they mean is actually what I'm like I should know they don't what he was explaining is like oh what what caused this thing or how was this came about and stuff like this but the thing is when people ask this why question there are these at least at least two different ways of looking at it there is the um the means end relationships like okay um why did this happen well it was we were trying to achieve this goal like okay that's fine the other why is like an intrinsic why like oh the why is the intrinsicness of it itself in itself so now I've gone full on canty in here apologize so I've gone for a hypothetical imperative a categorical imperative but the better way of putting this is similar there's always these like least a duality sorry sorry mark um there is kind of at least a dualism could be trialism could be infinite any on top but like there's okay there's it there's this means ends relationship with why and it's like why do we want to achieve this goal I want to achieve this end and it's like okay but why do you want to achieve that end and that thing could be oh I want to achieve this end I'm going to achieve this end it's like it could be infinite series or the other one is like okay or another better question is why or what is it they always people put this to Martin Luther Pesciaco um I would if I knew the world was ending tomorrow I'd still plant this cherry tree today because it was a good thing in itself or apple tree or whatever the phrase is um and there's a thing is like why is it good because it is good in itself not because it's going to achieve a goal but because it's good in itself and they are very different whinesses to them so this is the thing I find a lot the time when people I know it's like making distinctions but I find making distinctions is so useful to help me clarify concepts because if you muddle them up you start making you sloppy thinking but it's also it's not good for yourself not good for your own practices not your own habits or anything like that like for instance if you've got a problem in your life like asking why do I have this problem it's like okay which why is it like okay you could say oh I've got a bad had a bad day and that's why I'm a bit grumpy today or not feeling very well it's like yeah but then the question is why aren't you doing anything about it or why do you want to why is this an acceptable behaviour or something like that or the other problem is like if you're trying to solve a problem it's like a good good example of this some people may know it's called the xy problem and if you've ever been on a help desk or a call center or asking people questions people will ask like okay I've got this thing in my bob and I want to do why would you do you do it to achieve y and it's like this problem why it's like okay so you have this thing mobile x to achieve y and the question is that's what and the customer will go I want to do this and it's like you have to ask them the question's like so why do you want to achieve y in the first place and this and they'll get but yeah but I'm and they'll get angry at you and they'll go like no no I want to use x to do y can you tell me how to do it I'm like why are you trying to do y because it might be x is not the right approach to begin with they see they've got a hammer and they think oh everything's in hell but and so I'm a bit rambling here but it's it's kind of like look the y-ness is easy and it's like which y is it and why yeah I think I mean well I mean I'll just take my position on this that uh why is easily answered in um I would say the catechism Westminster shorter catechism what's the chief end of man to glorify God enjoy him forever how do we not do that contained in the scriptures how do what do the scriptures teach the duty of God requires of what the duty is required of man so that why if it is constantly in your brain as the why you operate it all why suffering is important for the glory of God alone and so all of the distinctives although difficult as they may be if you offer them to God and accept your suffering or difficulty because of the glory of God not yourself God not yourself then you're no longer in the situation where you must somehow knuckle under and achieve what you think is most important today um now that's a real christianese answer I'm sure it's you know and I think pvk would say hey you know the Westminster shorter catechism is way outside most people's purview in here but at the same time I'm just happy there's another reformed guy around yeah I think we're alone over here it's a tough one yeah um but you know it's I it's simply put and I find it to be um one of the most valuable easily accessible um directions for those who may be wrestling with the idea of why are we at all here with a purpose what is what's going on and where can we find the answers and that's that's why those are so useful and that's yeah it's one of those things that you're right it is very christianese and it doesn't it it basically articulates the structure and and points to a whole bunch of things to read to try and reference and tease out what those details and particularities are which I think is what most people are hung up on and that's the pursuit though right isn't that worthy in itself the pursuit it's it's uh if you can instill that that pursuit or that worthy pursuit in someone when they are asking these questions then they'll in my opinion God you know God breathes scripture being special revelation when they pursue this meaning it will be revealed in time because it's very special literature it's not it's not something like um even Plato we're talking about something that cuts and divides so pointing someone that direction has a profound impact and those who are in rebellion will rebel and it'll be rough for them but at the same time um it's also comforting uh to know that we have a codified word from God to meditate upon and so if someone's asking those questions point them in this direction I you know it is simplistic but but I think that's its beauty I'm just curious how you got to that why though like did you just wake up one day and like that was the appropriate answer to your question you know like well I'm asking it because like you know yeah there's a lot of christianese in there but like what about the the person like myself like say I don't know a year and a half ago where you would bring that up and it would just be like that makes zero sense to me and makes no sense as to why I should even do that you know so like I wonder because to me it's what's under your answer which I don't know for me there's there's there's something that motivates somebody to ask the question why and then your answer is like you said to glorify God but it's like well yeah but what happens before that that. There's also a question about why glorify God seriously I mean like clearly I'm the weirdo in this chat but the asking that why you can ask it forever you can ask it and ask it and ask those questions because here's the thing it's beautiful to ask those questions you can keep going on forever like there's an unending stream of questions you keep on asking and there won't be or sometimes they don't even have answers. Right I agree Bill like so there's a there's a this like old a trope where like dude comes into the room and he's like new to recovery his life's burned to the ground and it's like like he's standing there asking why why do I have to be an alcoholic why me why why why and it's like it's like standing there watching your house burn down and wonder why why me why is my house burning down it's like it doesn't matter at this point just put it out and that's that's what I'm wondering like where the question I don't know I don't know I understand it like sometimes it's not a good answer to ask the question why like sometimes especially for many people asking questions isn't the best answer you should just do just do it get on with it like you already know the answer to it you're just procrastinating at this point. It also gets to the to the fundamental and foundational reasons to as to as to why ask why why are you asking why what's the reason for being how do why do you at all operate every day standing before your mirror and operate as though you have any purpose now let's investigate why you've even asked me why right where there's me it's not nihilism it's not a vacuum it's not flat you have so much to yourself and to your meaning the fact that you're asking the question and in my in my belief of providence the fact that people are here on the call has substantial meaning and has reasoning enough alone to investigate the reasons why sorry I'll stop preaching. That's really fine. How are you able to ask why if there's no why doesn't make any sense right this is what what PBK was talking about earlier right like there's a drive somewhere that's causing us to ask the why and maybe there's no way to know where that's coming from but it's clearly there because there is a why to be asked unlike you know Lawrence Krauss would say there are only how questions right or whatever this is crazy if there are only how questions we wouldn't have come up with the word why in our language like it wouldn't be an option to us yeah and and my family how questions why would you even make the statement that there are only how questions but go for it sorry sorry Richard no no problem and like the thing Mark you said that the two us or maybe the thing pushing the why does have to be bigger than result because I think of Susan Blackwell talking to Jordan Pierce and and here they go right down to why do I get up from bed in the morning and they run to the hypothetical of okay this person doesn't want to get out of bed and what do they do and all Susan says and it's so naive of her I think is that she said oh eventually they'll have to go to the bathroom and eventually they'll get bored of their little lives and they'll go be productive and it's like there is nothing in reality that says that has to be the case and there are many many many many counter examples to that where people lay in bed and they have no meaning and no why and they're either positively and put the rest of their life or they the worst case scenario is like they end their lives and what stops that is people like Jordan Pearson who will go around exercising demons from people right it's not some simplistic well-being narrative it's not some dull, dying, secularistic religion it has to be something big and meaningful right I think I'm cut out but yeah. Chad if I may interject like I get your question man I think that we cannot have a religion without a transformation like you cannot have like a simple bite-sized like you enter into the frame and that's it you take the pill now you're out of the matrix I think that the point of religion is is transformation so it's natural that there is a language barrier there where you have to actually enter into the picture and it's the same for everyone it's not that there are people who are naturally in tune with the word of God it doesn't come naturally to anyone. I would say that we're discussing when we're talking about why and we were giving this Christian answer I mean less about the commandments and more about you know religion offers a mode of being and if we're in that mode of being and where you know Jordan Pearson will talk about being aligned if we're in that mode of being then the why becomes more apparent because we are now functioning in this world now it's very hard to get aligned and these different modes of being or these different operating systems they are infusing meaning into the mundane or into the day-to-day actions so whether it's respecting your parents or being a good neighbor or all the linear things you want us to do these are constantly giving us the framework to realize and understand the why now if we're looking at all this just from a materialist perspective and going back to this again the why starts to disappear starts to dissipate and if we sort of need to again put ourselves in a certain reality and allow ourselves to be and some of it has to be done with ritual someone has to do with modes of being but if we're in that reality then the way we look at the world back to this matrix if we take this pill and build the simulation around us then we could then move through the simulation and see things with a purpose but we need to I guess in a certain way keeping with this analogy realize that we're in a religious matrix to then see things the way neo does but as long as we're like ignoring that we're not going to see the pattern but if we're in it and that's a sort of beautiful thing about the matrix that they were tapping into in the first movie the other two were there disaster but they were tapping into a certain truth over there which is there is this pattern that we could be tapping into but you need like you know his running after the right rabbit and only getting to that answer at the end is because he only then realizes that this this he's looking at this pattern so up until that point he really can't ask why and he doesn't realize that he's the one now we don't believe in the one as in like you know we're our own little our own little jesus but rather that we as a we when we realize that are in ourselves and then again at peterson we grow to our family to the neighborhood to the community to the city so these are things that like modes of being that if aligned we realize the why and if we realize the why is the collective we could move we were a very powerful force and this force one one manifestation of it for example would be the you know the declaration of independence right so this is a collective getting together all the way manifesting it to on the money it says in god we trust right this is like this is amazing if you took it from that perspective how far religion has come right to like have that printed on the money is crazy but but you know we're at a we're at a different point in history now where we're looking sort of to get the collective again to you know raise our voice where we could manifest again this collective into a truth into a pattern again yeah if you're if you're trying to orient on material you run into the entropy problem right as discussed earlier and then the entropy problem maybe you can rally people around the material for a while right maybe that'll work for a little while but the entropy is going to get you and so you lose your universality you lose your your absolute reckoning right instead of your dead reckoning you lose your absolute your absolute measure you need both you can't you can't pick one you need them both and the materiality really throws you throws you off of that and what's your choice well you can you can manipulate it yourself right you can or you can get together with people and manipulate it right and then then that's it right but that's not that's not that's not that's not spirit and spirits would build community right the spirit of bridges of meaning is what builds bridges of meaning not the technology the technology enables it certainly helps but it's not what builds it it's not what makes great conversations not just like this but i mean bruce and i were literally talking about this very subject while you guys started the live stream didn't realize it right so there's something going on there is it the zeitgeist is it you know i i don't know but this whole enablement in this estuary style conversation and what is what is an estuary right it's the acknowledgement that there's saltwater and there's freshwater and what are you doing you're re-enchanting the world by saying well there's not just saltwater and freshwater there's a space in between where things mix that's re-enchantment that's re-inflating reviving the world adding complexity adding some complexity so that you get out of this strict materialism because you have to bridge the gap and peterson you know and i think peugeot said this to him you're like you're like standing on two islands and those two islands are moving further and further apart it's like yeah that's a problem but if you re-enchant the world you connect them back together and materialism has a problem with intimacy and conflict because it says things like well what we really want is no conflict because that will give us happiness or something something equally banal and and devoid of meaning right and and purpose and all that stuff but but the conflict is in the entropy because if what you're moving towards decays why are you wasting your time moving towards it that's the heat death of the universe argument right there that's why the nihilism is always there right and it's that inability to deal with conflict as such that's the intimacy crisis i can't get intimate because i don't know how to resolve conflict and my argument is you don't resolve conflict you accept conflict not any old conflict but you accept a conflict you say i'm going to be submitted to this or subject to this and this is going to be subject to me and i'm a terrible person you don't want to be subject to me but right we're all making sacrifices here right and and that's what revivifies the community is this subject subject relationship i'm subject to you you're subject to me there's no object there's no object here we're persons we're connected together we're not individuals we're persons who are connected together who are subject to one another and subject to whatever that higher common good is and that's very important you can't have a common good if you're not subjecting yourself to the same thing and that's where the petersons and the verveckis and the sam harris's of the world get it wrong because they're not and subject to that thing they're just avoiding conflict it was so interesting to watch joey and peterson and um john mclawyer sort of go down the individualist route and kind of say is this really where we're going you know i kind of like this thing and i if i had my way i would keep going that way but for everything they see that's not the way it's going and it seems like this community is not going that way either and so maybe we have more in common with the works so all right i'm gonna i'm gonna close this up at the top of the hour so quick lightning round takeaways from this conversation that y'all have or any last thoughts that's fine intimacy is really important see my video with and you with the banks and check out my youtube channel navigating patterns where i talk about this with manuel i released that yesterday so what was the name of the channel again troll i know i can do troll i just need to get it out there so could could the y be something like because god knew that we whatever god seems to be knew that we would get such great meaning and joy out of the participation with it even in the worst of times because supposedly we only have this one chance to do it this small window and to get to know other people and to share the participation of say the glory whatever that is whatever that is right it seems death is a part of the story you need to die first before you're resurrected in your life i'm not dead yet i'm only mostly dead i'm getting better so martin buber talks a lot about the i-thou relationship and how a lot of what we're talking about and that why or that participation between recognizing the other that's really where a lot of the conversation is happening and that could be between two people but that could also be between this whole group you know the i-thou it makes it way through zoom screens and it makes its way through technology like as long as we feel that we're you know that presence is there then you are and and as long as we're open to each other then we're recognizing our own each other's glory and that within itself is is a lot of the why and like you know maybe the word again categorize it but like the reason everyone has a smirk on their face is why because they're feeling that everyone's moving towards something and you know perhaps to be a you know discuss and discover it in the future but i appreciate all the all the eyes and all the vows in this room so thank you even the the like relation with the other as you're saying like once i was able to um more engaged with with working to grow with other people what's interesting is when when i'm able to look at at my past and like uh like to really look at it and meditate on on my past and how like life has completely changed all these different things is happening is happening 39 years it's incredible and then like to see to kind of have compassion and um forgiveness even for that dude you know and then that helps me as a move forward to help the others more rightly and i think like that's where a lot of the intimacy is i think we have to be willing to really honestly look look inside look at ourselves in order to sometimes like a wise friend of mine says chad if you want to be let off the hook you got to let others off the hook you know if you want to get off the hook you got to let others off the hook and the only way i'm able to do that is if i can look at things honestly and and look at how whatever god seems to be seems to completely obliterate what i think is reality and just something that's really incredible all right any any last thoughts obviously you guys can continue in the stream and those of you are in the in the discord this kind of stuff happening my own little plug this kind of stuff happening stuff's happening this kind of stuff is happening on the bridges of meaning discord and so if you want to participate in these conversations whether or not i'm streaming it you can just hop in and you can almost always find you know some of these characters and lots more who are more than happy to tell you you're wrong or agree with you or or do whatever so so thanks for thanks for thanks for stopping in guys and i appreciate it so take care so i i never quite know how to end these things so i i ended that and and there's the cliff dwellers up in so yeah thanks for joining me and again that was from the bridges of meaning discord server and i'll probably keep playing around with this just starting a shortish video and then maybe by virtue of the shortest video gathering a few people to discuss it or obviously the conversations go different places and they they they morph in other places the link to the bridges of meaning discord server is down below anyone can join just don't get yourself banned if you get yourself banned then you can't come into the conversation is quite quite as well you can still participate in the chat room so take care folks thanks for thanks for watching and i'll post a an audio version of this on the podcast as well because i know some of you have been asking for it so