https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=GE5uWYyGMLQ

 Hey, this is Paul and I've got about an hour before I've got an appointment. By virtue of how the calendar worked out this week, I didn't do a rando, so I thought maybe I'd take this hour, which would usually be a rando slot. Just did this camera yesterday a little bit. Should usually be a rando slot, but thought that I might jump into here and see what's going on. People usually pop in. There's a whole bunch meeting in the other room. See if anybody wants to talk. Watch the, rewatch some of the rebel wisdom. Zubin Zidanea, is that his name? Thought about the fact that why am I interested in David Fuller's take on a lot of this stuff? Because in a lot of ways, his institution, which is news media, my institution, which is religion, and the medical institution, they're all sort of facing similar things. We've got a couple of takers. We've got Father Eric and we've got Joseph. See who's first to camera. Hey, there's Father Eric. How are you? Oh, doing all right. Good. Got a little bit of time this afternoon. I've got to talk. I've got to get ready for tonight, the youth group. Okay. Okay. How are things going? It is bloody beautiful here today. It's above freezing. Oh, man. You just live for days like this in February. Keep those expectations low. There's Joseph. How are you? Good. Sorry, my camera wasn't working. No, that's okay. That's okay. Yeah, we've had this particular weather pattern keeps us dry here in Sacramento and warm, so it might even hit 70 today. At night, it goes down into the 30s, but during the day goes up into 70s. Can't beat that. Well, we have a Protestant minister and a priest and- Not a rabbi. Not quite a rabbi, but walked into a Discord room. What should we ... I've only got about an hour, and I thought ... I was sitting down and I was thinking about just quick making a video, but I was worried that a lot of the thoughts I had wouldn't fit into that timeframe. I thought, well, I'll jump in here. I never jump in here in the morning, and we'll see who joins us. Any thoughts on what's been going on or what I put out or anything that you've been thinking at all that you wanted to talk to me about or you wanted to say? I think you're not wrong about Sam Harris. I got a brother who's kind of in that camp, and I get a lot of the same sort of frustrations whenever I have a little, at this point, interreligious dialogue with him. It's like, well, why do you even do anything? Why do you get upset about anything? If you were actually that apathetic, like, oh, my consciousness is actually an illusion, and you can't derive any kind of morality, it's like, well, that doesn't match up with the fact that you go to work every day and have values and get upset about things. So I don't know. I find it really incomprehensible. Yeah. No, that's a frequent thought of mine when I listen to him, and someone just sent me a podcast of his where somebody comes on and talks about recurring intrusive memories, basically, that are probably memories of trauma, probably minor trauma, and he asked, is this something I should maybe get help at seeking resolution from? And Sam Harris' was, well, I find that the best overall thing is to basically to not believe and to disbelieve in yourself. And in other words, the self is the thing that's carrying this trauma. And I thought, now who's the fetist here? Because if someone were to walk into my office and talk to me about that, I would say, well, let's talk about what those memories are. And I would probably also refer him potentially to a trauma therapist to say, you know, I've got one in my church, you know, maybe a little EMDR or something might get that stuff unstuck and you know, you might be okay. But to just kind of, I thought, I know churches that would basically say, well, you're not sufficiently, you're not sufficiently living into your identity in Christ. That would be a certain class of reformed people would sort of lean in in that way. And oh, okay, that's a fair answer. But sometimes things are true and not helpful. Right. And in fact, if the presenting problem is, you know, it's almost it's kind of like the nail in the head video. It's well, maybe, you know, maybe if your arm hurts, see your doctor instead of deciding that the pain that is low that you're experiencing in your arm is a faulty sense of self. Why don't you just maybe see the doctor or maybe take some ibuprofen? And then I ask, well, who's the religious, you know, who's the purely religious person here using a particular metanarrative in order to in order to master absolutely everything? So I don't know. So this was we're talking about this a little bit in the voxer and something that the way I was kind of it has kind of came out. I was framing it was that there's this there's this fundamental tension right between. Science wants it wants to generalize and because it knows everything about and not just science philosophy to write. I mean, and to some extent, philosophy within religion. Right. We want to generalize. Once you undermine, let's say, I mean, you've talked about this, I think, beginning of your second video quite a bit. Well, right. Once you undermine people's subjectivist accounts because, you know, you have because brains are whatever they are. And it's only in their head and it's epistemologically like, you know, faulty. Then you need some way to generalize. The only way to do that is kind of statistically, you know, with redundancy convergence. I mean, all the things that are reiki talks about where you have like multiple senses telling you that this you have to do that because you have no other way to generalize once you say an individual is entrusted. Right. So on the one hand, that has to be the project once you've undermined epistemology. On the other hand, you have OK, say the intuition is coming in. I represented. So Shari was my main interlocutor this morning. So Shari was saying, you know, it's all about love. But like love is the opposite of generalizing. Love is very, very particular. You have to love. You can't, you know, it's about this individual, this moment. It can't be communicated well. You can't generalize. And it's hard to express. It's almost ineffable or limited effability, whatever. And there's this kind of third or middle ground that Harris, I think, is I mean, in some ways, we're all we're all kind of in the middle ground. But on one hand, so Harris, right, he wants the project of generalization and rationality to work. On the other hand, and he says, like, it's your brain is limited. I mean, like you're going to come to experiences and you can't trust them necessarily. And your transcendence is only going to get you so far. Like you can't solve society by it. But like it's still this something. And he doesn't want to dismiss it completely. So he picks this kind of middle ground that's not really so middle. And we're kind of on the other side where we're, you know, but at the same time, right, this is all kind of dependent. This is all conditional on the fact that we psychologize everything. Religion also, right. Like, see, the fact that you're saying who's the religious one here. Well, you're only a part saying that because religion has been psychologized. So it's hard. And yeah, it's hard for me to kind of divorce these things because, like, I see him very much. The problems with his argument are the same problems with, let's say, the coherence theory of truth or whatever, because once it's all in your head and it's all about that's what we're trying to show, then of course, that's the answer. And this is the weakness of coherence, right? Because it does you need some correspondence. There is something in reality. You want to take the nail out of your head. You want to go to the doctor because at the end of the day, you can't just live in your head. And like and he knows that. And he recognizes that to some extent. But it's not that he's more religious or less religious. Religion has decided to find a different balance in this continuum. Basically, I was just listening. A lot of I was just listening. Seekers of Unity, Zevi Slavin, who he had talked with Reveke that I suggested to you about Boober. But he just started a three part series on the history of the idea of mysticism. And he was talking about in the second episode, he talks about the beginning of the 20th century, basically, where like. So you had a process for first, you had nothing. There was no mysticism. The word mist, there was mystical and it was an adjective and you had mystical traditions. And like and it was really it was a Christian or a Greek term that became Latinized and then Christianized. But like it was you had mystical traditions and mystical readings of text, mystical humanics, ex Jesus, then became mystical theology and that would come out of the Greek Mysterion. But it but it becomes the beginning right at the beginning, the enlightenment becomes a noun. You get mysticism as opposed to mystical something. And then it becomes secularizable because it's no longer attached to religion specifically. And they start globalizing it and broadening it to mean other mystical traditions. So like you get Christian like Kabbalism. All right. So like whatever. But you also get in the 19th century, you know, a lot of Indian, you know, mysticism and Sufism begins to be noticed by the British Empire, you know, empires basically and people in those spheres. So this is the reification. Right. This was the like this is the whole Wickenstein's be using of language once you turn that adjective into a noun. It actually allowed it to be divorced from religion and be its own thing. And then it becomes an attack point. This was what the comment that you responded to, Father. That once the goal becomes its own thing, the people who are claiming to be mystical, try to find it within their traditions. They go back to Eckhart and St. John of the Cross and then further back even. And they create like a new hydrography of mysticism. They redefine what it means as a noun and kind of a standalone concept. And then what you get at the beginning of the 20th century with William James and a little earlier in the late 19th century of Schleiermacher is they psychologize the term mysticism. It's now it's about phenomenology and experience. And they do that to protect it from modernity. They do that to protect religion from modernity by saying, you can't criticize my religious experience. Well, this experience is the root of mystical mysticism and mysticism is the root of all religion. It also, of course, allows for globalization, right? Like because now you have a whole cosmopolitan perennialism coming up and all that stuff. But it's fascinating, this history and the way he lays this out, because it really shows. I mean, it encapsulates the long term. Zevi Slavin, is that who you said lays this out? Yeah, Zevi, yeah, Zevi Slavin. Yeah. Seekers of Unity is his YouTube channel and his last three videos for this history. But in a short, I mean, all three of them are the length of one of yours, you know, together, you know, all three of them. And the third one's really just terminology. It's just kind of like the third one's just about like academic study of mysticism, kind of the debate between contextualists who say like you can't divorce it from, you know, Christian mysticism can't be divorced from Christianity. It has to be part of the practice. Like you can't, you know, in the text and all that stuff, Kabbalah can't be divorced from Judaism and the practice. Whereas like the perennialists are the opposite, right? That there is some core here. We can find it. We can accept it. And, you know, instead of tools from it, kind of very Vervecchian. But, you know, obviously, they unlike Vervecchia, I think, right? They do believe that whatever you access and that universal thing in your brain in a mystical experience is, in fact, you know, divine. It's not just some product of, you know, cognition, but some sort. So that is a difference. But so he has these three episodes and this kind of race through 19th century and then basically late 19th century to the academic turn and then the academic turn. But the whole point is that this captures so many different themes and like trends, right, across modernization and enlightenment, especially like the idea that they would. And you see this in Kierkegaard too, right? Or even earlier in enlightenment, but internal private religion versus like external civic religion, right? Where by making religion internal, like private religion internal, you protect it from external critique. You also do other things to it, though, that are not necessarily good for it. And then he points out that so tons of tons of mystics or whatever people who have religious experience push back on this. They say you can't trust mystical experience. It's not about mystical experience. It's not the essence of mystical experience. Eckhart says this very clearly. Like sometimes he says that's not the point. If it doesn't bring you to the love and compassion, like the perspectival knowing of in the world, then you've missed the point of mysticism, essentially. So whatever, it's great. But it's still but I literally just finished watching it like half hour ago, so it's still like percolating. No, that's good. That's that's very germane. That's really helpful. Because you really see, I think, in there sort of the quintessential move of the secular, because the secular does. I mean, the secular develops partly to to handle pluralism has to be dealt with in a certain way, because all of us are aware that there are multiple ways of seeing of seeing the world. But we all need to see the world in one way. We can't have a an integral self and just see the world. I mean, when we watch each other not being able to see the world through one lens, you know, part of what I'm poking at Sam Harris is that, I mean, come on, dude, pick your pick your side. I'd have less complaint if you're over here or over there, but to just say, well, I, you know, I'm married to Joey. No, you're not married to Joey. I think Jared would find that to be a little bit disturbing if I said I was married to Joey. So and so secularity is sort of a way of I think you're right in terms of, OK, how will all of this really foundational stuff be managed? Well, let's let's sort of segment it off in different places and and then we can sort of go on with life. But that going on assumes a deep level of agreement about a whole bunch of stuff that we've sort of put underneath, you know, put behind the curtains. And I think part of what we have now is that, well, the curtains, the curtains have frayed and they're coming down and the level of unity is no longer able to hold. And so now we're going to have to talk about this stuff again. But there's a lot we've we've we're going to have to integrate everything that we've done since then. So I definitely going to check out those those videos. They sound very germane to what I've been percolating on. So. And it's good to see Topher in here. For those. I was going to say, for those who I've you know, this is this is common on the Bridges of Meaning Discord, but I don't know if I've ever live streamed the inside of your speaker, your speaker repair shop. So probably not. I was going to add that hopefully, hopefully all we do is have to talk about it. Hopefully, hopefully it's just talk. Intervene. Go ahead. I've been observing Sam Adams, right, and his interactions with other Protestants, especially right. So when I when I first saw him, I'm like, well, he's outside the wire, right? I don't have to worry about him all that much. And I've come to figure out how a Catholic mind and the American Protestant mind might work a little bit differently. And so I've never really like butt heads with him. You know, I disagree with him, but I've never really gotten kind of visceral about it. You know, it's all kind of remained pretty heady. And and part of me is wondering, you know, you talk about how the religious spirit of our ancestors encodes our responses to things in ways that we're not properly able to understand. I think somewhere in the back of a lot of our Trinitarian debates is the religious spirit of the Peace of Westphalia. It was like, we agree on this and we are not going to kill each other anymore. That's right. And all of a sudden, the incomes, the American Unitarians and and you just go berserk back there because you're sensing danger. You know, I think that's very true. And again, when I've made this comment before, when Sam first sort of appeared in our community, even when he just wrote me an email, it's like, you know, I can talk to Buddhists and atheists and I can talk to all kinds of. But if I talk to a Unitarian, suddenly that code sort of wells up, it's like, oh, so, OK, calm down. Let's and and so I mean, that's part of what we've been treading on in this space. And and it's, you know, of course, Jacob came in here in some ways, you know, guns blazing on one hand. Oh, Jesus is really cool. On the other hand, Paul of Tarsus. What a fraud. Whoa. Rup. Credit to Sam, though, in that he's both probably the type of person and has worked to be the type of person that can have those conversations in a way that maintains the friendships. Right. A lot of people will come in and try and have those those really tough conversations at the expense of the group that they're talking to. And Sam doesn't do that. Jacob, he sometimes did that a little bit, but Jacob always reeled it back in to he. Jacob always made it very clear that he could play both sides of not the argument, but he could play both the I'm going to be very intense and I'm going to be not very intense. And that helps people, I think, separate the argument from the person where people who are always on and always very intense. That. Are they the idea or are they the person? It's harder to figure out which which one you're dealing with there. And people like dealing with people they don't like dealing with manifestations of ideas disguised as people. Yeah. And Sam had to develop all of those skills because he, for the most part, has been living as a Unitarian in a Trinitarian world. Hey, there's Cassidy. Hi. It's always good if at least one woman joins the live stream. I'm the token lady. I'll play the part. So I, you know, and I think I think you're right, Joey, and that Sam had those skills. And I mean, Sam even confesses now that he gets a little nervous and understandably so. You know, Calvinists did not tolerate Servetus terribly well. But the you know, so the Calvinists understood that Servetus would have been killed in France or Italy or Spain just as easily in Geneva. You know, it's kind of the OK, well, we'll all agree on these things. And I think you're I think that I think that's a great point, Father Eric, that along comes the Unitarians. And it's like, oh, that's why Unitarianism has always sprung up in America. Right. Because we've got laws against that sort of thing. You know, religious violence. That's true. That's true. But that's it's deep. It's deep in terms of the coding of America as well. And it's it's interesting, you know, right now, for example. There's often for Americans, you know, Canada is just kind of America with a queen with different money. But, you know, lately, Canada has been, oh, oh, well, this is interesting. Don't have a First Amendment. I guess that First Amendment means something that some pretty deep coding that got in. And it's and it's enlightenment coding. I mean, Christian should fess up to that. What what levels does freedom live at? Does it live at the right to move where you want to move? Does it live at the right to have the job you want to have? Does it live at the right to say what you want to say or say what you think or say what you don't think? Like what which one of those things is the is the straw that breaks the camelback on free or not free? I mean, it's probably not that simple and not that one dimensional, but. It's a question. That's why the institution that actually seems to do handle these questions the best is seems like the court systems handle that based on the Constitution. And that's an opponent processing kind of hacking it out rather than strictly theoretical. Well, in courts. And I was thinking so I was I was watching the the rebel wisdom video this morning, rewatching it with David Azuz. I never heard of the guy. He's a doctor that's on YouTube, talks about covid. He was just on rebel wisdom. But, you know, I thought why, you know, why? Why does David Fuller continues to impress me in terms of the lines that he walks? Well, today I figured out part of the reason that he what one of the things that he and I have in common is that he's trying to walk this. Authentic individual versus institution line. And and he's doing it sort of in this new media space, and he's asking questions about, well, once once PVK has a YouTube channel and I start talking about myself in the third person, I sort of migrate over towards becoming an institution myself. And, you know, Joe Rogan, I mean, that's this whole Joe Rogan controversy, too. Is Joe Rogan an individual or is Joe Rogan an institution? Get big enough. And so the news media has been disrupted by the institutionalization of the authentic individual, as increasingly have as the medical establishment, almost all of our major institutions. What, you know, we we so far haven't had we've sort of had rock star judges. I mean, that Ruth Bader Ginsburg was awfully popular for a while. So but, you know, what if a Supreme Court justice decided to get a YouTube channel and start hot takes on, you know, current events in the news? Impeach them immediately. So there's all these different levels and and and part of what social media has done is sort of that there was OK, you've got. I've been on I've been on radio now a couple of times the last couple of weeks. And every time I do that, it's like, OK, we've got 15 seconds. It's like. We're going to do this in 25 minutes. Really? Twenty five minutes. I'd take two hours. You guys get to hear me talk all the time. I come on here to hear you guys talk. Oh, bunch of bunch of people just just plopped in. So. Have at it. I heard. Yes, I hear you. Yes. OK. It's interesting. I don't know the gentleman in the blue panel talking about what level does freedom exist on. And then, Paul, you got into the are you am I is my organ. Am I an institution, individual, et cetera? And this is something I think Peterson has brought this idea of superorganism. I'm to a certain degree as a human being, I'm a superorganism made up of a bunch of different organisms that we call cells that add up into organs that add up into me as a human being. And then me as a human being might add into a family or a church or a school or an institution. And that to a certain degree gives us a bit of a framework to start working some of those things out. At what level does my heart have a right or my liver? You know, my liver is faulty. I want to replace it with somebody else's liver. Well, does that liver have rights only in as much as it is controlled by my. Individual consciousness as a person, and I don't really have an answer to where that's going, but it's an interesting pathway of thought to start trying to answer some of those questions. What are the rules for these superorganisms, so to speak? That's a that's a really interesting way to to frame it. You know, does my liver have rights? The whole concept would be, OK, well, yeah, go ahead. This is basically an argument the apostle Paul made. Go ahead, divorce your liver. See how that goes. Does your liver have rights? Is that quite quite the right framing? Divorcing my liver would be a bad idea. I kind of like staying in polyamory with my kidneys, though. Liver is a little bad. I've definitely abused my liver. Your liver remains faithful to you to this day. I love we got some open studio vibe going on here in the live stream. I you know, we've got Topher's we got Topher's shop and we've got Chad's workspace there. So I think that's awesome. What are you doing, Chad? What? I'm I'm mixing up some dry fat right now. I'm actually about to clean up. Wonderful. What are you doing? Who are you pissing off now, Paul? Oh, I yeah. Well, I don't know. I've got I had a I had an hour and I was going to sit down and work on some of these ideas. But I thought, well, I don't know if I'd get it all in in an hour. So why don't I turn on the live stream and oh, here's Luke. Let's turn off the camera. Oh, this is what I was hoping for. I was going to ask. I'm requesting like, I guess I'm requesting a sit down between you two guys and I want to hear you guys settle this, the me and Luke, we're going to settle it. Do we do it? Does Luke have a problem with me? Has Luke been going off on me on the Voxer? Is this where I'm supposed to talk? I don't know. I just I just came in because you were praising everyone for showing their workspace, so. I just wanted to show your base. I just wanted you to tell me good job, Paul. Oh, Luke, you know, you know, you know, you have a special place in my heart. No, I don't. Chad, you are. Yeah, you said that this morning that you wanted me and Paul to talk, but I'm not even. Sure about what? So I mean, we always talk about things in the box. We were talking about the Sam Harris stuff and. I don't know, it was, I mean, it was fine. It was good. I sometimes. Yeah, I don't know. I don't know what Chad was wanting me to say. Sorry. Yeah. I think I would just wanted to chime in. You brought up Paul and the issue of freedom. I mean, it's always I think it was the most difficult part of moving to Christ and understanding the easy yoke. So that freedom that we wish to have really is a freedom that most people wouldn't want when it comes to being subjected to your own heart. And so the bond servant that we are to Christ is is the lack of freedom that I would desire when the freedom that I once pursued was was actually slavery. So I find it to be a somewhat silly pursuit to pursue my own desires of freedom, despite my own best ideas. Now, what you said, I think, is was pretty coded in Christian ease. And I think a lot of people who aren't Christian might not understand. Can you flesh that out a little bit more? I mean, the idea that you don't really know what you want, you think you know what you want and that in the ultimate freedom would be pursuing what I want. OK, but that but those wants typically don't end the way that you had once envisioned them, and even if they do, there's no end to you wanting more. And they'll eventually end in a sort of lackluster or maybe less than satisfying way. So your never ending pursuit of freedom to get what you wish to to achieve will lead to usually a lack of complacency or anxiety or something like that, because the outcome maybe wasn't what you had once desired. So that freedom to yourself is its own sense of slavery to your desires. I'm pretty sure we could legislate freedom from negative outcomes. That's something we will work on. I definitely value the freedom to pursue destroying myself, though. I think that that's OK. I think like it's a strong and good value to have because I need to know the boundaries. And not everyone's boundaries will be the same. I mean, the church has gone round and round with respect to alcohol in that. For some people, alcohol is not a self-destructive thing. For other people, it is. And so then you get this you get this framing issue of well, at what level of how does society as a whole sort of back to the secular thing, how does society as a whole modulate that? And of course, the United States had this big experiment in that and prohibition. And basically the country decided prohibition was a failure. And we're currently having similar conversations with respect to other chemicals that we ingest in our bodies. So. But not all chemicals are the same. Alcohol is one thing. Pod is another thing. These psychedelics are different heroin. You know, I I forget the doctor that Peterson had on posted. Esther, of course, pointed me to it, my source of all things, culture war. You know, Canada was giving away fentanyl to homeless people because they wanted it. It's like. Wow, you know, that just wow, doing that for a while. That was part of the San Francisco lockdown as well, was they put them up in hotels and they supplied them with all the drugs and alcohol. Not that they wanted, but that they thought that their current consumption levels because they wanted, you know, this part of the reason people don't go to homeless shelters is because there's rules, well, they needed them to be inside because they rightly or wrongly thought COVID was a grave enough threat. And so in order to get them to go inside, they gave them whatever drugs that they were used to taking. The funny thing is, is that they're probably all safer outside. Like most of the homeless people I know, I don't know a single homeless person with COVID, they're all living outside, soaking up the vitamin D, all the fresh air. But really, at some point, this whole conversation of freedom and constraint is kind of. I mean, that's the base conversation almost at everything in law versus spirit and what it means to be really, I mean, I was trying to think about how to respond without making this too esoteric, because just to use a practical example, the drug one, well, I mean, I can lean pretty libertarian when it comes to drugs and decriminalizing drugs, but that only works when you have a cultural consciousness or a zeitgeist or Lartre, like you could say it this way. Let's do it this way with the Verveky incarnation and body incorporation. You need like a cultural body that can handle that freedom. If you don't have a cultural body that can handle that freedom, I mean, it'll go crazy. Like, I mean, you don't want to give a bunch of unhealthy people. Just free access to drugs or housing or whatever without responsibility, it'll destroy them, however, there are cultures that I think like Portugal has done this. Uruguay or Paraguay has done this. I think there are some cultures or even like I saw there was this really radical prison reform in one of the Scandinavian countries. But what you can't do is take this personal application in a certain cultural context and then universalize it and say it's going to work. You can't make that that spirit that manifested in a way that worked and then universalize it and make it a law and apply it to all people at all times. It doesn't work. On what level would it work? Is, I think, one of the questions, because if it works on a Scandinavian country, which has a population of what, like four million, similar populations in Chicago where I'm at, but I don't think it would work on that level, like at what level of heterodoxy do you need? How big the population? And I think those are some of the questions that need to be hashed out. Does it work? And then where what are the specifics behind where it works? Well, but this is the problem, though, is I don't think it's just a matter of scale either, and I don't think you can ever formalize it. I mean, this gets into why I'm a personalist versus like. And I think personalism is like the opposite of thinking in this machine mechanistic mode is like we want to we want to try to systematize and strategize how to how to bottle. The spirit is what Chad the alcoholics called it once. And I don't think you can. The spirit moves where it wills, which doesn't mean that there's not discernment and wisdom and how to handle it. But I don't think you can make a lot to figure out how to get certain outcomes. Right. The biggest problem with that is there's the unintentional consequences. Yes, what we think will happen doesn't always work out in reality. And it's really hard to understand what those outcomes actually are going to play out outside of systems, especially when we're talking about laws or economics or certain things that are supposed to make life better. And there's a certain value in freedom. I mean, I'm American. You know, I'm freedoms ingrained in my ideologies and what I think. I also think there's a huge responsibility in that that we often don't recognize. And this idea of I have the freedom to destroy myself if I'd like. Well, surely you do, but you have to recognize that that freedom that you. Are, you know, utilizing is not just impacting yourself. There are all of these unintended consequences for other people. And I mean, if we're talking about drug use, especially that it's often seen as a. Single issue of substance abuse, but we are anybody who has a family member or a friend who struggled with that knows it does not stay isolated within the behaviors of which the person who is taking them. And we all have a responsibility to deal with that on our own individual way. But outside of some moral code that keeps us grounded in something good, of putting life into the world and not death. Personal freedom is scary. And I don't think nobody I don't think anybody truly wants full freedom for every individual. So this is where I want to bring in this concept of the container. Right. So we don't want to make rules and laws to constrain people. Right. But we want to have the spirit. Right. Because the spirit is the thing that will move us in the right direction if we let it. But then there needs to be a place for the spirit. Right. And that's why container ideas handy. Right. Because instead of imposing laws, you create a set of affordances that reliably allow something to manifest. And when you start thinking in that way, instead of imposing things upon people, then you you gain more flexibility and you give people the space for self-expression. And I think that's where where the attention needs to go. And I think that that's helpful because it nicely bridges the. I mean, a lot of the addiction talk was first simply assumed that these substances sort of completely hijacked the individual and took away their agency, whereas, you know, to go back to Grim Grizzz and his Rats of Nim, addiction comes where there is a breakdown of the container, a breakdown of wholeness. And this is this is in some ways analogous to this amazing clip. I really should clip it out and put it on my own Vanderclips channel that Karen had in a video not too long ago where basically a cancer doctor was making the point that you've got these cancerous cells. If you put these cancerous cells into a healthy body, where all the other cells are talking, the cancer cells don't multiply. And in fact, they die. But you put the cancer cells into a body where the cells are not talking well with one enough. In other words, the body itself isn't functioning well. That's when the cancer begins to basically just just take over. In other words, addiction and the individual is is is connected to the health of the individual. And that's where I think Manuel's container and, you know, can mention Mark in there because he always talks about the container, too, so. I really appreciate this talk about the container. I'm connecting your video that you posted today, Paul, where you were talking about the the attention and its connection to Agape. And this other broader conversation that's happening in various different areas of this corner where people are kind of making this effort to to develop whatever they call practices or whatever, this effort to bottle the spirit and how there is this this sort of obvious truth that there are things that work that help us to sort of observe ourselves and that that self observation is necessary. And yet the description of sort of the healthy container or the healthy contents of the container, whether that's an individual or a group, is can't be sort of turned into a legal code, even because and there's this some where there's this distinction between like like that. And well, you try to contain the concept with the word you you defeat your purpose. I'm not even sure how to exactly say it. It's not that you defeat the purpose, because like you were I wish I could remember exactly your words earlier where you were you were asking in a hypothetical way for Sam Harris to sort of go ahead and and participate in the conversation. Like at some point you have to accept the terminology loosely enough to have a conversation. At some point we have to accept the sort of trends and truths of the way that people interact and become self aware to say, well, there are some principles that apply fairly universally. And it's important that we recognize that a healthy approach to maybe academic study is not necessarily the same healthy approach to intimate relationship or something like that. There's there are all sorts of different domains of health and personhood and community that that it makes sense to try these different approaches. There's value also in finding the the I can't remember who was talking about the the dock being a place of transition. Like you can be both a land dweller and a seafarer. And so there are these cool docking points. And what what purpose does the docks serve? What are these transitionary languages that allow us to to to go from one domain to the next and make partnerships and trade across these boundaries and participate more effectively as a whole? Anyway, I've said enough. No, it was great. It was great, Shane. It was wonderful. You know, I want to add something about this idea of controlling things. Right. So we want to control things because we have control. That's good, because then we can reliably manifest. So, right. But if we start controlling something in a conversation, then what we do is we we pay attention to it, right, like we feed it, we make it bigger and and thereby have control over us. Well, the right thing often right sometimes it isn't. But often writing is just to ignore it and just let it recede into the background. So it cannot take over what is manifesting. Right. And there's this tension. Right. Because because when I meditate, like a lot of a lot of my struggle in meditation is, oh, like I have this feeling here or this this way of my intention is drawn here. Right. And then and then I have to deal with it. Right. But now I'm in a struggle with with what's happening inside of me. And like when I'm in the struggle, I can't get out of it. And like I am not sufficient. Right. Like I cannot be my own source of getting out of it. Right. So I need to appeal to to something ineffable in order to to have a way to direct my attention where it's not within me, but outside of me so that I can come into peace. And that's that's a little bit the steps that I've been going through. But I see that happening in bigger. Fractal patterns as well. I think you're right on about the control aspect of it all. We're like, I mean, especially in sort of a Western frame, we want control of our lives. We want to create the order and the structures so that we can be our own destiny makers. And if I learn anything in the last five years, it's I am far less in control than I ever like I ever truly acknowledge. And I had, well, I was just going to say about Manuel, this idea of releasing that control to something bigger. And I just had a talk with Chad about this, about AA and that idea of, you know, the 12 steps and all that and submitting something to a higher power in whatever way you can see it, like a lot of way that is super helpful in the processing of these symptoms of sort of these fear mechanisms or these places where we feel out of control, and that can be very helpful in like putting it in somebody else's hands. But I think as a broader culture, as it gets more secular, we've lost the confidence and the belief of something more effable and bigger than ourselves to put control in. And so what do we do? We make more structures. We we do exactly what's on the first three pages of the Bible, of taking good and evil on our own terms and defining that and ruling the world outside of something bigger than ourselves. And if we keep doing that, we're going to get the same result. This has me thinking of the role of responsibility versus control, like I'm responsible for certain things that I don't have control over. And so there's an element of it that is sort of a confession, the same play between humility and humor. I need to sort of detach myself from a mistake in order to be able to laugh at myself, but it doesn't work the same externally. Like, I can't I don't want to like there's a there's a there's a there's a level of detachment that can be dysfunctional or a level of laughing at somebody else's folly that is cruel. And and so responsibility has a similar dynamic in that I am responsible for certain things that no one else is responsible for and I can accept that and own that. But I need to have a healthy understanding that that doesn't mean that I'm in control of it or should be. And so there's there's a weird play of of accepting and owning while holding loosely and not not assuming control as either something that I ought to have or can have. And I there's a there's a strange relationship that I don't even know how to explain, but seems relevant. As you guys are talking, the image that I keep getting in my mind and I don't know how well this will play in this audience is of a soul train line. Now, how many of you are familiar with the idea of a soul train line? It happens at parties where there's a song happening and everybody lines up and one person at a time comes down and they do a dance and they can do whatever kind of dance they want. Some people use it as an opportunity to show off. Some people like myself are less confident, will do something silly to create a laugh. But everyone gets to participate and there is these unofficial control measures because it reminds me of a dance. A dance is controlled. There is a pattern in which you have to come through, but there is also a flexibility in it. You can't just go around. You can't really do a mosh in a soul train line. You can't just hit people and run into them. So there's these. Rules or methods of control, so to speak. But they're not super firm, if that makes sense. Hey, maybe as the no man less legalist here, but there are laws of that mean that we're going back to the drug initial conversation. Right. I think when Lucas talking about it, he's framed it as certain cultures and this has worked in certain cultures, but they're really policies that have worked and they're barely new policies. They're not necessarily inherent in these cultures or like longstanding things. And how like and this goes to Manuel Manuel's point about control. We want control. I mean, he put it as for, I guess, to repeatedly manifest something. But we need policy to generalize. We need policy. For instance, we're all coming from different places. If we want to live together, we need some sort of bare minimum where we can agree that this is the minimum of how we're going to act together and not hit each other in the soul train line or whatever. That's one part of law and the purpose of kind of setting a lower bound, let's say, on behavior or something. Another part, though, is and this, I guess, is why living like the living constitution or for the idea of a living legal system or dynamic legal system is one that has flexibility in it. And that's not setting the bare minimum. That's kind of setting like a norm or a standard that's flexible to either side. It's kind of like the, I don't know, there's the middle way type thing where you have some flexibility, but you have this is kind of the norm we're trying to keep and get to at the end of the day, which kind of is where the courts tend to take us. They tend to try to keep us within certain bounds around those norms, though sometimes they are enforcing the bare minimum. And we can look at both of those frames, I think is useful here, because as long as we're not living in a society where we all we're all sharing the same religion and values and culture and totally homogenous, you're going to have to I mean, this is why the legal system, like this is this whole point of separation church and state as a legal concept is because you needed to bridge across cultures. You needed to be able to generalize as what nice as personalism is. And I'm very sympathetic to that whole project. It doesn't generalize because this goes to my point when we first started, Paul, right, that and Father Eric, right, that there's this fundamental tension between love and personalism and the individual and kind of being able to generalize the things. And that includes making policy and law. And that's just, you know, we have to live in that tension. I think the tricky part comes when you have laws built on laws, built on laws, built on laws where they're not necessarily abolished, but they're adjusted and changed. And you've got all of these different I'm speaking mostly for America because it's it's a very interesting, different system than a lot of other systems. But you have the federal law, which is the minimums, right? But then all these other states have their own individual laws that at least have to meet the minimum of the federal laws. But then they can be different from city to city. And so then you have all of these little intricacies and differences. And then there's this tension and chaos of what it means. And then you have people writing laws who. There are certain places where people can write laws who have never written laws before, get it pushed through, and it has to be, you know, adopted as written. There are some crazy things about how it is, like the idea of it's great. But I think America has scaled so much and it's lost so much of sort of a consistency that it's hard to figure out where those boundaries. I wouldn't I don't even know what Luke means when it really says personalism. So I'm not advocating for that, but there is this certain tension of like, how do you how do you find that place where, you know, you're you're working with a smaller community because there's laws that are being passed for huge swaths of people that have no idea what's going on in the communities and how it'll actually, you know, adapt. And there's so many people in their communities who've just opted out because the laws are purposely written to be very confusing so that they don't understand what's going on, what's the implications. And then the other part is like, when does what happens when the legal system and politics become religion? That's another dynamic. Or it's like we're trying to separate church and state, but the state becomes a church. Yeah, that's a good. Sorry. Go ahead, Chad. I was just thinking about that, like when you were talking, it's like a degree of. Church smuggling, something like that, like, yeah, well defined. Holy Christ, sorry. Well, like I just. I just did a film that touched on some like local law stuff. And so it's been something I've been pondering a lot, but you hear rhetoric coming from the right or the left, whatever, you know, whatever team you want that says these things, this is what this law does, and this is why we stand for these things and it becomes a certain dogma. And then it becomes, well, this is the right thing to do. Independent of how it actually affects communities, how it works in things and it becomes the truth, even if it doesn't match what's happening in reality. And I've had people and the film kind of touched on minimum wage stuff. But I had conversations with people, you know, just friends saying, oh, I know minimum wage laws have a lot of negative ripple effects, but I vote for it anyways because that's the right thing. And it's like. Well, you know, it's not helping the way the rhetoric rhetoric is saying, yet you're still supporting it. It's wild. And it's like, how do we find this way to to break it up from just talking points and religious. Prop propagation or whatever the word is. Yeah, I think that there's the we're talking about the law, but we're also talking about the application and enforcement of the law and then whether or not anyone could meet the standard of the law. And so, like, I mean, as far as I'm concerned, there's there's the law that's described in the New Testament and the old and no most that law is a set standard that we agree to and the application of this law is the more difficult part of that and the fact that we can admit our failure to meet that law standard despite our best efforts. And so when we get into the point where we say, well, we have the answer here, we have the proper laws defined by man and the proper application of that law so that it will be followed and then justice will prevail. And when it doesn't happen. We're upset and we find we must create a new law for this to occur as though perfection is even possible. And I think that like a little bit of humility in admitting the flaws that we have in the interpretation, application and understanding of these laws we put in the place there needs to be a higher order that we that we fall under and admit the fact that it's going to be impossible for us to meet this standard. Well, you would put so many people out of work. You did that. Like, I think it was going to get more jobs. You think? Well, yeah, maybe. It's just like this is like it seems like there's like people who have a strong desire to. To change law or impose laws, that in itself seems like a type of game and it seems. And not genuine, whatever. But yeah, sorry about that. I love the reference to the Old Testament law because it reminds us of who the law was for the law was not for Israel to start executing judgment against others. It was for them to see their inability to claim righteousness. And through that, that obvious understanding that really was it didn't manifest until they saw Jesus, they they're able. We who understand that are able to say, oh, it is my absolute failure and the gift of grace that allows me to love my fellow man, not judge my fellow man. But we're still being judged by the same law. But it's a but there's a difference between using that law to frame our position in humility rather than using it to condemn people outside ourselves. Well, I think the issue of motivation is important. And sometimes when I think about this, I think that part of what's going on in the background is what we'd really like is for people to choose to do the right thing, to know the right thing to do and to choose to do the right thing of their own accord. Right. And and in law and in the negative sense, like Joseph was talking about, right, which we've talked about on here before, it's it's an issue of compulsion. Right. It's an issue of setting a base minimum standard that if you don't do this, there's going to be consequences. Right. And and and I would say that to say that that's completely evil means parenting is evil. Right. I heard somebody point out that they said something along the lines of like parenting is a is a necessary but good tyranny. Right. You know, and you know, and when when kids are little and they don't know the different, you know, they don't know why they need to run in the street. Right. But they're not going to be allowed to go play in the street. You know, I mean, it's just one of those things. And if I got to spank them or whatever, right, you know, or ground them or whatever, that's I'm going to be tyrannical in that sense. And it's not necessarily tyrannical just to be mean, but it's it's for their good. Yeah. And so that sense of the law, the compulsion sense of the law, it's always. You know, it's always it's not what we'd like, right. It's not the best, right. But it's but it's necessary. And I would go, I would point out that it's explicit. I mean, this is clear in in Tanakh, right. In the Old Testament is very clear that the way that the law is designed to be implemented for Israel is meant to inculcate these as things that eventually become in the heart, if this is the whole right. These are start they start off as, let's say, external propositions that are being compulsory, compulsory. But the whole point is that they are going to get habituated and they're going to align yourself with the values with which the law exemplify. And they're going to become embodied, perspectival, all those wonderful, fun things, because that is how that set of law is designed. And that is and not just internally, but like the metal legal aspects of how it's supposed to be implemented, that's how it's designed. Well, you make yourself in the vessel of the spirit of the law, right, which is like a completely different level. And I think this came up yesterday in a live stream. And Paul didn't like this idea of leaving the dogma behind. But I think that's what it is. Right. Like you have the dogma, you have the law. And then when when it's part of you, you leave it behind and the spirit is taking it forward. And I think I think that's the right way to conceive of that. But you still need it for the next generation, right? For whoever is joining. Yeah, I'm talking from the individual. You can't leave it behind as an institution because you still need it for newcomers. Yeah, it's a preservation. Or accounting for the mistakes and misgivings you have when you no longer have integrated it well and you've fallen away from the principles you thought you had integrated. It's there to manage consistency. This is the manual. What was manual term? The repeated repeatability for manifestation or whatever. You need to have it there. To guarantee consistency in the future and repeatability. Well, and part of the reason I don't like leave it behind is I think it's not I think it I think the best term is, let's say, what Jesus talks about in the Sermon on the Mount. You're looking for the fulfillment of the law. You want to see the law achieve its telos. Because the law is always pointing to the the point of the law is not the the stipulation or the restriction. The restriction serves an end. And I think that's where Bruce Bruce was going. The restriction serves an end, which is its fulfillment. And and it's you know, there's in terms of Protestant theology, you know, Lutheran's and Calvinists. This is an ongoing conversation between Lutheran's and Calvinists because Luther's Lutheran's tended to set up a large duality law versus gospel. And Calvinists basically wanted to say gospel fulfills law. And so law doesn't law doesn't go away. Law continues to have continues to have a role. But law has to be seen. Law and gospel have to be seen as pursuing a telos, which is the kingdom of God in, you know, Jesus. Yeah, that's the law. The gospel is a command just as much as the law is. Right. This is the pursuit you should follow. These are the rules. Yes, it's not a suggestion. I think a little bit back to culture, one at a time, one at a time. When the law becomes some, I think the law for me, the law is something that I get to bump up against. It shouldn't be used as something as a weapon, though. And I think that's where it gets nutty. That's why I say I do value being able to. Have the freedom to hit the wall, I value it now. I may not like the consequences, but I like. I like the freedom of being able to find what that is. Now, I don't I'm very much against this idea of using the law as a weapon against somebody else to contain somebody else. I know that doesn't sound very logical or whatever, but. It's hard to explain what I'm trying to say with that. Just just just a program note, because I have to leave. And that means that the live stream is ending. But anybody out there watching the live stream that wants to participate in this conversation, the link is is below here. Just jump into the room. And I just want to thank you all for for jumping in here and participating, because again, when I come into this room and when we turn on the cameras and when I listen to your wisdom, I grow. And so thank you all for being here. And sorry, sorry to have to run, but keep doing what you're doing. I I wish I could. I you know, in a better world, I just leave the live stream going and I go off and do things. But I think it's a little scary. You can't do that. What's that? In the land of the lawless, you cannot do that. No, no. This I could not. If Rick were here, I'd let Rick, I'd like I'd let Rick moderate it. But Rick is Rick has his day job. So anyway, thank you all. So keep keep keep going. Nice speaking to you. Yeah.