https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=dXBoNFDrrpk

 There he is. Can you hear me? I can hear you just fine. Hey Paul. How are you Topher? It's December. I'm sitting by a Christmas tree and I'm waiting anxiously for a big guy with a white beard. Pretty good. Oh. For me this is sort of you know often with the randos I just turn on the video. I don't know who's going to be on the other end but now via the Discord server and now the new Open Studio room this is and the Friday conversations this is I see some of these things coming together. Right. That we're not just all random free radicals floating out there but we can begin to understand each other and this isn't entirely fair to the people watching the video because I guess maybe some of the some of the benefit of these random conversations is that I don't know the person and so I have to have them introduce themselves. Although I really don't know you well. I know that you repair speakers and I know that you're in Canada and I don't know how much. I mean I'm going to leave it up to you to decide how much to disclose and I assume we'll at least share this conversation with the Discord server it'll be up to you if you want me to share it on my channel or not but I'm I think it'll be a great conversation so Right on yeah. I will say that sounds good. I like the idea of sharing out some of the people on the Discord server but at the same time we'll just see how it goes and maybe if one of us ends up in tears we'll keep it to ourselves. Oh I don't know. It's just a trade of pastoring. If you can make people cry you know you win. At least in a good way. So alright so let's get into it because we don't have that much time which is unfortunate. Well let's begin with your beginnings. Who's your family? What was it like growing up? Who are you? Okay sure. So who am I? I'm Topher. I am a 32 year old from or almost 32 year old from Toronto Canada. I'm one of four brothers. I have two older brothers. One is seven years older than me. One is five years older than me. I have two lovely parents. I live here in a very lovely patch of Toronto. It's kind of like a small town within the city. Kind of I live with this absolutely remarkably lucky which is a theme I actually as I was preparing for this I was thinking about different themes that I wanted to re-emphasize as much as I could. One of them being that I feel like I am one of the luckiest people on the planet that Canada in general is an incredibly lucky place to be to have been born. Toronto is. The beaches are. And to have my mom has a kind of an extended network of relatives around here. So as I walk around with my dog and my daughter in this neighbourhood I bump into aunts and uncles and stuff like that all the time. So I have this incredible kind of network. This incredible safety net around me. Which is going to be absolutely priceless when it comes to being a father and raising a child is to have that kind of tribe here around me in the city is just beautiful. How old is your daughter? She is 21 months. She's napping about 50 feet that way. Wow. That's really precious. You're first? Yeah. Wow. Faith life in the family you grew up in. Go to church? Not go to church? Not really. I think I was baptised when I was a kid but I've maybe been in church less times than I have fingers kind of thing. I've been in them for weddings. I don't know if we've had a funeral in a church yet. But I've been in a couple just here and there. Never went to church. Pretty entirely biblically illiterate other than hanging out with you listening to your videos, hanging out on your server. Having listened now to a ton of Jordan Peterson has kind of helped me pick up some biblical literacy. So I take it your family wasn't anti-Christian. It was just something that you didn't participate in. Yeah. So my mom's family, I think when she was a kid she might have gone to church a little bit. And I know her mom was a member of the United Church around the corner and apparently my grandfather was Catholic. And on my dad's side I'm quite certain that he went to school. He went to Catholic like he went to church and he went to Catholic school. So his family I would say of the two was the more explicitly religious and they were Catholics. He's actually American so they grew up in just outside of Chicago. And so to the extent that there's been a kind of our entire culture is saturated with Christianity and with Christian norms, Christian behavior, etc. And so I would say that we all and I specifically I would consider myself kind of culturally Christian. But to the extent that there was kind of a specific and explicit kind of Christian source in our family was through my dad's side. And yeah. Go ahead. So now you're talking to a Calvinist minister. How did this happen? Yeah, I guess I bumped, I ran into your videos like many of us, right? Through the serendipitous algorithms that I was in the Jordan Peterson crowd. And for whatever reason, YouTube threw me, you know, threw you my way and I clicked on them. And just yeah, your ability, I think this is one of my original messages to you. I think on Facebook I mentioned that I was just looking back over some of the things that I originally reached out to you and said. And yeah, you like your ability back then to kind of weave together different elements of a conversation to kind of take, to take Peterson, to take Weinstein, to take you know, Louis, these different voices that you had kind of at your disposal and kind of weave them together into kind of like a pseudo conversation through kind of your PowerPoint presentations. That was, I always found that just very, very impressive. It was kind of a feat of of being able to kind of, like I say, hold, hold a conversation of kind of different profound voices that you that you had kind of deeply saturated yourself in and then to be able to kind of link the different pieces of the conversation together on in real time was, was super impressive. And I I yeah, and so I, you know, became an avid listener or watcher of your channel. And and then I think the, you know, another thing that just clicked because he just reappeared in the server was I sent Nathan, I sent Nathan links to your videos and then he wound up being one of your one of your first random interviews and watching you guys' conversation was like super like just inspiring. Yeah. Yeah, that was one of the very early conversations. How did you get into the IDW space? Was it Peterson that caught your attention and why? That's a good question. So I guess that I guess this would be a way to pull back to you know, kind of like many of the Petersonites that were generally young men, you know, looking to kind of to go through some sort of growth phase in our lives. And we happen to be lucky enough to be, you know, driving cars or to be, in my case, fixing speakers. And so we're able to sit and listen to, you know, hundreds of hours of online content. And so, you know, I had already that was already a thing that I was doing, right, is just kind of listening to, you know, this book or that book or listening to this lecture or that lecture. And so when I found this guy, like when he got into trouble with the, you know, with the powers that be, you know, he pops up and you can check him out and you click on his YouTube channel. It's like, oh, look at all like there's 30, 40, 100 hours of psychology lectures. Don't mind if I do. And then, yeah. And so then, you know, yeah, how many years later? Four years later now. And what a ride. Holy cow. Yeah. What other kinds of things? So his the political stuff sort of put him on your radar. That's you found him around C16. I mean, you're in Toronto. So, yeah. I had friends who were like, so some of those iconic, you know, shots and like images from when he was out in front of the UFT and stuff like that. There are kids that I went to elementary school with who were standing around him. On that note, a friend, like a friend of a friend of mine, not even a friend of mine, a kid I also went to elementary school with is a friend of Michaela's from high school. So it's very, very much small world stuff. Yeah. Yeah. So he was controversial. So he popped into my thing. And the C16 thing, I mean, I remember saying that, you know, I was trying to say, like, hey, you should check this guy out. It's like, you know, yes, there's the controversy and, you know, take of that what you will. You know, there it is. But don't let that distract you from the fact that this guy is a absolutely fascinating dude, you know, that if you check out all these lectures. And so before and this was all before, you know, he kind of, as you always say, took off on his statics rocket, right? And so I thought I had found this like, you know, under the radar gem of it. And so I was like, under the radar gem of a professor who had put a bunch of interesting lectures out there online. And so I was happy to share them with everybody. And then I very quickly realized that like, oh, yeah, me and everybody else. Did you ever manage to get to any of the biblical lectures? Not the biblical lectures. I deeply regret that. Hopefully, maybe if there's round two, I'll jump into one. I did manage to get to one of his just his book tour lectures. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I saw in fact, I'm pretty sure I saw Michaela. So after afterwards, I went for we went with my brother who I work with. It was a gift from him. The tickets were a gift from him. And afterwards, we went down to it's on it was down on a street called the Esplanade. It was at a theater that's on the Esplanade and the Esplanade has a keg on it, which Jordan Peterson famously likes to eat his steak set. And so we were went for a drink afterwards and I'm pretty sure I saw Michaela sitting at the bar waiting for Jordan to come out of the theater so that they could go for a steak at the keg since he was in town. Anyway, yeah. How much how much of this thing is Toronto? Because it's it's amazing how so I grew up in the Christian Reformed Church. The epicenter of the Christian Reformed Church is Grand Rapids, Michigan, which is not too far from Canada. And so when I went to Calvin College, you know, a good a sizable there's a sizable Canadian community at Calvin College. There's a sizable Canadian contingent within the Christian Reformed Church. And so I have some familiarity with with Canadian culture and the I was just speaking with someone yesterday who was who made a who made a comment about he was also in Toronto. He just kind of made a comment dismissively about Canada. I said, hey, wait a minute. You guys have Peterson. You've got Peugeot. You've got Fervakey. You've got Peter Lindbergh. I mean, there's a lot going on in Toronto. And and so why is that? Tell me a little bit. I mean, you're you're native. Tell me a little bit about the culture there and and what you think the culture contributes, how you think the culture contributes to this. The short answer, Paul, is I don't I don't know if I have a coherent like a coherent or interesting response to that. You know, Toronto is you know, it's a big world class city. You know, Canada in general and I guess Toronto specifically because it's the biggest city in Canada by by a huge degree is affected by this this kind of magnetic pull of you guys, which I was actually I was thinking that maybe you might empathize with this because Sacramento is so close to San Francisco where you or and New Jersey is so close to New York where you get this kind of magnetic pull of everyone's attention and all of kind of the best and brightest of you as a people get vacuumed up by this big poll so close. And so and so, yeah, I don't know. I mean, we we you know, Canada is in a lot of ways is affected by the fact that so many of us, you know, the Jim Carey's, the John Candy's, the Jordan Petersons, I think he's down or he was down in Florida for a little bit there. But that so so many of us wind up down in L.A., down in California, kind of elsewhere in the world, because if you know, if you're if you're exceptional, if you're, you know, incredibly talented, intelligent or whatever it is, then then maybe you don't stay in Canada. And so then so then we are. What does that leave Toronto being? I don't know. And why is it that we that we are seemingly kind of disproportionately productive? Yeah. Or loud in this kind of this, you know, the IDW, the culture war space, it could it could be like a measure of distance that like we're we're close enough, we're close enough that it motivates us and that we're passionate about it. But at the same time, we're not we're not in it. And so we're able to see a little bit more clearly. And so, you know, it's not our president who's, you know, dropping bombs on Twitter. It's, you know, but and so we're not personally enraged by that in the same way or something like that. I don't that's that's a best guess. But like I said, short short answer is I don't know if I if I know why Torontonians and Canadians in general seem to be participating in the conversation and kind of punching above their weight in the conversation. Yeah. You part of what's interesting about your story is you work in and correct me if I'm wrong, but my impression is you work in a family business. Yep. And you work in a family business, which, you know, your family business is hardly rust belt. But there's a degree to which globalization, technological disruption, and these forces that are dislocating a lot of working people is impacting you. You're you've still you know, you're still there on the margins on the borders. Yeah, but you're you feel the you feel the margin slipping away. Now, one of the things that I'll just for those who are listening last week at the end of the week, you know, I'm this so much of this whole project for me has sort of been a play thing in that this is a space that I can just try out new things. There's very little downside for me. You know, my main job is a pastor of a local church and a, and a, you know, medium to small denomination. And so to me, trying stuff out is a big part of what I do. And so I started this. I started this, you know, first called it the Truman Show. Now, now, Sally Jo had a comment, you know, about the space and the space that I'm in. And so I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, I started this, you know, it's just kind of like an open studio for artists, because I saw you and some others who were hopping onto the discord server. And of course, voice chat is one thing. But once you turn on the camera, and right away, I noticed you're in a shop, and you've got all these speakers around you, and you're repairing them. And that immediately caught my attention because I'm old enough to remember a world of little shoe repair shops. And electronic repair shops, and a world in which the, the mid 20th century or even older technology had value enough and wasn't displaced sufficiently by mass production to to warrant repair. And of course, in a certain way, this is, this is very hip today because, oh, we like it, we love to imagine the bookstore and this shoe repair shop and not filling up our landfills with, you know, all of the discarded technology that failed for a two cent reason. And here you are in a family business dealing with that two cent reason. And I also wonder in terms of, there's at least to me some resonance between Peterson and his strange, implicit conservatism, and I think it's very implicit, it's not overt in many ways. And then your family business and how you spend your time. And, and to your point that like, you know, being on the margin. So like, so that business is 45 years old, my family bought it about 15 years ago. And, and I've been working there for about 10, probably now like 12 years, something like that. And, and yeah, we've like, so that business once upon a time did a tidy, tidy bit of revenue, kind of doing hundreds and hundreds of speakers for large kind of, say, corporate or, you know, just kind of large customer, customers, clients. And, and so you know, you would get truckloads of speakers, the guy who was the previous owner, he would just get truckloads of speakers and be pumping out hundreds at a time. And you know, what truism about kind of work like that in general is, you know, being able to set up and kind of assembly line through work, you know, really makes the efficiency get a lot higher and your, and your profit margins go up. And as, but one of the things that's happened over time is that that is less and less the case and kind of more and more I'm dealing with, you know, a lot of Caribbean guys, a lot of, as I have, you know, you and I both have somewhat of a link to kind of the Caribbean community. So we have a lot of Caribbean guys who are, I think Jamaica might be per capita, the speaker capital of the world. And so yeah, we get a lot of a lot of, you know, just a lot of, you know, people from the neighborhood, like, you know, husbands of or or kind of that eccentric single guy who kind of has a, you know, who has speakers as a passion and a hobby, or, you know, young guys who are building sub, you know, subwoofers or car, car audio systems, competition car audio systems and stuff like that, but just kind of more one offs, two offs. And that's, it's, it's nice because it means that you interact with more customers, kind of rather than a truck driver showing up and offloading a bunch of stuff, which you know, there's, there's an interaction there, but it's, you know, relatively speaking, not as much of one as having, you know, wives come in and buy stuff for their husbands or, or, you know, guys building, you know, big, big sound wall style systems for their husbands, you know, for their block parties back home, etc. But the result is, like I said, the profit margin does go down. And so that, you know, the business has changed a lot over time and has been kind of squeezed and forced to pivot in a number of ways. And, but kind of, I think one of the one of the things that speaks to that that that squeeze more than anything is kind of where you where you have you're watching me when I'm working is we're in a garage, like we've we went from being able to have I think we had a 4000 square foot warehouse with a, you know, 1000 square foot steel mezzanine, where my my repair shop was actually 12 feet up in the air, you know, on this big steel structure. So we you know, it was a fairly significant and kind of robust operation. And we've kind of gradually over time shrank down to now being in a 2000 square foot garage, you know, where, you know, the rent is dirt cheap, but the rent is dirt cheap, because it was literally a concrete box that we had to throw like $15,000 worth of renovations into to turn it into a garage. And then, and then still have to deal with the fact that there's no plumbing, and there's no, there's no natural gas. And so, you know, you've seen me when I'm at work, I'm wearing like literally, you know, a merino wool balaclava, a neck warmer, a sweater, I usually have like, you know, a fairly warm hat on and I have like a paint drying heater behind me to just keep me warm enough to not have my fingers freezing. So, and so that like, that's like, on one hand, you know, humans, you know, we're the creatures that that survive World War One. And so you know, you do what you got to do and you know, adopt, adapt and improve. And you make do. On the other hand, like, it's kind of ridiculous that I'm having to, you know, that our business is having to kind of squeeze itself into this little kind of nook and deal with all of these ridiculous compromises, including the fact that we don't have like, our customers don't have parking, or custody, like our customers pull up in the alleyway that we're our garages in. And then they get yelled at, pulled at by our neighbors, because they're, you know, they're leaving their car in stupid places. So anyway, it's just to speak to your point that yeah, we're definitely, yeah, we definitely are that kind of working class fringe of the urban thing. And it is kind of a throwback to an older time. And, and yeah. Well, it reminds me a lot of New Jersey, where I grew up, because again, that was, New Jersey is one of these perimeter cities. Patterson was one of these perimeter cities to New York, and the, you know, the community at least half of the community, because of my father's work, I was sort of have one foot in the black community and one foot then into the Dutch, the CRC Dutch community, and you had small machine shops, you had landscapers, you had a lot of, you had a lot of blue collar workers. You had a lot of blue collar working people who were, you know, small business owners, this, this kind of thing. But you know, one of the things that impressed me to watching you watching Nick, Nick, who's been on my channel quite a bit, I sometimes call him for Colt Nick, because then people can know who he is. But he also he's got his camera on in his shop and he's been, you know, lately he's been making a knife, you know, he's, he's pouring all of that work into one knife. And you know, part of what part of what I think about when I watch you and I watch Nick is this. I don't exactly know the right words to use, but it's it's sort of a local knowledge where you mean to have a conversation with you to have a conversation with Nick. You know, both you guys are obviously very intelligent. You're up on ideas. You know, you're people in sort of the the low resolution class distribution assumptions, people might imagine that, well, you're you're sort of stuck in this niche because you couldn't have anything better to do. And but my impression is very much from you and from many others who do I sort of, you know, rightly or wrongly associate with what you're doing. That isn't the case. And I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all throughout. I mean, I have found all of my friends there and specificallyığım basically who can basically who can basically who can who are looking to have a certain kind of content for their time and it has to be credible. It has to be intellectual but it also has to be practical. It's got So it's been interesting finding this in, because again, I didn't set out to do any of this stuff, but sort of as a pastor, I'm not an academic, academics can sort of stay esoteric. I just received a note from someone who's kind of tired of all the, the vervecchian esotericism up there. And he says, we really got to keep this conversation down to earth for regular people, you know? And so I, you know, and that was one of my, the things that caught my attention about you, even before I saw the shop, but your, I mean your comments on the Friday conversations on the Discord, that I think in some ways you do represent one of these, you do represent a community which is very much both salt of the earth, but also, also connected and listening and participating in what our bifurcating cultures sort of split. You know, Mary Cohen is another one of these people. There's, I mean, there's a, they're all over the Discord. So that you've just triggered like five different segues here. So let's try to get through them quickly. Good. Like, yeah, they're all over the Discord, like Joe, you know, Joe Lars, I don't know if you've had a conversation with him yet, but you, if you can get the chance to, you should. He is a treasure trove of an individual, of an individual. He's the gentleman who drives trucks, but you know, he went to, I think he went to university and maybe got like, you know, a, a degree. I don't know what level of degree, but he took, I think English, like English and philosophy and stuff like that. So he's just this absolutely, you know, beautifully articulate, knowledgeable guy who has kind of spent his life doing the white collar thing and then has transitioned later in life to the blue collar world. And so is exactly who you're talking about. Sherry, I think to some degree is like that, right? Like who, you know, who would imagine, you know, a goat herder up in the mountains of British Columbia, who, you know, is as able as anyone in our community to kind of sit and talk theology and, you know, highfalutin and what a wonder Discord is that we have these people kind of brought into our worlds and we get to participate in the treasure that is there, you know, what's between their ears and in their hearts because of this beautiful technology that enables us to kind of to reach out to all these people out on the fringes and bring them into a lovely space like the one that you and Joey have put together here. What were the other ones? So in terms of traversing heaven and earth, that was a note that I just wanted to, I think I've touched on it before with you in regards to what a pastor does and kind of what your father did and what your grandfather did and how I think that that's, you know, that is kind of a pastor's job, right? Like you're kind of like a Sherpa or another way to think about it is like, cause a Sherpa goes up and so it actually, it'd be better if it's an analogy that goes down. And so I was thinking maybe the donkeys at the Grand Canyon. The- I like Sherpa better, not my donkey, I'm an ass. But it goes better with the like, cause what you're doing, I mean, it is, heaven is up and so I guess maybe the Sherpa works too, but the, it's also going down layers of analysis, right? Like from the superficial social into the, you know, let's say the political into the philosophical, into the theological, you know, down, down, down, into the, into kind of the different, you know, the deeper and deeper, more bedrock layers of analysis. And that's what as a pastor you kind of have to do is you have to be able to go up or down, however you want to say the level, you know, you have to get, be able to interact in theology space and in kind of, you know, the realm of the heavenly or the realm of the theological. And then, but also be able to be present in people's lives as they, as they're getting married, you know, having marital strife or dealing with sickness or death, et cetera. And so you're having to connect those two worlds. And the fact that you represent like a lineage that is like, you know, it's a three generation long lineage of individuals who have had this as their day-to-day life, right? Like this is their, you know, we're all shaped to some degree, to a huge degree by our phenomenology. The fact that, you know, on a daily basis, this movement back up and down, up and down is what, you know, shaped your grandfather, shaped your father, shaped you. And so that's just, that's just an astounding, like, I don't know, like, what's the word? There are, you know, there's people who will say that there's way more going on than what we're able to say to one another, right? And so there's way more being picked up across that multi-generational journey that you and your grandfather and your father have been on. And, you know, it shows up in, you know, your behavior, your stance, your posture, your tone, you know, your ability to, you know, kind of graciously be present at a bedside to be, you know, to know when to uncork your amazing laugh, to, you know, et cetera, et cetera. Just this kind of automatic grace that we pick up that's kind of passed from generation to generation. And so I guess one of the ways that I want, one of the ways I want to go with that is, to what degree are you, like, so you have two sons and one and neither? Three sons. Three sons, and are any of them headed to seminary? Not at this point. Yeah, what are the chances that any of them will? I don't know. None are showing any desire to do so. Right. Okay, well, so, and so maybe it's wonderful that you have found an alternative place to distribute that kind of lineage or that legacy, right? That like you have this, you carry this kind of payload of built up, I don't know what the word for it is, but something, and that now you've found this community who have kind of gathered around you. And to some degree, I would say, you know, many people in that community are going to now take, you know, that, yeah, that century long kind of, you know, treasure that you and your family have kind of built up and they'll learn from it and hopefully carry it forward, even if none of your sons go to seminary. Well, you know, it's interesting how I, I in some way see the relationship between the church and your family's little speaker business because I mean, what has happened to churches this morning, or yeah, this morning I read David French's piece on Carl Lentz and the celebrity church. And in that way, you know, the church has been sort of the small church, not really the small, small churches, the very small churches are all over the place. It's sort of the mid-sized churches. And that's, you know, that's kind of the same space that your speaker business is in because it's providing livelihood for a, it's a small business. It's not a micro business where you have a day job working in an Amazon phone bank, you know, for not enough money, but so then you come home and you, you know, you repair speakers that people send you UPS and you send them out and you do that two, three hours. Not yet, Paul. Not yet, but that's exactly the point is part of what's happening in our culture is this. Bifurcation, yeah. Yeah. And it's not, you know, it's not just speakers or shoe repair or fixing toasters or microwave ovens or even PC repair. You can still kind of look around and find little shops around that will build a PC or fix your PC. I mean, that business is in there, but that's sort of the same, that's sort of the same level. I don't know, you know, to me that seems to be the same, the same thing. Churches, again, micro churches are all over the place. It's something like 90% of, it's not 90. So the mega church is basically over a thousand people and the micro church is basically less than 75 people. And so that it's kind of house cat sized church from kind of 75 people to 200 people. That's the slot that we're talking about that used to be sort of the bread and butter of the church world and those churches of which the Christian Reformed Church, for example, is mostly made up of churches in that size. And right now, I think, especially during COVID, but over the last 10 years, a lot of those churches, just like the church I pastor, have dipped below the 75 level. I think, so why the 75? Because the keeping it, you know, 150 to 200, I mean, you know, the Dunbar number, like this makes all the sense in the world. And so you can see why it's good. It would be best if that pattern continued. But so why have they shrunk down to 75? What's the dynamic there? Oh, that's political schism. What's that? Political schism, like that they were 150, but then half went red, half went blue? No, no, it's far deeper. It's the ongoing secularization, the rise of the nuns, the N-O-N-E-S. It's the aging of the church. It's the lack of plausibility of Christianity, or at least of that form of Christianity to millennials. Right. And the, I mean, the church, I mean, given all of this, the church is still an enormous number of people go to churches. And the church is very well studied in North America in terms of the sociology, the demographics, all of these things. And, but this question, you know, so some people say, well, the millennials will come back. A lot of other people are saying, no, they're not coming back. They're not coming back to the same thing. And so then you look at say Hillsong and some of the mega churches with the likes of Karl Lentz, or, you know, you can list a bunch of other, in other words, it's probably the dynamics are at least as complex and global as even the systems that a small business like yours is dealing with. In fact, it might even be that the- It's more complicated for sure. Yes, yes. And so for me, again, this makes, you know, this makes everything that's happened on my channel and the discord server, you know, so when I, you know, when I come to the discord server and I listen to the kinds of conversations that are taking place and I look at the, you know, the mash between, you know, Roman Catholics and Orthodox and Protestants and, you know, people like yourself who, you know, haven't had a church relationship. And I watch all of this happening. Part of me wonders if this isn't sort of the, sort of the fertile soil out of which new church like things will emerge. I mean, one of the, I mean, the real, the real ongoing conversation between Protestant and non Protestant is really over form of church more than all the other kinds of things you hear the religious nerds talk about on the discord server. It really is because if you listen to the Orthodox, this is church, okay? And there's a power in that rigidity and that focus. The Roman Catholics have sort of modulated the Protestant reformation in all kinds of other different ways by creating all of these little niches within their massive structure. But at some point you have to ask the question, what, to what degree is that massive structure functioning when, you know, when we see the continual tribal warfare that you see in the Roman Catholic church. But then, you know, and I think about someone like you who none of this has been a part of your life at all. And yet. Until recently. Until recently. Well, what about that? I mean, you're, you, I mean, there's a certain group of people on the discord server that have limitless appetite for theological disputation. Not all of us on the discord server share that appetite. Go ahead. I would just say this dispute, in my case, disputation would not, I think, be the appropriate word. I think exploration. Like I'm, you know, coming in it from, coming into it as kind of a ignorant third party. And so then I'm just kind of listening and kind of squinting as I listen to all the different people. Like I, you know, I don't understand the kind of context within all of these different kind of, you know, disputations are taking place and kind of, you know, why, you know, what does this mean? What does that mean? How is this relevant? How is this, you know, historically, you know, based, et cetera. But I just kind of, I kind of, I come in there and I listen to everyone kind of, you know, pushing back against each other. And one of the things that I've, I guess, developed is like this squint method, which is that, you know, you blur your eyes a little bit and kind of don't try to be, don't try to look at it too closely and just kind of, you know, zoom out a little bit and just kind of go like, you know, how, I don't, I don't know. You know, I'm not a theologian, but I can, I know how to listen to people and tell when they're making an invalid move or when they're kind of having to, to bend really, really hard or use some really fudgy words in order to take this piece and this piece and put them together. And so who, who, as they're kind of connecting all the different pieces of their worldview is doing the least exertion? Kind of who has the pieces, the most kind of elegantly mapped together. And hypothetically, if, you know, if you're, if you're operating with something that is supposed to be to some degree, kind of like, you know, a, a, a system or, you know, a theological system that is, is reflective itself of kind of the, the pattern of the universe itself, you would think that the pieces should fit together fairly elegantly, right? That they're, they're hyper, you know, that that might be a clue as to who, who's on to the, you know, the closest version, because, you know, if you're having to bend a bunch, well, then maybe, you know, maybe the axioms that your system is built on are a little, a little warped, because, you know, you're, now you're, we're building up into the sky and your house is teetering over a little bit. And so, yeah, so, you know, that's, that's what I've been trying to do. And so, but exploration, like I say, that's, that's just the point I'm trying to make. Sometimes it's exploration, sometimes it's disputation. For me specifically, when have you heard me dispute? No, no, for you it's exploration. Yes. But, but that, but that leads me again to the question of what are you looking for there? Me personally? Yeah. I guess, yeah, like, I mean, so, you know, trying to, trying, I guess, you know, you're, you're looking to find, like I was just kind of saying, like, find the, the worldview that kind of clicks most elegantly the most stuff into place, right? And, and so that, and that's both consciously, right? That like you're, that you're able to, you know, look at the prepositions and look at the, you know, the theological statements or et cetera, and, you know, the linguistic landscape and say, okay, these, these linguistic pieces all kind of click together, but it's also about, you know, phenomenology, right? Like which, which suite of lenses, right? Like a metaphor I like to use often is kind of like goggles. Like when you go to the optometrist and she kind of switches all these different lenses over your eyes and, you know, that change how you see the world. And so all of these things are kind of like, you know, whether it's Buddhism, whether it's different versions of Christianity, whether it's scientism, whatever, they're all kind of, they're all lenses that are vying for, you know, mind space, like mind landscape, mind, yeah, territory within our, within our heads. And, and which of these, when you kind of click them on, right? When you, or which set of them, right? Like maybe it's not just one, maybe it's like a, you know, these five or something like that. So which, which suite, which combination of lenses, when put on kind of lead you to be, you know, the, you know, the most loving with your family, the most present with your family, kind of the least addicted, you know, the least vulnerable to addiction, whether it's from, you know, alcohol or marijuana or digital, digital drugs like, you know, Twitter, YouTube, et cetera, which, you know, which, you know, which, like I said, which, which lens, when you put it on kind of aligns the most at as many levels of, of analysis as possible. And, and most of which being kind of down in elephant land, right? That like, you know, the one that makes it the easiest to get up in the morning and, you know, and, and kind of strive to work with confidence as a, as a, you know, a simplistic way to say it, I think you get what I mean. Yeah. And, and so you, yeah, you're just hunting, hunting for that, right? And, and, and to some degree, like there's kind of a dual element to that, which is on one hand, you know, this is a, it's like a personal venture, right? That like, I'd like to find this for myself, just, you know, to be the best version of myself that I can find, you know, that I can be, but then to exactly your point earlier, I think, I think I get what you're, you know, you were, I was suggesting that the churches were splitting in half left blue, but what you, I think what you just described is more that they're essentially just aging that like, there's just not new people entering. And so then over time, the population dwindles to, you know, half because there isn't new and new people entering. And so my generation has this problem, which is that like, you know, more and more of us are in none space, but the fact that, you know, we, I think that, that, that idea of homo religiosus is a pretty powerful one that we seem to pretty much be inevitably religious. And so whether that's going to be politics, whether that's going to be social justice, whether that's going to be, you know, something is going to fill that void. And so, you know, my, my generation needs to kind of get serious about finding, you know, the best, the best vert, you know, the best thing in that space for ourselves. And so, you know, partially, I'm doing this for my own benefit, but partially, I'm, I guess, trying to kind of explore, you know, the, you know, the space of possibilities, and to try to find kind of the best tool that I can find, and then and then turn around to my, you know, to my generation and say, like, or at least, you know, my friends and family and stuff like that, and say, like, Hey, here's, here's the one that seems to work for me the best. What do you guys think? And then go from there. Yeah, you you sort of anticipated and answered my next question, which was going to be and I have to, I'm really careful about questions like this as a pastor, because they get very, they get to be lying in the way that Jordan Peterson calls pastors liars. You know, when I when I when I listen carefully to the millennials, and, you know, I'm always looking for signals like this. The point, and I heard this, actually, and I just in one of my last videos, I, I just read Sean Tung compound, which was Langdon Gilkey's reminiscences of his time in a Japanese internment camp, filled with Catholic fathers and, and business people, expat business people and Protestant missionaries across the spectrum in the middle of the 20th century. And he who grew up very much, he would have been third generation, kind of a cleric in the Anglican world, looked around at what was going on in that compound. And the book is really very interesting, because it's, there's no audio book of it, which is kind of a shame. But there's, he looked at this compound as sort of a an experimentation of a certain group of people under stress, and what holds true and what sort of fails in that. And, and his, he came to the conclusion that, in terms of the various religious services that were going on in the compound, in the Protestants were doing their thing, and the Catholics had their thing, you know, these things were going on. He didn't go to any of them, because he just basically didn't see the point. And when I think of why, why churches are, are dying and going away generationally, a good bit of it is then I think, because that generation looks at it and doesn't see the point. Now that doesn't mean that there isn't necessarily a point there. But I think there is always a sort of negotiation going on in terms of the the institution and the individual. And the institution has to understand the needs of the individual. But the needs of the individual has to understand their own institutional needs as well. And when I look at what's happening on the Discord server, and in the Jordan Peterson space, and in all of the conversations that I've had over the last few years, I see that negotiation underway. Right? I don't know where it's going to go. But the negotiation is underway. Right. Yeah, people saying, you know, this is this is this is what works for me. This is what I need. And and yeah. But so that, you know, that book, I think there's other versions of it would be like Viktor Frankl or or Shoj Nitsen, right? Yeah, who, when you're in the prison camp, you know, who's, who's system holds up best and, and this is this was I mean, maybe a couple weeks ago, I was thinking about I think, along these same lines of, you know, what is apparently something happened to Topher's connection. I'm really bummed because I thought we were really getting into an important space, really interesting space for me in terms of the church and Christianity and in our culture. And so I'm almost out of time, he hasn't reconnected. So I guess that's the end of this talk. He and I obviously talk again, if you want to meet people like Topher, there are other people like him on the discord. And now the disk the bridges of meaning discord servers not for everyone. It's a particular medium of communication, we're playing with it, there are limitations to it. And I know many of you have tried it. And basically, that's not for me. And that's completely understand that. But for others, you know, we're trying to find ways to expand the niches in it, because I think part of it is, is size, you sort of that Dunbar number is very real, and you need to sort of find your, your group of three, your group of 10, your group of 30, and your 150. And the discord server has like 1500 on it now. And so yeah, that's way past the Dunbar number or 1700 on it. So that's that's part of what we're continuing to try to experiment with it. But anyway, thanks for watching. Sorry, Topher that this bailed out, neither of us cried. So how successful that was, we'll have to see. But I certainly want to post it. So I'm going to end the recording here because I got another conversation in two minutes.