https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vkM40PJw3Cs

 So if there's one question I hear asked most often about Jordan Peterson is, is he a Christian? Or does he think that God is real or God is an idea? And these are obviously some of the questions I'm going to dig a lot deeper into as I get into my videos. But now that he's doing the book tour and causing all of this conversation, friends of mine who haven't really talked much about Peterson and they're bumping into him and they're bumping into people who are talking about him. And so I wanted to talk about this a little bit today. And this is the Jordan Peterson is he or isn't he game? Is he or isn't he a neo-Marxist? Is he or of course he isn't. Is he or isn't he a neo-Nazi? Is he or isn't he alt-right? Is he or isn't he men going their own way? Is he a conservative? Does he hate women? On and on and we saw the Newman interview. But this edition is, is he or isn't he a Christian? And so if you read Christy Blatchford's sit down with Warrior for the Common Sense here in this one, she says, are you a Christian? Do you believe in God? I think the proper response to that is no, but I'm afraid he might exist. And for some really sharp viewers out there, you might notice this quote from the usual suspects Keaton once said, I don't believe in God, but I'm afraid of him. Well, I believe in God and the only thing that scares me is Kaiser Soze. So there you go. And so you read that and you think, okay. So then actually a friend of mine wrote me and said, I read a thing in the paper that said, Jordan Peterson said he didn't believe in God. But one of the best journalists that have written on Peterson is Tim Lott. And he's actually written two really excellent pieces. This one that just recently came out yesterday and which has this fun picture of Peterson with the lobsters, in it he says, Peterson, is it about Christian? And he talks about life after death, reality, the future, all of this stuff. And again, when you see Peterson in one interview saying, no, he's not a Christian. And here Tim Lott, who's interviewed him quite a bit and in fact made a video about him says he is, this is the previous article about him. And he talks about his Christianity is often viewed through a Jungian lens and so on and so forth. Peterson is not rather surprisingly only a philosophical Christian. When I ask him whether he believes that Jesus physically rose from the dead, he was unable to answer. Now this is when you ask Peterson, you know, are you a Christian? He'll often say things like, I don't like that question because people are trying to put me in a corner or I would say people are trying to put him in a box because everybody has boxes for Christian or no Christian. Now all of these boxes are of course a function of the evaluator. And they're not only a function of the evaluator, they are a function of the criteria that the evaluator is holding. And of course if you're part of a church or involved in this kind of thing, you see this kind of question all the time is should we consider such and such a person a Christian? Is Donald Trump a Christian? Is Franklin Graham Jr. a Christian because he supports Donald Trump? Is Jim Wallace a Christian because he votes for Democrats? And so on and so forth. And you know, all of us understand that there's a whole lot of criteria going on here. Now Peterson looks at all these people and says I don't want to be a part of this game. And again, if you delve into Peterson deep enough, you will see that he doesn't want to be a part of this game because he wants to be truthful in his speech and not be like lying pastors. And I'm going to do another video actually on this lying business because the more you study Peterson, the more you have to drill all the way down to understand his philosophical roots and for all of this terminology. And this is why there's all this is he or isn't he game when it comes to Peterson because he speaks, he chooses his words very carefully and he says what he wants to say and he doesn't always define his terms to the degree that people would like. And I think actually he has done so much speaking, he has in fact defined his terms that the vast majority of people don't want to wait around or put in the effort to figure out what he is. They have other things to do in life and they're simply going to move on. And it's only crazy people who watch hours and hours and hours of video by Jordan Peterson and they're really crazy ones that are watching hours of video of me talking about Jordan Peterson, you are the true addicts and we probably all need a good 12-step program, but here we go. And so when I go into let's say the Christian Jordan Peterson Facebook groups and then of course the big question is well, how does God regard Jordan Peterson? Well, the best, one of the best video clips on this was with Tim Lopp and who wrote those two articles and so let's hear that. Quick question, are you Christian? I suppose the most straightforward answer to that is yes, although I think it's, let's leave it at yes. But he's not going to leave it at yes because he can't leave it at yes because again, this is why the question itself doesn't really get you anywhere. He has answered it many times and in many ways, you just have to throw the question back at yourself and ask yourself, well, how do you define what a Christian is? Well, I'm a bit dissatisfied with that because there are so many kinds of Christians and I would never imagine that you are a very literal-minded Christian. Now we're going to get into this word literal in the other video I'm going to do this week, hopefully if I have time. It really digs into this issue of literal which will be the biblical series three, my third video on biblical cities three. So yeah, and this is going to come up again and again, literal versus non-literal. Well, what do you mean? Well, there are truths other than the literal that perhaps are more truthful than even literal truths. You know, there are many kinds of truth and I don't mean that in a postmodern way actually, but the truths that govern behavior and the truths that emerge from facts are not the same truths. Do you believe that Jesus rose again? And again, boy, this gets interesting because right away, why is it that the test of Christianity is the resurrection of Jesus Christ? I personally think that's a tremendously good test. And if you listen to some of my sermons, you'll understand why. But, you know, so do you believe Jesus rose from the dead? From the dead. Literally. See, you just finished saying you're not one of those literal Christians, but do you believe Jesus rose from the dead literally? We're going to have to come to terms with this word literally. I find it. I cannot answer that question. And the reason is because, okay, let me think about it for a minute. See if I can come up with a reasonable answer to that. Well, the first answer would be it depends on what you mean by Jesus. A historical... And so now Tim Lott picks the literal answer. ...human being that existed... ...in a body. In a body. In a body. And it was a physical body and then it was on earth. Yes. It was on earth and that was literally, was literally, was literally, it came back to life after death. And again, we're going to have to get into why this question. What is with this question? And we will spend, if you keep watching my channel, we will spend a lot of time talking about this because this goes down very, very deep. I would say that at the moment I'm agnostic about that issue. And in fact I would say, and you can listen to the rest of it, it's a short video clip, and agnostic is one of the best words that Peterson can in fact use in this because this is in fact where he's going. And Peterson, see I don't fault Peterson at all with this question. I fault the listeners because Peterson has told us again and again and again and again what he believes. And in fact I'm going to use some of the Transliminal 2015, this was before a lot of the pronoun stuff kicked up, and his answers have stayed remarkably the same. The problem is he is not giving people the answer within the framework, and I would have to say within the socio-political framework that they are looking for or within the ecclesiastical framework they are looking for, but he tells people again and again and again exactly who he is and what he believes. But for the most part, most people don't want to take the time to do the research and then say, well what does he believe? Well one of the best videos for this was actually this video where he gets hot and bothered about someone calling him far right. And so here he goes and he's going to tell us exactly who he is and what he believes, and he's going to put it in all of the boxes for us, and he's also going to give the guy a look which I think is just one of the funniest things. He wrote back and said, thank you for your response. So the article is truthful and accurate. How is it to be characterized? I said very clearly, you have characterized me as far right. On what grounds whatsoever can you make that claim? And having made it, it is your responsibility to either justify the characterization with some investigation or to withdraw and apologize. Politically, I'm a classic British liberal. Temperamentally, I'm high in openness which tilts me to the left, although I am also conscientious which tilts me to the right. Philosophically, I am an individualist, not a collectivist of the right or the left. Metaphysically, I'm an American pragmatist who has been strongly influenced by the psychoanalytic and clinical thinking of Freud, Jung, and the psychotherapists who have followed in their wake. That is who he is. He has said it again and again and again and again, but the problem is that most of us hear that and say, well, I don't know what that means. In other words, we've got the question, do your own homework. Figure out what these things mean. And in fact, he gives you all the books to find out what it means. He in fact says it again and again and again in a number of videos. The thing is, it's just not easy to get your mind around. And so, well, let's get back to the PowerPoint. And so, well, what is pragmatism? Well, you know, some of you who studied a little bit of philosophy in school understand a little something about the pragmatic school and the American pragmatists. And I've quoted a number of times from the book he recommends, The Metaphysical Club. And, you know, after thinking about pragmatism a little bit, and I'm by no means an expert in pragmatism or philosophy, pragmatism isn't just a disposition towards a certain thing. Pragmatism is in a sense an answer to the question, what is knowledge? Now, if you think about that long enough, you'll begin to see something. You see, pragmatism assumes, and Peterson says this again and again and again and again, pragmatism assumes that the deepest truth is nested in action. And when I revisit the liar thing and his church or non-church going thing, I'm going to revisit this because this is actually germane to the entire conversation. Pragmatism assumes that, and Peterson will say again and again, people's beliefs are revealed by their actions, much more than they're revealed by their statements. And again, if you read Jonathan Height, you'll get exactly the same answer, that, you know, in a sense we're the rider on the elephant and we're making up PR press releases, and what we really believe is what we do. Now, Peterson is, I'm going to use something from the Transliminal 2015, and this is by Jordan Levine, and he wants a little bit more restrictions on the use of his video, so I think I've satisfied that for him. And I want to use this clip from him because I actually think that the 2015 Transliminal video is if you want, if you have two and a half hours that you really want to devote to and you really want to know who Jordan, where Jordan Peterson's religious views are coming from, that Transliminal 2015 video I think is probably the most linear, and the video is by no means very linear, the most linear, the most succinct treatment of the very complicated process that can answer the question about who is Jordan Peterson. So let's pick this up here. No, don't tell me PowerPoint crashed. Okay. So if I just interject, if I understand correctly, you're talking about, there's, there, in let's say the industrialized north. And it's fun comparing Levine's 2015 to 2017 videos because he got better, and he might himself because he asks really good questions. These are some of the best stuff on Peterson out there. In a society that relies on scientific analysis to make it, to establish the fundamental basis on which the rest of the society is predicated, there are certain assumptions about what is real versus what is not real, what is actually out there if there's a distinction between subjects. Right, but even there, there's an implicit assumption that's what's out there in objective space is what's real. Okay, well, but the problem with that is that... Okay, and that is the implicit assumption of the materialists that this is, this is again, which Weinstein, I've been listening to both of them lately. This is, I think, is it Eric or Brett? Gosh, I can't remember because they're brothers. But it's one of the Weinstein's that was on Rogan with Peterson that, you know, material, I'd like to say physical reality because it's governed by physics. Physical reality is base reality. And Peterson's saying, ah, but that's an assumption. That's an assumption about reality. Now, it's obviously a powerful assumption, but here's another... And when he says it's a powerful assumption, he's a pragmatist, which means that assumption, if embraced, affords a lot of power pragmatically. And he's going to go into this in depth in this video, but I'm not going to play the whole thing, obviously. ...the way of looking at the Darwinian problem, as far as I can tell. So part of the reason that the Darwinians insist that random mutation is the source of continual... It's not progress. Continual survival. Now, again, in the future, I'm going to have to get into this question of random and materialism. And hopefully in the next couple of weeks, I'm going to start my project with Jordan Peterson and C.S. Lewis's miracles talking back and forth. That's the project I've really wanted to do, but I'm still in my prolegomena, and I've got to get there. And so random mutations and Peterson... And then he says, and it's not progress, because again, again, pay attention. One of the things I love that Peterson mentioned, and I think it's actually in this video, where he says, you know, you can have intelligence, and you are as intelligent as probably your genetics are allowing you to be. But here's something that you can do if you really want to be powerful is pay attention. Pay attention. Listen. And so basically he's going to be saying that, okay, so you have this chaotic environment, you have random mutations. We don't call... See, again, language. We don't call progression. It isn't progress because suddenly you begin to appreciate the filter our language is putting on it. Let's say change. Is that the underlying environment changes, and it changes unpredictably. By its essential nature, it's unpredictable. Thus, if it's unpredictable, only random transformation can keep up with it. A lot of random transformation. Hopefully the randomness of the environmental change will be matched by the randomness of the genetic change. Okay. So what that means in part is that the environment, so to speak, is finally incomprehensible, because you can't predict it. Okay. So that means that a limited creature that's established itself by Darwinian means can't have access to the truth. They can only have access to sufficient truth. Bingo. A limited creature. This is Darwinianism for him. He's pragmatic Darwinian. A limited creature cannot have access to the truth. And this is the bone of contention he is picking with the materialists that they are, in a sense, implying. They are assuming they have access to truth in a direct way. And this is what so much of his content has been dealing with. And he's saying, no, we only have access to sufficient truth. Well, sufficient to what? And sufficient truth is the truth that allows you to survive and reproduce. And from a Darwinian perspective, there isn't any truth past that. Hear that again. There isn't any truth past that. Now pay attention to all of his answers about Jesus' resurrection, about the existence of God. There isn't any truth past that. Well, what does he mean by truth? Well, this is at the end of this video. He says this is really hard to talk with, because you have to have everything on the table in front of you before you can actually put the thing together. And you can't just start with a piece of it and eat the elephant that way. You have to have everything in front of you and then put the thing together. And that's how you can see it. So, you know, this is our lot, sayeth Darwin. So I don't think Dawkins is a Darwinian. I think he's a Newtonian, because he believes that there is truth. The Darwinians don't believe that. The Darwinians say, no. There's enough truth to keep you alive and have you survive. And that's all. In other words, Dawkins, and actually in my next video, when I dig into origin and allegorical interpretation and Dawkins, he's basically saying that Dawkins, in a sense, when you have the story of the blind man and the elephant, Dawkins says, yeah, there's an elephant. Of course, you can't tell that story without knowing there's an elephant. And so that's why he says, Dawkins is a Newtonian. He is not a Darwinist. A true Darwinist who doesn't lie understands the limit of their truth. And eventually all that's going to go to, because 99.5% of all species are extinct. That's an amazing point, if I understand it correctly. Look, the American pragmatists figured this out in the late 1800s. Exactly. This reminds me of pragmatist philosophy specifically, which I have a soft spot for. It speaks to me directly. But I'm thinking about other people who I know at the university or just in my life. If they hear this, they would just say, what? Like, so it's as if we're living in two different worlds at the same time. We are. In the sense that we've internalized the evolutionary mindset for a large part and parcel of how we understand reality. But at the same time, we hold on to this notion of truth as beyond our subjective experience out there. And we're actually directly when we conduct these experiments. This is just true. Right. Well, part of the problem too is that because science is reductionistic, whenever you measure something extremely accurately, there's a whole bunch of other things you're not measuring. And your assumption is that the knowledge gained by that precision isn't undone by the dismissal of everything else. Well, is that a valid claim? It depends on what your preconditions are for determining validity. And I'll pause it there. So there you are. And again, I have listened to this video, that extended video at least three times. I've listened to other portions of it many more times. And it's not easy to figure this out. So again, you say, well, why can't, why won't Peterson just categorize him himself in terms of these things? Well, he won't because of his metaphysics. He won't because of his epistemology. He's a Darwinian pragmatist and he's saying there isn't sufficient truth. Well, you know, someone says, well, did Jesus rise from the dead? Now, how is he supposed to answer that question and not be a liar? And this is why Peterson answers that question all over the place in many different ways. So you can ask him this question all day long and you'll keep getting answers like these. And he's not being coy. He's not teasing us. He's not being duplicitous. He's not lying, which he understands as being manipulative and self-serving in terms of the answers. Sufficient truth to survive is all the truth we are privy to. And those who don't lie won't talk beyond it. And this is where, again, you get his answer to, well, what about Christianity? I live as if God exists. I live as if this is true because he's saying I can't have knowledge of that because my Darwinian epistemology will not allow me to go beyond that point. Now, let's dig a little deeper because most traditional Christians have an implicit epistemology. And that means that you have assumptions about epistemology, which is epistemology is a theory of knowledge. And it's embedded in their belief systems. And most people have never explored these. Now, to be naive and to have implicit things is not a crime. We all have implicit things. None of us can take enough time to explore all of our implicit things. And in fact, usually in the process of talking with others, we begin to see our implicit things. But if you want to dialogue outside your implicit belief system, it's important to own and therefore to explore your own implicit beliefs at a higher resolution. Now, this is, again, where I'm going to be going with some of this. So this video is a little bit of a teaser. As a Christian, I have a question. Does God demand a specific epistemology? Now, you might say, of course he does. Well, see, epistemologies are functions of culture. And Christianity, for a very long time, has understood the relationship between Christ and culture. I can pull a book off my shelf that I read in college, Christ and Culture. And that just has five little explorations of it. But it gets far more nuanced than that. Does God demand a specific epistemology? And I would say that many people, you're not liable for the culture you were born into. You're not liable for the culture you were educated into to a point. At some point, you have to examine your culture and make decisions about it. And so now this is one of the things I'm going to explore. And I'm going to say basically that the answers are more complicated than that. That to say, well, just because Jordan Peterson doesn't share your implicit traditional Christian epistemology, that he is outside the pale. And I would say, I'm not ready to shut the door on that. And you might say, whoa, but you're a pastor of a conservative reformed denomination. I'd say, yes, you should understand that I, PVK, am a Calvinist. Well, what does that have to do with it? Well, Calvinism gets into epistemology. And if you don't believe that, take a look at Alvin Plantinga's Warranted Christian Belief and take a look at his work and look how often he gets into the Calvin census Daviditatis. And so we're going to have to get into that too when we get into Lewis. And the other thing I would say is most people, if you want to listen to the sermon I just preached last Sunday, I got into this question of how we define this term saved and how this becomes a Christian catchword and what it believes. And I think it's important for Christians to dig up those assumptions that they're bearing on those kinds of things. And I would say as a Calvinist, Calvinism nuances and relocates the criteria for salvation as in a sense a code word merely from human volition. Well, that's kind of a teaser. And I hope it's helpful. So you can keep asking Peterson, are you a Christian? And you're going to keep getting the same kind of answers you're getting. And in a sense, if you really want to know, if you really want to evaluate Peterson, you're going to have to dig down and you're going to have to, part of his not being a liar is he is not going to easily go along. He's an individualist, you heard him say that, and he's not a liar. So he's not going to easily go along with any of these broad communal things that you see. Now, he will try to locate himself within it, which he does. But for many of us, we listen to those terms and we say, well, I just kind of got a fuzzy idea of what those terms are. So if you really want to understand them, you're going to have to do your own homework and try and get to the bottom of it. Well, I didn't want this to be too long and I hope it wasn't. So thanks for watching.