https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=o6A2lye3mm4

 Hi, my name is Paul and some of you who are used to my channel are used to me talking about Jordan Peterson. This isn't going to probably talk about any Jordan Peterson, if any. We're going to talk about some issues within the Christian Reformed Church and some overtures that are coming up. I made a video that's right before this one. I'll link to it in the notes on that other video, giving you a little bit of background if you're not a Christian or don't know much about the church and want to contextualize this conversation. That video will have more background. But what I'm doing in anticipation to this larger, what we call an assembly, which is a large meeting in the Christian Reformed Church to decide things about the Christian Reformed Church, is I'm trying to host some conversations with some members of the Christian Reformed Church. Today we have two pastors and one lay member of the Christian Reformed Church. We're going to be talking about the relationships between the church, the institutional church, and politics or religion and politics. And so I'm just going to let each of these guys introduce themselves. Dan, why don't we start with you? Goodness. Okay, so I'm Dan Brown. I'm a minister here in Kingston, Ontario, Canada. I served for 10 years in Nova Scotia as a minister there and two years as a chaplain at Dalhousie University. Let me see. I went to school at Calvin Seminary for my MDiv, also at St. Mary's University for my MBA. What is pertinent for our discussion is I also served on the Canadian Committee for Contact with Government, which is part of the discussion that we're having and part of what's related to these overtures. And I've also been involved in politics behind the scenes for many, many years, decades now. And so I have a perspective that may be a little bit different, a little bit nuanced from the perspectives where the overtures come from. And so I'm looking forward to our chat today. Okay, thanks, Dan. And how about you, Rob? Why don't you introduce yourself? Yeah, my name is Rob Torstrup. I'm a pastor here in Salem, Oregon. I've served here for 12 years now, almost 12 years. I also graduated from Calvin Seminary and I did doctoral work at Covenant Seminary as well. I completed that several years ago. Looking at one of the topics I explored was faith and vocation and work. I have somewhat of a unique perspective or maybe something in common with Dan in that I grew up in Canada. But I live now, I've lived in the States for almost as long as I've lived in Canada. So just seeing the different cultures and the different ways that faith engages culture and faith engages politics has always been interesting to me. And I was part of the committee that wrote the overture from Classes Columbia. It's now known as Overture 14. And so discussions with our church council and the committee writing that overture. And that's sort of how I got involved in this. So I'm also really looking forward to a good discussion and learning from others here. Okay. And the one of these three that I probably know the best, even though we've never met in the flesh, is Doug Van de Green. Doug and I have been emailing on a little group called CRC Voices. Some of you who saw my Dave Snapper video met him from that group. And so I've gotten to know Doug over a number of years and I really appreciate him and enjoy him. Doug, why don't you introduce yourself? Well, sure. I'm the non-pastor here. I'm the lawyer. John Calvin was a lawyer. So you know that guy. I know. I point that out. So was Herman Doyle. Did you know that? I didn't know that. Yes, he was. That's what he was, occupationally. Yeah. So anyway, I hail from the great state of Iowa. I grew up a farm boy, went to Dort College, came out to Oregon because my wife got a teaching job where they happen to have a law school. But then we came and we stayed because the weather is different here than in Iowa, should we say. And a few other things. But anyway, so I've been a practicing private attorney for about, this year it's 39 years. So I've been involved in the CRC all my life. I'm one of those lifers. I did a lot of work early on beside being a private practice attorney in public interest law. So I worked for Christian Legal Society. I ran an Oregon-based, basically a First Amendment type of public interest law firm here. I worked for Alliance Defense Fund, now called Alliance Defending Freedom for a while. And all of that, if you were keeping track of things in terms of left and right, all of that would be roughly regarded as right. But then I'll say to some people, well, that's only if you don't get nuanced on what left and right is about. Because oftentimes, for instance, I was a little bit involved in the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, what they call RFRA. And that act, even though people of late have thought that's a real right wing thing, because I think they had something in Ohio where that was sort of a tab to state RFRA. Well, actually, it's mostly non-Christians that benefit from that, not Christians. But when I worked with Christian Legal Society on that, the idea was that the First Amendment should not be run over. And it came out of an Oregon case that essentially defended the Native American population and supported their right, if they wanted to, to have peyote, even though it was otherwise illegal, because it was part of a religious exercise for them. So when I did all of this legal work, I got in contact. I went to I don't know how many places in terms of worship services, because the people that were associated with Christian Legal Society, so we were all over the country. And frankly, there weren't many reformed people in that group. And so that's where I kind of got to know a lot of the broader Protestant and Catholic groups out there, even Mormon. And one of the things that I noticed when that happened was that the CRC was unique in one respect. And this was during the 80s and 90s. CRC meaning the Christian Reformed Church. That Christian Reformed Church. And that was in other churches. It tended to be at least the ones that I went to. But understand, I was working with Christian Legal Society and things like that. They tended to be far more politically aligned, all of them on the right side than the CRC did. And I was not a fan of my denomination becoming politically aligned, even though back then if you would characterize see or seeers, the people, you would say, they're pretty right wing. I mean, maybe you're an exception there, Paul. Maybe Daniel too. But there's hope for you. I see you migrating of late. But anyway, we won't get off on the tension. No, no, don't say things like that. You're going to lose me friends, my friend. But I did not want my church to become politically aligned, even if the people, you took a vote and the people were 90% one way or another, because I'm also a Kuiper fan. I'm a Doryward fan. I'm a fan of those people. And frankly, I'm a fan of United States Constitution and all those guys. And there's a distinctive for the institutional church. Even though I'm a rabbit, get engaged in everything in life, including politics. Shoot, it's been my life, politics and law. But I don't want to take that into my church. So why don't you tell us a little bit about, well, I think you've given us some background in terms of where this Doug, where this your feelings for this overture came out of. Why don't you and Rob maybe give us a little bit of background and then summarize the overture briefly, because many I'll put a link to the overture in the notes, but many people likely will watch this without having read it. Well, I'll give you a little bit of background and then maybe Rob can do this overture because he actually authored it. I was on the committee, but he authored it. So a little bit more of a background to this is in 2012, and as you probably know, Paul, Classes Columbia did an overture that I had actually authored, and that was overture three. Basically asking the denomination at that point, asking Sin at that point to look into the whole question of what is the role of the institutional church with respect to other Kiperian spheres, if you will. And the reason that I got into that is it seemed to me that over the past, from that point of view, from 2012, over the past 20 years prior to that, we have migrated quite a bit into being political. And then it was actually, I'll be honest here, it was a little bit more upsetting to me that the political that we migrated into was way left of the center as opposed to what we used to be, and that was way right. Now, I think I'm an honest broker in this. I don't want either, but I especially don't want way left. So that was a little added incentive. So I wanted to put a kind of a stop to it. And we talk about that in this overture, but basically, even though the floor expressed a lot of interest in that overture because the committee said ignore it, but the floor overturned it. And let me pause there and just highlight a little bit how Sin had works. Overtures are communications that come from classes, which are regional bodies, councils, which are local bodies, and members. They go to Sin had, which is the broadest assembly. It's a binational body. Overtures are communications that come where those overtures go to an advisory committee. That advisory committee makes a representation to the full session of Senate in terms of what to do with that overture. So that's the advisory committee that you spoke of. So it seemed to me back in 2012, there was a lot of interest. It wasn't just me in kind of cutting down on the political stuff. But there's a certain amount of inertia. I mean, I don't want to say it's Grand Rapids, but you know, within the bureaucracy that they have a tendency to lean politically left. But more importantly, they lean in the direction of the institutional church should become more politically inclined, which I think is a little bit more like the mainline churches are. And I've never wanted that. So nothing happened really from that 2012, except I think it started a conversation perhaps. But nothing definitively happened to slow down the politicization of the denomination, which brings us today and I'll turn it over to Rob on this overture. Okay. Yeah. So we wrote the overture really with one goal, and that was to ask the denomination to stop what we call political lobbying. We were careful, I think, and we were very intentional about this. We don't want to minimize the importance of Christians speaking into the public arena. In other words, we emphasize that, I think, in the overture that Christians should be engaged in matters of poverty and immigration and racial reconciliation. But we don't want the institutional church advocating for specific political positions more specifically for bills in Congress or pieces of legislation. And one of the reasons for that is that many times those pieces of legislation or those bills can be far more complex and far more nuanced. And this is not a politically left or politically right tendency. This can be on both sides. What we don't want is to see the CRC, and we've seen this, and in the overture we list a number of examples where the denomination is specifically instructing or encouraging members to contact their representatives to vote on this particular legislation, to vote this way or to vote that way. And the problem with that is that in all those cases, there's such nuance that Christians of good conscience could legitimately disagree on those things. And they could be working out of a shared conviction and a commitment to Scripture and to biblical authority, but they come down on different sides of the issue. So just a brief example, and maybe this is a thorny issue, and so I want to be careful not to come down on any one side or the other, but the immigration issue. If you come up with a law that tries to control and push for more border control, that might be a good thing, but then there might be others that say, you know what, as Christians we need to be much more welcoming to the stranger. So you can debate that. And often the legislation that passes through Congress and through government is far more complex than some of the soundbites would lead one to believe. So we're asking that the denomination refrain from taking specific political positions, or I should say more carefully, we're asking that they stop advocating for particular positions on pieces of legislation or other actions, and to stop asking the denomination to advocate one way or the other. Again, we're not asking that they stop speaking. We think that actually there's room for the Office of Social Justice and Hunger Action to play a part that can be very constructive and helpful, informing denomination about issues of race, hunger, poverty, immigration, etc. But inform us about those things, help us think through biblically what the implications might be, and then let the denomination make up their own mind based on their own convictions. And so the overture is kind of long, but at the heart of it, that's what it's really getting at. That's what we're really asking for. Okay. Okay. Now Dan, you've been listening, and this group of four kind of came about because there's an online community that three of us participate in, and Rob and I were talking a little, and Dan jumped in, and Dan expressed some views, so I wanted Dan in the conversation because I didn't want to just have me and a couple of friends think in a certain way. I wanted to have a lively discussion. So Dan, what do you think about what you've heard so far? Well, first, I'm hoping I can join the circle of friends. So Dan, as of today, you're my friend. I think what I wanted to bring into the conversation is a sense of perspective that there is some of the overture that I want to say yes to, but there's also a bit of a, whenever you get into legislation and legislating how things are, sometimes you have unintended consequences that are a part of it. And so the idea that the denomination shouldn't tell people how to vote, pastors shouldn't endorse candidates, those are things that everyone can agree on or should agree on. Those are good things. So you agree on that, that the denomination shouldn't say vote for Trump or vote for Hillary or vote for Trudeau? Absolutely. That's not the place of the church. And when we think about the whole idea of sphere of sovereignty, that's part of it. But there are places where it is very important that the church, institutional, and as organism, need to interact with government. I can't speak directly to the Office of Social Justice because I live in the world of Canada and our politics and the way things are done here are very different in a Westminster parliamentary system than it is in the system down south of the border. And so what we have here is sort of a like organization, the Committee for Contact with Government. But they're not in the business of telling people how to vote, but they are in the business of lobbying government on behalf of the denomination. And that is a very, very carefully defined role that is taken there in which we don't say to politicians, you must have this legislation or you must not because that's the combat sports that don't necessarily take place in our system. It's more the case that as a denomination, there are things that we need to speak to because they directly impact our denomination. It's agencies, the churches, or there is something that we as a church have a position on and need to speak to in terms of legislation that comes up. And so the Canadian side of lobbying is one of being in committee meetings and adding our voice to many voices speaking on policy. But it's not done as part of the combat sports of politics, it's done as part of the civil discourse in which policy is shaped and influenced by many voices. And so when we move into sort of these ideas of the overtures, they tend to put just this great big solution that would negate something that is very, very important. If we talk about immigration, the Canadian experience is different than the American experience. When we talk about immigration, it's not about opposing policy or advancing policy. Often the cases that are dealt with are in terms of our experience on the ground with refugees and immigration as a church and adding our voice to the conversation to make sure that the policy takes into account those very important parts that we've been involved with. So what I would want to see and what concerns me about the overtures in general is that they're a very, very big hammer trying to do some surgery that would have unintended consequences across the border. Can you give me an example of the kind of thing that this committee has engaged with the Canadian government about in the past? Sure, sure. And I can say the committee on the Canadian side deals with very, very small files, not small files, but a small number of files. So one or two or three things at a time. So it's not delving into the entirety of the Canadian body politic, just things that we have specific connections to. So immigration, that was decided by synod and handed down in response to the American question of immigration. And then there was the, oh, yes, and we will instruct the committee for contact with government to which we said, okay, we have different questions and so we will look at that file, but it won't look the same. And so we looked at the experience of diaconal ministries, of world renew, and their interaction with refugees and some of the policy that was going on in the day in terms of legislated and bureaucratic changes that would significantly impact our ability to do ministry on the ground with people and that would have a particular effect. One of the other very important ones in Canada, which is very distinct from the American experience, is our relationship with Indigenous communities in Canada, where the church and the state are both intricately involved in the dialogue with Indigenous peoples. And being a part of this conversation is incredibly important, not only politically, but also in terms of gospel proclamation, because the church as a whole, the church universal in Canada needs to be a part of this dialogue. And so this is a place where state and church and the cogs of the spheres, as Kuyper described them, really need to influence and interact with one another. Okay. Well, so you two from Oregon, did you write it too big of a hammer when they needed a scalpel? What do you hear? Well, let me ask a question just of Dan, if I could, because I think that gets a response to that question. Because, Dan, you mentioned a couple of times that the issues, you're speaking to the issues that directly impact your ministry on the ground and you talk about, you know, speaking to specific issues that directly relate to the work of the church. And so when it comes to immigration, the Committee for Contact with Government is speaking about issues that would limit, perhaps, your ability to help refugees in Canada, right? I mean, am I understanding you correctly? Absolutely. So, and to me, that makes sense. I mean, there's a case where you would maybe want to be able to speak as a church a little bit more forcefully because it impacts directly your ministry. But I don't think every political issue is like that. I mean, there are, you know, there are tangential relationships between issues and the ministry and the work of the church, but not everything directly impacts the ability of the church to do ministry. And so what we're trying to focus in on is asking, you know, the overture says we need to refrain from having the church speak on every political issue and take stance on every political issues. But I don't think we would foresee or expect that the church can't take a stand. Like if the government began to, you know, pass laws that would restrict the ability to preach and worship, there's a case where we would certainly want to see the denomination taking a stance on it because it directly impacts the ability to do ministry on the ground. But not every issue is like that. So that's what we're targeting. Yeah, let me add to that. I'm actually quite pleased to hear what Dan has to say about this because, and I realize the devil's in the details on this one, but what Dan describes is next to nothing of what I see coming out of OSJ. OSJ meaning? The American side of the social justice. The Office for Social Justice. Yes. And so you do good at this, Paul. And so, and what I've done is I've kind of stayed out of the Canadian end of it for the simple reason that I've been practicing long enough to know that I shouldn't talk about that which I don't know much about. But I think what Dan describes is exactly where I would say, well, yeah, the institutional church ought to be talking to it, the government. This is about the institutional church. Now, again, devil's in the detail. Let me give you the flip side on that. Just an example of what OSJ does over on the American side. So it was a bunch of months ago, probably even longer than a year, there were two competing agriculture bills in front of the United States Congress. One that the Senate was supporting, the other one the House. And the agricultural bill has within it the SNAP program. And the SNAP program is basically the food stamp program. Now the agricultural bill was probably a thousand pages long, right? So the SNAP is only part of it. But these real long thousand fifteen hundred pages. So OSJ does a big push with its members and probably otherwise too. They do prewritten letters for you and then you can access them with email and they basically lobby for this. And they wanted the Senate bill, not the House bill. Now, in conversation that I least attempted to have some of, I sometimes have one way conversations with them. But what I pointed out that the difference between the two bills was this, that the House bill saved some money on the SNAP program because and I actually read the bills or at least the part of them that affected SNAP, because the House bill got rid of what's called auto qualification, which means this, if you qualify for certain programs, then you automatically qualified for food stamps. Well, as opposed to having to apply for food stamps and actually qualify specifically. So what was happening is number one, there was just a lot of over giving because just because you qualify for that doesn't mean you need food stamps. And I had personal experience with a number of people who have that. And the second one is the various American states were kind of getting the hang of this. So what they would have a tendency to do is, some of them at least, is they would create little programs where somebody got 10 bucks of energy credit for a year in their state because all those people then would get food stamps even if they didn't otherwise qualify. So whenever you make laws like this, big fat laws like the federal government makes you get all of this abuse. So I pointed that out to OSJ, didn't get an answer and said, so why are you pitching for the Senate bill? But my analysis of the rationale was simply this, it had nothing to do with the CRC. It had to do with, well, wait a minute, the Senate has a program that doesn't cut SNAP on the whole. It didn't cut SNAP to people qualified for SNAP, but it didn't cut SNAP and it expanded. And the House bill got rid of all of auto qualification. I doubt that OSJ knew that. I don't think they knew anything about that. They were just going, well, this reduces some welfare benefits. So we don't want that. They took this little bit of information, they promoted it on their website, they send it out into their email flashes. And then people in the denomination here, because they trust the, this is their CRC, this is their denomination that they love. They hear the OSJ saying the Senate bill is good, the House bill is bad, right, Congressman, so on and so forth. And this doesn't necessarily, this doesn't impact institutionally the Christian Reformed Church at all. Yeah. Now the argument that the argument would make is, well, it affects hunger and we're the Office of Social Justice and Hunger Relief, right? Oh, come on. Okay, Dan, you heard that. So we've got a nice agreement going here. What do you think? Well, okay, I can't speak with any expertise as to the SNAP program or to spending bills in the House and Senate. Neither could OSJ and that was part of the problem. But what I would say is this, that in addition to the things that directly impact the operation of the Church, there are also times when it's important for the Church to speak to not necessarily specific policy, but certainly to some ideals or some things that we hold value to. Again, I can't speak to your specific example. I have no idea really what it's about. But in terms of things like in Canada, if we were to talk about, for example, Aboriginal justice and that conversation, sometimes the dialogue that goes on in Canada is very- Okay, now I'm listening with American ears when you say Aboriginal justice, what do you mean? I mean, you're talking Australia? What is this? Who are these Aborigines? Well, I'm one of them, so there you go. You're an- Oh, wow, okay. So there we go. We have an Indigenous conversation, a nation-to-nation dialogue that's based on a long history and one that has both specific ministry connections to what we're doing, but also fundamental justice ones in terms of how the Church related to Indigenous peoples in Canada historically and that whole route. And so there are times when it is important when, as a Church, we see a fundamental injustice within society, that we speak to it. And sometimes that conversation happens with government because of the intermix and the interplay there. We can look at a recent example, which is a policy in Canada for Churches to employ summer students. And nonprofits and small businesses, they access the same grants. And the current government in that conversation has said, you have to, as Churches and as organizations, attest to your support for a pro-choice position as being a part of your mandate or that a pro-life position is not the direct mandate of what you're doing. It's nuanced. It affects what we're doing, but also the broader sense of life- You're speaking about abortion there. Absolutely. Pro-life, pro-choice, the debate in Canada is not the same as the US, but it is a conversation that happens. And so, you know, we, as a Church, directly respond to that because it impacts us. But also we speak to the issue of life, and we should because that's a core principle of our values. Legislation is a part of the interaction. But when we think about sphere sovereignty in Canada, we also recognize, again, as Kuyper describes it, there are cogs to the wheel. The spheres interact and they must connect and they must influence one another. It's just a part of the way that society is built. And so the Church has to be able to have that conversation about topics. Now does this bind the individual conscience? I don't think so because of the way our polity is structured, but that's a long conversation to talk about what delegated authority means and how our denomination actually works. That when the agencies speak for, when the Committee for Contact with Government speaks, they're not speaking for me. They're speaking for a process, an institution which is the tool of the organism. And so, but I think that it's important to know that there are times when the Church must speak and also speak beyond direct implication to issues of fundamental justice upon which we have positions, upon which we have a long history of talking, and upon which are very important to speak to power in important ways. So Dan, if I can jump in and just ask, then where is that line between articulating policies? Because I heard you saying that, right? You want to speak to certain ideals that whether it relates to aborigine justice or whether it relates to pro-life positions, where do you then say, okay, but now, but we're not going to go any further in terms of speaking to a specific policy, right? How do you draw that line? I don't think that a line is necessarily what you're looking for there. I think there are times when you do need to speak to specific policy and it's important to have that tool available. Should that be your go-to? No, but I would agree, right? You're going to have, you use the example of if the government is crafting a law that says you cannot hire this person unless they take this position. I would imagine that the government then is probably overstepping its authority and interfering with your ability to function as a church and so you're going to have something to say about that as an institutional church. But then there are other policies where it maybe doesn't, where the law wouldn't interfere as much, but it still is an important policy. How do you make the decision about saying, we're going to take a position on this versus saying we're going to just speak to the principles underneath it? This is where I can speak in terms of how I have experienced it in Canada. And I can't, again, the OSJ is a foreign entity to me and the politics of the thing I can't speak to. But what I can say is the way the Committee for Contact with Government works is that you have people who are elected from the regions of the church in Canada, they come together to provide oversight and also to provide policy analysis together with professional staff. But this is also overseen by synod and not only denominational agencies, but the Canada Corps. And so there's a very, very complex and long history and dynamic that goes into decisions like that. And they're not made very quickly and they're not made just because of it. But let's think, for example, Indigenous justice issues, speaking about schooling for Aboriginal children in Canada, which is something that the Committee for Contact with Government directly both lobbied for and advocated among the churches for. And the importance of being a part of that conversation is the historical root of the church within that conversation. But it doesn't necessarily, it's not necessarily something that we directly interact with. We are not providing education for Indigenous peoples, but to be able to speak on behalf as part of bearing witness and being part of that conversation, it's important for the church to be able to say in the particulars of this particular policy, say, this is where we stand, this is what we've learned, this is the history we have, and this is our voice lent to it. There are times when that is appropriate. There are times when it's not appropriate. And it's messy business at times. But I think that... I was just going to say, I guess that's where my difficulty comes in, is precisely because it is messy. Right? Because I don't think you'd hear an argument from me that the schooling for Indigenous children is a good thing based on the history and so on, and I can understand all that. But again, is that... Why should the church take a position on that as opposed to taking a position on another issue that may be equally important, but for whatever reason is, you have to make the decision about what you're going to take a stance on and what you're not going to. And because it's messy, that's why I guess I would make the case it's better to keep the church specifically focused on speaking to principles and articulating these ideas as human beings made in the image of God and the need for racial reconciliation and so on, which are biblical themes without saying, we have to stand behind this policy. And so that's just kind of where my difficulty comes in. And this is where the differences in sort of how politics are done is really important, because in Canada, it is more of a conversation rather than a battlefield. And so even in articulating, we are looking at this policy, we speak in support of it, it also comes with that broad, and here are the reasons. This is the Christian witness in terms of the image of God, in terms of looking at reconciliation as an important principle, in terms of looking at the gospel witness in an important way in terms of our relationship. So again, this is one where the experience in Canada is one that is not really, when I see the overtures presented, it really doesn't track to that. But when you look at the overtures as they are, it has that unintended consequence of saying, well, what you're doing really is crossing all these boundaries we don't want to cross. But we're having a conversation in a completely different way, and that's just not reflected in the way the documents are presented. So my question, Dan, is in your example, the Christian Reformed Church via this committee would say things to the Canadian government about an issue that the Christian Reformed Church isn't necessarily directly involved in, such as education of Aboriginal children. Yes. And that, and you're saying that there is a compelling reason why the Christian Reformed Church needs to speak into this, even though it's not involved directly. Yes, there is. Now, this morning I got someone posted on social media. Someone was outraged in Orange County, California, because there was a school board meeting, and the school board informed the parents that parents couldn't opt their children out of the state-mandated sex education program, which had a number of elements in it that these parents objected to. Now, this is not a situation where the state is telling a Christian school what they may or may not teach. This is not a situation where the state is telling homeschoolers what they may and may not teach the children. This is a situation where the state is telling parents they may not opt out of the state sex education program. So in your mind, if, let's say on the American side of the border, if the Christian Reformed Church wanted to weigh in here and say to the California legislature, because that's the German, that's the organization that's doing this, you should stop teaching sex education to children that involves these things. So that would be an example analogous to the example that you're making? I don't think so. And the reason that I don't think so is because when we're talking about issues of broad societal justice in which the church is connected but not directly involved, we speak on Indigenous issues in Canada because the church is involved in that conversation. The process of reconciliation requires us to be a part of it. What is interesting when this filters south of the border, that nuance is lost and then it is, then the angry, angry letters and comments come. I don't understand the differentiation between Indigenous education and sex education. Because the reality of the conversation in Canada is that Indigenous education is directly in related to the Canadian residential school systems of which the church was directly involved. The Christian Reformed Church was directly involved? The church as a whole. The conversation is different in Canada. You can't minister as a church in Canada and talk about the Christian Reformed Church and think that anybody cares what you're talking about. You're talking about the church. So whether it was the Roman Catholic Church, whether it was the Anglican Church or the United Church, it is the church. And so we are part of that conversation. And our ministry and witness is affected by our participation in the process of reconciliation and also walking alongside Indigenous communities and saying, okay, we are seeing the injustices that are done. The specific policy example in here was funding, the question of the government funding Indigenous children at a rate of a couple thousand dollars less per student because they were Indigenous, which is a fundamental injustice and part of the reconciliation conversation. That's important. And it's an important part of the broader dialogue that we are having on this issue north of the border. But, Dan, if I could push back maybe along with what Paul was saying, I mean, when you get, so I realize that there is a little bit of a complex history in terms of the Indigenous population in Canada within the relationship between the church and there's sort of a sense of past injustice there. And so I see how Paul's analogy doesn't directly line up. But when you have the state insisting on educating the students according to a state mandated curriculum, there are some that would say that that's an injustice as well and that it's not right to not have any way to opt out of that. Right? I mean, so there's some that I think would push back on that a little bit and say, well, this too is a matter of justice. And there are probably cases like that where we would look at sort of church order and the mandate of our institutions to say, is this weighty? Is this something that is part of our ministry and conversation? Is this something that our resources can go to? Again, in Canada, two, three files, that's what we look at. And they are generally mandated by synod or the direct experience of the agencies. I can't speak to what the OSJ is doing. I could have a particular opinion on the case that's there. And certainly I see the injustice in it. But is that a more universal case or is that a local case? Is that a case where the response of the church is one that is necessary for the whole conversation? In Canada, Indigenous justice and reconciliation is a question that the church is directly involved with in the broad sense. And so we do have not only a voice within the conversation, but we also have 50 years worth of expertise as a Christian Reformed church in that conversation. So this is also something with a long history. If synod decided that this was an issue down in California, say this is something that we as a church should speak on, and the classies came together through their representatives that were delegated to synod to say, this is something. And overture comes and says, go and address this. And the church together through prayer and worship and deliberation said, agencies, go and address this. This is a part of our educational ministry. This is a part of our justice ministry. Then I would say, absolutely, yes, that's something we should speak to. There is a process that's involved. One of the things, not particular to your overture, but perhaps to one of the others, is that there is this sense that you've just got lone ragers running around making their own decisions uninformed. My experience has been that that is certainly not the case. It is opposite to that reality. So Doug, are you ready to come down to Sacramento and fight the good fight against the evil sex education advocates in Orange County? What do you think about this? You've been so quiet. And I know you're a quiet guy. I want to pull the out of your shell. Right. Well, I'd love to. I've got a couple of years before retirement, and then maybe I will. And I've got other lawyers that I'll bring into the game down there, too. I think a good way to, because what I hear from Dan tells me that there was good reason why I never commented much on the Canadian scene, because I think, in fact, from what he describes, the way they operate up there with regard to quote quote justice issues and the way that we operate down here via OSJ on justice issues is, in fact, very, very, very different. And I don't think there's be there'd be too many things where I would object to what Canada does. So when Dan says we only got a few things, well, OSJ is popping up all over the place on all kinds of things all the time. I'm on their email blast for these things. And they're just like this, that, and the other thing. And it's all over. So I think there is a big difference. But let me point out an example that's actually past history for us. And maybe this will help sharpen our swords on this. So, Senate, of course, and Dan suggested that if Senate says go, go, because Senate said it. And I'm going to push back on that a little bit, because I'm going to say that we have, of course, this is the lawyer in me, just because the Congress does, it doesn't mean that they can do things that are unconstitutional. And just because Senate does, it doesn't mean that they can do things that are opposed to our church order. So once upon a time, I think it was actually in 2012 when our other overture was there, Senate pronounced about climate change. And they made all kinds of pronouncements. And then later on, OSJ is sending people to the Paris Accords and taking positions on joining the Paris Accords or not doing this or passing this legislation relative to that. And then they take positions on United Nations things and get very politically involved. So it would be my opinion, and it was back then, that we really had no business going to the Paris Accords or saying about climate change that we adopt the views of so and so and so and so. Now, I do know that the way that the study report came down, they actually looked at different thinking about climate change. They rejected some, they adopted another. Now, part of this is political, but I would expand the conversation a little bit to scientific expertise. I remember watching on live feed the debate on that climate change, and there are a couple of pastors or delegates who got up and said, you're asking me to vote about something I don't know anything about. Because of course, the whole arena of climate change is the most complex set of scientific disciplines that the human race has ever encountered. And I've actually been following the climate change debate for a very long time. And as we all know, it's gotten highly politicized. There's two reasons that the Senate should butt out of this. One is because you're asking how many people are sitting there on the Senate floor? 167, I think. 197. So you're asking 180 whatever number of people who know nothing about the science to make a decision in behalf of all CRCers about this. Now, everybody says, well, the debate is over. The science is in. Frankly, those guys, those men and women on the floor don't even have the qualifications to figure that out. That's doing an analysis about what the scientific community says, which is a whole other discipline. So I would argue that on saying things about climate change or that we ought to support the Paris Accords, number one, it does not comport with the rules, including for Senate, as to what it ought to take up and what it ought to refrain from taking up. And number two, it doesn't, Senate, through its representatives, do not have anywhere close to the kind of expertise that's required to pass on a subject like that. All they're doing is getting involved in a political fray. And in doing so, well, they're going to gain some friends among CRC members and they're going to gain some CRC members who say, hey, stay out. Not only because you ought to stay out, because I thoroughly disagree with you. I'm one of those that, well, it would take a long time to explain my position on climate change, but I thoroughly disagree with scientifically the position that the CRC took. And quite frankly, I would say that I know more than 99.9% of the people on the floor who passed on the subject matter. So if the Canadians were doing this, I'd have an objection there too. So the question, Dan, is what do you think about that? Well, this is what I would say. I think you're a little pessimistic about the delegates to Synod and their ability to do the task that they're asked to do. Synod is a deliberative body. I've been there, I know. Yeah, I was there in 2012 as well. And the reality of the situation is that each delegate going in, prays and studies and asks, or at least should, and that when Synod goes and looks at positions like this, they're not done so lightly or flippantly. And I'm not suggesting that. But the reality is to have a position and the position of the Christian Reformed Church, which is based on stewardship and creation care, which are fundamental positions of our role as stewards, even if, and I wouldn't be willing to grant this, even if the science weren't relatively clear and useful. The idea of caring for creation is something that is a fundamental part of our role, a fundamental part of our task assigned to us. But Dan, that's again the principle, right? So I think Doug and I would differ on this a little bit. But I have to say right up front, I am not at all an expert on climate change. In fact, I admit right up front that I know very little. But I lean towards thinking that there has been climate change and that probably human activity has contributed to that. Now, not an expert, and I'd be open to being shown otherwise. But even with that position, I am still very uncomfortable with sending a delegation, for example, to Paris to participate in the climate talks. That just seems, that to me seems overreach because something like the Paris Climate Accord involves all kinds of political nuance. There's layers upon layers of complexity there that can mean you stand for creation care, and you even believe that global warming or global climate change that's human caused is a thing, and yet that can still be a bad deal. And so to say, as a Christian, you really need to stand behind the climate accord or the Paris Climate Accord, I think is just overreach. And you know what, that may be the case. I would probably say something similar to that. But there is sort of a difference as Synod going and saying, here is what we've received as evidence for climate change. This is our Christian responsibility as churches to have a position on that. And then to go, you know what, here is something that is specific that we can speak to and we should speak to. Whether that's Paris or not, I'm not saying. I want to say in a bigger, broader sense. Should we send people to Paris? There may be good reason to do that. There may not be enough. So even I would push back on that, because you're right. I mean, so the delegates should be prayerfully thinking and reflecting on the matters that come before them. And when the agenda comes out, there's a report to read. There's pages upon pages of material. But even with that, I'm just not convinced that a sincere person prayerfully thinking and reflecting on the agenda can even come close to weighing all the evidence and doing all the research and the study that would lead to a reasonably informed opinion. And that's not even to say, you know, these people are coming, these delegates are coming to synod and they're shirking their responsibilities, because I don't think that's the case. I think actually most of them do take it very seriously. But I just don't think that, I mean, I think honestly, if you wanted to put forth a case for or against climate change, you'd need an agenda for synod that would be about five times, you know, the normal size. And you need to assume then that people have the expertise to unpack the meaning of all that. And I just I'm just not convinced that that can be done. Maybe one way into this is the question of in which direction does the church speak? For example, let's take an issue that is not a debated issue. Let's say the Christian Reformed Church has a position that people need to read the word of God and believe it in order to be saved. And that maybe what the Christian Reformed Church should do is communicate with respective governments at every level and tell them that this bit of information that people should read the Bible and believe in it so that people can believe in Jesus Christ and be saved, this particular bit of education, this particular knowledge should be dispensed at every level of government instruction because the eternal souls of the children are at stake. Now, this obviously this would be an area within the realm of the Christian Reformed Church. We would say this isn't climate change. This, you know, sex. Okay, we have a lot of things to say about sex, but all right. This is this is right here at the core. And so shouldn't it be our job to communicate to the government that this truth, which we it's right at the center of our doctrines, say it is true. This should be our main job to communicate to the government. I've never heard us say that, you know, in the United States, we've had conversations about prayer in public schools and Bible, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, you know, all of that presupposes our faces towards the government and through the government out to the rest of society. The other question, you know, especially with respect to the OSJ in the United States is a lot of Doug's complaint is that the face of the OSJ is towards the denomination. Sometimes now Dan's the face of the committee you're talking about is towards the government, but the face towards the denomination. And the idea is that we're going to we're going to shape the hearts and minds of the people of the church with respect to climate change, the SNAP program, abortion, immigration. And therefore, we're going to use the church in order to achieve some outcomes outside. So in other words, we're going to talk to the government through the people. Now, both of you have said, well, I think Christians should be involved in politics. So, you know, there's some lines here that are that get very interesting. And I would very much imagine, you know, I've got a lot of people who watch my channel who aren't Christians at all, they're atheists, and they they listen to us weigh in on issues that they as Doug said, they might have some expertise about. We claim to have some expertise about this one thing, but we don't actually go to the government with respect to that one thing for very good reasons that have a long history. And then obviously, we get into this sphere sovereignty argument. But, you know, you have to the conversation we're having is rather weird. And because anybody say coming completely fresh to this might look at this and say, so you really believe that all kinds of people are going to suffer in hell for all of eternity, but you don't talk to the government about that. But you want to talk to them about the particulars of how indigenous people are educated. Isn't there something weird about this whole conversation that I would I would think, especially non Christians would look at and think, what are you people doing? And especially thinking, aren't you just kind of playing politics? We are playing politics. No. So Dan, I have a question for you. Do you think we should pass on fourth generation nuclear plants? Now this relates to climate change. The godfather of climate change, the guy Jim Hansen, who brought this and is regarded as the expert on climate change, he thinks the Paris Accords are a hoax. He thinks they'll do no good at all. In other words, I'm aligning with their biggest hero. Now, do you know what you know what James Hansen thinks we ought to do to solve the problem? And he sees the problem as Armageddon level. He thinks we ought to build nuclear plants like there's no tomorrow. Now, the Paris Accords don't want to talk about that. In fact, a lot of the people that support Jim Hansen otherwise don't want to talk about that. Jim Hansen believes, and the CRC has confirmed what Jim Hansen believes, in that this is an Armageddon event. It's going to affect the poverty of all the nations. It's going to hit the poor. It's going to do all of these things. Just read what the Senate said in 2012. If that's true, James Hansen, the foremost expert of that movement, even though it's contradictory for the movement, says we have to build fourth generation nuclear power plants because it's the only clean energy source that will both supply energy for the people that need it on the planet and stop the CO2 production. So if there's a justice issue out there, as the Senate has defined it, this one is absolutely huge unless you scientifically disagree with Jim Hansen. So the justice issues there are all lined up, all lined up. So should we take that up? Not a word on it. My answer is absolutely not. Keep your theological nose out of it because you don't even know enough to what kind, let alone tell your members what position to take. So do we pass on, do we take up that issue down? Now, here's my artful dodge. That's not part of the two or three files we deal with in Canada. And I love you for that. And I mean, in all seriousness, if this was something where we divided, where we put our attention to, if this was a position where we had people who spent the time to study and understand, which is how the Canadian side works, this is not done in just a, here's our principle, we have something to say, it's also based in a lot of deep research and policy analysis, communication with people who are experts in the field in having a very, very informed opinion. And this has been the history of the Canadian side for a long time. But to say, you know, first, are we playing politics? Back to the first question, the answer is no, we're not playing politics. We are actually articulating the gospel witness in every position we advance because as we do so, we are doing so in a way that is made in scripture bearing testimony to how our politics and how our policies are informed by our faith and by the word of God. And in doing so, we bear witnesses, Daniel and his friends did, to the government to say, this is how we got here. And in doing so, that advances. Well, but there's a certain amount of what you just said that could be used to justify anything, including passing judgment on fourth generation nuclear power plants, because, you know, as we say in the Calvinistic world, our faith underlies everything that we do. So we can bathe every activity and should bathe every activity in prayer and scripture reading, da da da da da. So that hasn't helped us create any lines at all. And what sphere sovereignty is about is it's about lines. It's literally about lines. We insist on lines from the government. You folks in Canada right now have this problem where the government is requiring that you take a certain policy perspective as a church before you as a church can benefit from government programs that partially subsidize certain jobs, right? Absolutely. And you ought to be engaging with the government about that because that is a government intrusion on your institutional church. Or you're simply looking out for your line against somebody who's overstepping their line. Boy, you ought to be doing that. And I am in full support. So if I could jump in on that too, because I think, Dan, you hit on something important. And it was in response to what Paul was asking, right? Why don't we go and speak to the government about, you know, eternal, you know, You know, we're working on 302. What about damnation? We're the church. Come on. And there's no committee meetings on damnation in the Canadian government. If they had one, we would be there. And I would support you. Because that is an institutional church topic. But the reason we don't do that is because as Christians, one of our convictions is that the kind of change that we're looking for is not something that can be brought about by legislating and going into government and mandating that, you know, we need to recast ourselves again as a Christian nation again, and so on and so forth. What we believe is... You're talking Canada there because Canada was a Christian nation. It still is, apparently. America isn't. I just want to be clear on that. You're the Christian. We're the secularists. Let's be clear. But go ahead, Rob. I'm feeling bad for Dan after that comment. Of course, Rob, you're Canadian, too. I was. I was a Canadian. But one of our convictions is that the change comes through almost an undercover mission, right? In other words, Christians are converted through reading the scriptures, and the change comes within as Christians would say the Holy Spirit changes a person's heart. And I wonder if maybe that's how we ought to be looking at this. How do Christians influence politics? Is it through legislation? Is it through lobbying in these kinds of ways that we've been talking about? Or is it more a Christian, a good friend of ours, and Doug, you might know who I'm talking about, sits in church and she hears a message on a topic that promotes a loving the stranger, and then goes to work the next day. And even without saying, hey, you know, Sunnyslope Church in Salem is going to, you know, we take an official position on immigration and we want our voice to be known. I don't think it comes up with, rather it comes as this person speaks into her work in government and in law and in public legislation and says, listen, these principles matter. How can we craft legislation that reflects these convictions? And it almost becomes a sort of undercover mission that way. Or at least it's a little more covert than the overt legislation and take a position and take this stance and you have to because that's a Christian position. Then I'll say that for all of my adult life I have been doing this, not even covertly. I, this is my world and in fact, and I don't want to be too condescending because that's what this is going to seem to be, but when I see the church do these things, not always, but for the most part, I say, what kind of idiots are you? And you know what? All you three pastors, you could talk circles around me when it comes to certain theology. You better, that's your job. That's your profession. That's what you do in life. That is your experience fear. But guess what? The institutional church is not an expert at some of this stuff. Now, Dan, if you say that you have a lot of people studying this in depth and what you do then is you get other experts in, I'm going, that's good. At least you're solving the expertise problem, but you're probably going outside of the institutional church to get that expertise. Now, if we want the church to be a supermarket, that is sort of like Fred Meyers out here, what you can do is you can go to the clothing store or you can go to the grocery department or you can go to the hardware department or the lawn and garden department. You can get all these things. If that's what you make out of the institutional church, you can do that. But then we're going to have to get into the business of hiring lawyers, of hiring professional lobbyists, of hiring economists. Instead, at least if you look at the OSJ makeup, which may be very different than what you got up there in Canada, we don't hire any of those people. The people that go out there and talk for us politically and take positions for me on things they don't know anything about, they have degrees in theology. Or the close they'll ever get is like a sociology undergrad degree. They have no experience in what they're talking about. They have no formal education in what they're talking about. It's sort of presumed it's a little bit like the Domine concept. Hey, I'm working for the church, so I know what I'm talking about. And the church is smarter and better about all of these things than you are. It's not. Which is why you see other organizations like Center for Public Justice with Jim Skillen. Well, he's not purporting to be part of the institutional church. Even though he makes no bones about it, well, he's not there anymore, but his organization is. Yes, they're Christian, but they don't have to be the institutional church to be Center for Public Justice. There's folks like Cardus puts out Comment Magazine. Jamie Smith, I think, is the editor of that. They do public theology, and a lot of times what they put out is stuff about the political world. Great. Absolutely great. And some of it gets really political because they'll have people that author things who are actually involved in law and politics. That's great, but they're not trying to say for all members of the CRC, and we're joined by certain creeds and confessions here. This is what you ought to think politically. This is what you ought to think on these political issues. So I actually think the greatest amount of work that is done in the political and legal arena is done by Christians, including Christian reformers, not from within the institutional church. And the institutional church can become a handicap. Now, I think in Canada, you have just a tad bit more, not too much, because I actually like what you've told me, Dan, about what the Canadians do. But I think you have a tad more of a supermarket concept. Don't take that too far. I think you just have a tad more. And I think that up there, you're being very responsible about getting this outside expertise. And in that respect, or in those respects, I think it's way different than what happens down here in the States. And I hope you kind of... I don't want these overtures to have anything to do with Canada, frankly. And maybe we can do that. We can say, this does not apply to Canada. Well, I mean, and that's the problem with some of the other overtures, where they sort of conflate the two and don't understand sort of the binational reality. And that's in terms of my concern. Again, I can't speak to the Office of Social Justice beyond what I'll read in the banner or what I might see over a Facebook post. I'm not part of that world. But Synaids have this way of having this broad sense of, okay, they're the same. We're going to deal with them the same. One big overarching overture says, okay, thus say at the denomination. And now everybody's affected. And when you do that, you lose something that is very important in the Canadian conversation. In terms of the way we do things, the conversations we're having, the reality of our interaction, not only with government, but also within our witness as a church. Because if we don't do some of these things right, not only internally, but also as part of the public dialogue, we will lose our ability to be effective witnesses here for the gospel. In any sense. But CPJ is part of the Christian church, and they lost their ability. You don't have to. Christians, including CRCers, do not have to do things vis-a-vis their institutional church to become a very effective voice. That's the part that I don't understand about this. People that want the institutional church think that if the institutional church doesn't do it, the organic church disappears. And I just think that is so untrue. In fact, I think the institutional church more often than maybe this is in the States, embarrasses us. And that would be not part of my experience here in terms of the way things are done. And again, the deliberative process, the accountability that's built in, makes it a different animal in terms of what I'm hearing and what I've experienced. I want to just agree with you on that because I guess for a long time, I assumed growing up, that Canada and the United States culturally were very similar. And I still run into that impression a lot, that people in the States think that Canadians may be a little nicer and they eat better candy bars and they say A a lot more. But other than that, they're all basically the same. The longer I live here, and then when I go back to visit my family in Canada, the more I realize culturally, there are a lot of differences that run very deep. Like all cultures, not necessarily better or worse. It's never as simple as that, but just very, very different. And I think you've brought out some of those nuances, I think, that are important to this whole conversation. I'm thinking we've had a great conversation. I'm going to wrap it. I want to wrap it up, but I want each of you to have a closing statement if you want. If there's one last thing you want to say that didn't get said, and then I'll bring it to a close. So anyone want to go first? Well, I'll go first. Here's the thing that I most appreciate about this conversation. I now understand Canada, which I basically not talked about. I'd say I haven't done my job then. No, no. Yeah, you're being an American. No, you're being a pastor. It's not your job to explain Canada to every American that needs to be enlightened about the glorious Great White North. But Dan, you have taught me a lot about the Canadian scene. This is possibly one of those reasons where sometimes I've wondered whether the denomination does well to being binational. But then at the same time, I said the more we expand our scope, the institutional church, the institutional CRC of what we do, the more we're going to run into problems that we don't need to run in if we pay attention to only the things that we should be doing and not become that supermarket because the more we become a supermarket, the more we're going to clash just because we have different cultures. And I'm real hesitant to tell the Canadian CRCers what to do in their country because I don't know what it is that you have over there. So that's probably my biggest takeaway from this is I've learned a lot from Dan. Great. Anyone else? Well, one of the things that comes out is maybe similar to what Doug is saying, but from a different, slightly different perspective. And that's that there is a lot of gray area, right? I think we like things to be black and white and very binary. But the reality is that there is a lot of gray area. And so the ability to talk through thoughtfully and engage, just the fact that four of us here can engage in not only a civil manner, but also in a way that is, you know, I think warm and learning from one another, I think is itself is a positive witness. But I also think, you know, it reveals the tension, but it's a good tension. It's a healthy tension that keeps us in check. And so I just really appreciate that experience that way. Thanks, Rob. How about you, Dan? Any final thoughts? One thing that I'm really excited about is just the chance to talk to all of you because, you know, I know Rob from school, but I know you, Paul, from online postings and your podcast and Doug from online world as well. And so, you know, being able to dialogue and to talk and to hear and to hear, you know, your passion for the church, you know, the frustrations and the tensions with the voice is just so excellent. And so I'm thankful for that. And, you know, also, you know, hearing the heart behind the overture is always nice too, beyond just reading it as words on the page. And I'm glad that this was a discussion like this rather than going through, let's pick apart things and defend them. Well, and I appreciate the three of you. I mean, for those, I mean, I had a life before YouTube, actually. I hope I have one after. No guarantees on that. But I've for a long time wanted us as a denomination in the Christian Reformed Church and people in general too, to have forums for productive conversation because in my experience, I, you know, I've lived broadly in the Christian Reformed Church and I very, very seldom find someone I can't talk to and someone that I can't find common ground with. And, and, and I very seldom find that if we get together and really start talking, we can't make things a little better. And so I really wanted to do this and I'm hoping to do a few more before Synod of bringing some other people online to express some of these things. And so if, you know, if you think this was helpful, I mean, share it on social media, get it out there because I know I've been to a delegate, I've been a delegate to Senate a number of times. My church is sending a deacon to Senate this year. And, you know, for so many delegates, they come to Senate and so my, my deacon, of course, got the fat book and she's like, what have you signed me up for? The woman that has lived, you know, in Sacramento, so it's, you know, it's a very political town, you know, so she, she, part of the reason I wanted her to go is because she can, when she walks into Senate, she gets it because she's dealt with state legislatures and she understands the process, which many people don't. But I also want us to see that this is the church involved here. And so, you know, like you said, Dan, we're not, you know, we're, we're embedded within a gospel and a context that I think fundamentally gives us freedom and liberty. And it's that freedom and liberty that helps us not make all of these conversations ultimate where Dan has to die. So Rob's over church and live. I hope not. But I appreciate, you know, in this, in this process, a lot of people aren't willing to come on YouTube and talk and all three of you said yes right away. And I really appreciate your willingness to be involved in this conversation. And I hope that this little chat that we've had today helps the church and helps Senate have a better conversation. So, yep, absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah. Thanks for hosting. Thanks a lot, Paul. This was, this was great. And, and hopefully we can, you know, I'm hopefully going to do some more of these. Maybe, maybe Doug, maybe so Reggie Smith, who, you know, is now, you know, in charge of that office, I was the best man at his wedding. So, wow. How's you about my liberal bona fides here? I know that from reading your dad's book. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So maybe, you know, we can have, and I would love, I know the OSJ has been a real sore spot for a lot of people. And I, I'm glad that Minn Kota had a conversation with a group of people, but I think it's important for the broad denomination, not just to get information about the debates, but also to see the spirit in which we talk with one another, because that is foundational. And that, okay, we've got disagreements. Let's talk. Let's, let's, let's, let's really talk, but let's also talk as brothers and sisters. And I think if we can model this towards the rest of the world, we'll be doing something helpful. Yeah, I agree. I agree. My sermon. So thank you all for participating. If you want to hang on a second, I'm just going to close the recording part and then we can chat a little bit at after. So. Sure.