https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2rZ-ldk9DAs

 on this computer and see if this in fact works. Let's see. It says we're live. Yeah, it is in fact working. Do you want me to go and check? I think Rick will check. I should probably... Let's see. The sound's working. It's going into Discord properly. Okay, it is going into Discord and we are live. And... except... Yeah, I think it is working. And everybody else in Discord can me? Yeah. Okay. And I'll record it too. Boy, I'm having to set the whole thing up this morning, so this is interesting. All right, well, welcome to the Bridges of Meaning Discord Friday question and answer stream. This morning, Rick and I got in and we're setting everything up and Rick had some new tricks he wanted to set up and so we start playing with it and we discover that nothing is working. And so I just two minutes ago ran to my office and opened up OBS and opened up the Discord and threw it together. So no fancy stuff this week. It'll be all bare bones stuff. So we just have to get this working by Sunday. All right. Well, where shall we begin? Free will and determinism. Really? Really? That's what you want to talk about? All right. Hi, Paul. Your main objection to determinism seems to be if determinism is true, why do anything? Let's take an example. Why did Calvin write the Institutes? He acted either by necessity, compulsion, or chance. I don't know that those are the only three options. As far as we know, no one took him by his throat and forced him to write. No compulsion. And there wasn't a lottery machine in his brain. No chance. Thus he acted out of necessity. I don't know, he couldn't have rolled over in bed or decided to be a lawyer and not a theologian. Factors that necessitated the decision include the following. His high IQ and education, his religious experiences, books he read, people he met, theological turmoil in the 1500s, et cetera. He had to write it. So he was unable to do otherwise. But that's what he mean by had to. Did I have to do this this morning? I'll tell you, because Rick is over in that other room and he doesn't, he might not even know I'm doing this right now. He's over in the other room. We have our whole setup. And so I was sitting here thinking, okay, what are my options this morning? I can just send out a note on YouTube saying, ah, sorry, we had technical difficulties. We're not going to do it. I could just not worry about the YouTube stream and just do it in Discord like we've done it before, before we started streaming. I could just tell Rick, you know, Rick, I'm tired of being a minister. I'm going to sell all my possessions and move back to the Dominican Republic and sit on a beach my whole life. No, I, I was under compulsion not to do that. Well, that's, that's where this whole thing gets weird is that I don't, in, in order to answer these questions, you have to, I think in a lot of, you know, I, when people ask me about this whole Calvinism and determinism thing, I always tell them the philosophical assumptions underneath the culture have continued to switch and you can especially see a lot of these transformations between the 16th and the 17th century. And I think that has everything to do with the rise of deism and the beginning of the imagined monarchical vision when we as a culture begin to think we can see as God sees and in seeing as God sees, we imagine we can judge these questions and I'm skeptical. I'm just skeptical. We can't see ourselves. And so how can I answer the question whether or not I had to do this question and answer thing this morning? Now, what things were weighing on me? Well, would, you know, a few dozen people be a little disappointed that they didn't have their Friday morning filled like it is? Would I be disappointed that I felt like I failed in an obligation? Rick is right now disappointed because we're going to come in and start all kinds of new things and now we have to get our basics set up working again and I can't even help him right now. Because I'm on with you folks talking about this miserable question. So I told Rick, I said, I'm going to get a little punchy with this. But I, people, so Joey knows that in our local meetup, we had someone who for a while came in and like two or three weeks, all he wanted to talk about is free will and determinism. And Joey basically says, you know, that is, well, this is the way Joey always phrases it. He says, you know, that's a really boring question. And okay, boring is one way to say it. The point of, so let's ask ourselves what a good question is. A good question is something that leads us to reciprocal broadening and forces transformation in our mind that moves us into the future, participating in the physical world and in the relational world in ways that we have at least a sense right or wrong, that we're making progress and things are improving in a particular direction. Those are good questions. And when we find those, and it's not always apparent what is a good question because sometimes, well, that doesn't seem to be a good question, but we drill down it is. So I don't know that we have the epistemological standpoint to answer this question because we are in the middle of it. It's sort of like in the French Revolution, is this a good thing or a bad thing? Well, a lot of people would say it's a bad thing, but a lot of other people are saying it's a good thing. Or, you know, I did a video this week on the particular misery of the Christian Reformed Church and its conflicts over a whole range of things at this point, sort of surrounding questions of same-sex marriage. And they're not just about same-sex marriage at all. It's about whole huge numbers of things. And we sort of mentally do this little self-transcendence trick by which we stand outside of ourselves and say, aha, I see what's going on. I'm skeptical. I don't think we see what's going on. I think we get little clues. I think we can be productive and I think we need to talk and I think all of those things. But I don't even know what seeing what's really going on would accomplish. I've been in numerous situations with a person, this gets into a question that's coming down the road, where, you know, there's a little video on the internet about a couple talking together and there's a freaking nail sticking out of her head. And she keeps demanding, it's not about the nail. Don't talk about the nail. And the guy's just looking at her like, I don't know what you want me to do. I love you and I want to help you. But you have a nail sticking out of your forehead. And she's sitting there complaining about how all of her sweaters have snags. And that's how we are. We really are. And, you know, so I'm not a therapist. I have a tremendous amount of respect and sympathy for therapists, because it's that sheep video all over again. You pull the sheep out of the ditch and the sheep goes right back in the ditch. Now, even me telling them, in some ways, sort of sets me apart from the story. And I can say, Oh, look at that stupid sheep. And then in one aspect of my life or another, I find myself being that stupid sheep. This is the premise of Roman Severn, you know, and when the apostle Paul talks about his misery, because he's not transparent to himself, he can't stop himself. And this is when Jordan Peterson says, we're not transparent to ourselves. This is the human condition. And so free will versus determinism. Okay, answer it either way you want. I bet you it's not going to change how you live. You're not free in terms of totally free because of all the constraints. It doesn't appear that we're determined. And, you know, I thought Brett Weinstein, Sam Harris's conversation about that was illuminating in that Sam keeps switching back and forth between the manifest image and the scientific image of the human condition. And so I think that's the way that we're going to be. In that Sam keeps switching back and forth between the manifest image of the scientific image of the scientific image, viewing it from the manifest image, it all looks determined because that's what science is. And from the manifest image, then we try to see ourselves through the scientific image and Sam Harris says, no, it's like watching a movie. Okay, Sam and Brett keeps telling him, but that basically, if we think that, but no, you can't really think so. I mean, this question just goes nowhere. And so again, with Calvinists, because of things that were mostly written in the 17th century, people look at Calvinists and say, oh, you're determinists. And I feel about like that Monty Python skit. He came here for an argument. No, I didn't. Yes, you did. We're not having an argument. Yes, we are. It just doesn't go anywhere. So there you go. I don't know what to tell you. We can't step outside of ourselves to make, to come to this conclusion. If the subject is of interest, by all means, talk about it. But I guess I'm a little bit of a pragmatist and I don't see people who say there is no free will. They say, oh, it's only apparent free will. Okay, fine. All right, I have to walk over there and get my water bottle because I'm going to get dry. So this is what it means to sort of do it on my own. I don't know if Rick is, I don't know if Rick is monitoring the chat room. This could be a train wreck today, but train wrecks are kind of exciting. Okay, next question. Yeats B, listening to your conversation with Rafe, the discussion regarding the feminine characteristics of social media. While I really appreciate that analogy at the same time, I would like to think that also means that there can be a masculine compliment that could also help to correct where social media has gone awry. Maybe this is a better question for Peugeot. Yeah, but he's got a hundred thousand subs now and he's harder to talk to. As if to deal with symbolism, but I'm going to ask it here anyway. Oh, shucks. If you were to take a guess as to what masculine compliment to social media would look like and obviously have a Christ church type relationships, what would your wildest guess be? Here's the funny thing about talking about masculine and feminine and masculine and feminine. I'm not sure we really know a lot. I know I don't know a lot of what I'm talking about, but it seems to these seems these seem to be two hooks that we want to hang a lot of things on and then sort of fight about them. And the world has gotten just incredibly weird because on one hand we're saying that the gender binary needs to go away. And on the other hand, we're saying you know, men by virtue of their maleness are the problem with the world. And at the same time, we're saying being a man isn't defined by his genitalia or his biology. And at the same time, we're saying, well, male and female brains are the same. So therefore, sex is a myth. And I just, I just listen to all these messages. And it's like, maybe the problem is we just have too many messages. Now, if we look at, you know, Peugeot's feminine masculine and you know, some of the stuff I get from Mary Cohen too. If you know, when we talk about these things, she doesn't make me blush. Um, you know, in some of the crudest ways, feminine is the receiving and masculine is the penetrating. All right. So there's, there's some symbolism for you. And, you know, this seems to hold true to sort of the Roman perspective because, you know, it was basically Roman sexual morality said that, well, if you're doing the penetrating, you're taking the masculine role. And if you're being penetrated, you're taking the feminine role. And so the ground is feminine and the seed is masculine and the sharp pointy stick that you use to make the little hole to put the seed in, that's really masculine. And a phallus is masculine. And then the sky is feminine or the, you know, the skyscraper is masculine and the sky is feminine and the, the boat is masculine and the sea, which, you know, the boat penetrates the water, that's feminine. So social media, but, but then, you know, then you have, okay. So Peterson's the devouring feminine and the tyrannical masculine. So it's sort of like my God number one and God number two. Now I mentioned that, Oh, by the way, I started a sub stack. I, those of you who are on Twitter might've noticed that. And I put it on the discord too. It's just my name because it's, you know, paulvanderclay.substack.com because I know that there's a lot of people out there that are sort of interested in what I'm doing, but are not going to sit down and listen to two hours of me rambling or watch a four hour video or anything insane like that. So I'm trying to give, you know, very succinct written summaries of some of what I do. So if you don't have time to catch up on my videos, you can just read the sub stack anyway. So social media is in some ways feminine. And I don't, I haven't in anticipation of this question revisited the recording of my conversation with rave. So I don't recall that in detail. I do a lot of talking. I do a lot of listening. So recording is kind of a neat way to record it so I can go back, but I don't always have time to go back and review it. So social media as well, I would say if social media is feminine, everyone who is using social media to pursue an agenda is masculine. Now, of course, there's a good many women who are doing that. But the, you know, in some ways the, the arenic is feminine and the agentic is masculine. And social media is, is feminine in that sense because it's the arena and masculine is it being used to pursue and achieve some goal or outcome. So there's right off the top of my head. I don't know if anybody in the, in the comment room would like to take their crack at it. I have a question. Okay. Because it seems that like we're abstracting principles out and then so they're plastering them onto male and female. Maybe that's a, a cynical way of viewing it. And, you know, I'm friends with, you could call her a progressive, but far less. She's an author. She writes, what do you call it? A fantasy story. I was having a discussion with her about symbolism of male and female and all, all of this. I sort of talking about pajama things. And then she said, but why do we have to assign these things to male and female? I do get that question does arise in my mind when I watch, for example, some of Pajero's commentaries on movies and things, because it's, it's like, okay, why is it exactly bad that Thor gives up his kingdom to Valkyrie? Now I, I have some information that something is wrong with her, but it's not exactly obvious to me because it's like, oh yeah, the woman and Valkyrie can manifest the masculine traits perfectly fine. Right. So what's wrong there and why even do it? Why even do the mappings in the first place? Yeah, it's a good question. And I guess we could ask how and why did all of this start? And well, let's just imagine we're all running around naked and some of us have things that dangle. And some of us have, well, you know, it's funny because women have things that protrude. But at some point there's the things that dangle and it gets very basic. At some point there's the switch and there's the pole and the hole. And there's just a real funny thing about the pole and the hole in terms of human beings that they found that the pole and the hole kind of go together. And when the pole and the hole go together, other things start to happen and change. And well, why can't we just have that be that? Well, and you know, in some ways I think your question reflects an attitude that is common among the young, which is, well, you know, why does sex have to be different from any other biological function? And I think the best answer is because it is. I mentioned Vikings. I was watching Vikings and I really enjoyed the first few seasons of Vikings. And I was fascinated by the way they tried to seriously handle worldview and religion. And then a bunch of people said, oh, watch The Last Kingdom. So I started watching The Last Kingdom and I've been quite disappointed in contrast with Vikings about how they handle worldview questions. What I often find is people sort of dressed up in medieval garb talking like modernists. I don't believe in God. I believe in myself. And I think, oh gosh. Anyway, there was a scene in there where the hero and his then girlfriend capture the priest of one of the Danes, not the priest, well, kind of the priest of one of the Danes. And they take him hostage and they take him out in the country. And what they do is that actually the woman does this to him. The priest is a man. She strips him naked, binds him and sticks a twig up his butt, puts him on his horse and sends him back to his king. Now it's sort of a funny scene seeing this naked dude bent over a horse with a switch in his butt, humiliated on his way back to the king. Why did she stick a stick in his butt? What is it about the butt and what is it about the stick? And you know, you see this and we've seen this throughout human history. Let's talk about male rape in men's prisons. And I'm using men in the traditional sense. Why do men rape each other? Is it for sex? Well, these people probably wouldn't, some of these people wouldn't consider themselves in any way gay. What is the deal about penetrating another? Well, we do it with a knife through skin and that kills us. There's just something symbolic about the whole business. And now is this simply cultural convention? Might we imagine that somehow being penetrated, well, being penetrated is a good thing? Well, sexually, I assume. Some people like being penetrated. Okay. And some people don't. Okay. What if we put labels on that and do those labels sort of scale out throughout the world? And so, you know, part of what happens in symbolism and when, when Peugeot hashtags symbolism happens, he's basically saying that we are wired to see things in different ways with different values. And a big piece of this whole Jordan Peterson thing that sort of erupted around us is that fact that symbolism happens and valuing happens. We see this, you know, so that so quality experience, Sevilla King's channel, where she looks at Pursig and Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance and everything going on with that book. Values happen. And, you know, so George Floyd is a black man. And there's a white cop with his knee on his neck and George Floyd dies. And the other cops are watching. Is this a valueless event? No, the event is of tremendous value and the recording gets shared on social media all over the place. Well, was it, was the skin color of George Floyd and the skin color of the police officer non-symbolistic in terms of the history of race in America? No, it was powerfully symbolic and it moved people all over the world. You know, when we first started our meetup, one of our meetup people said, what we really need is a flag. And it was kind of a joke, and it was kind of a joke, but it's kind of not a joke because a flag is, well, what's a flag? Well, it's a piece of cloth on a pole. Well, what's the point of the pole? Why do we look at the pole? Jonathan Haidt looks at all these varieties of religious people and says, you know, it's really weird if you take people and you put them in group and you have them sort of circling a pole, they all start to act differently towards each other. You know, and at schools and American schools when, you know, basically no longer had school-officiated prayer, then Christians would go out and meet around the flagpole. See, none of this stuff is accidental or arbitrary or incidental and we're not exactly sure why. And so, and human beings have been operating this way for a very long time. Why do all of those holy places or high places, as they're called in the Bible, why are they high places? Because they're on a mountain. Well, of all the places you want to build an altar, why are you going to build an altar on top of the mountain? That probably means finding heavy stones and collecting them or bringing them uphill, which is the last thing you want to do with a stone. You want to roll stones downhill, bringing all those stones way up to the top of the hill and constructing them in an altar, which in a sense makes the hill taller. And then, you know, having a barbecue on top and somehow this connects us with the gods. I mean, the whole point about what Peterson lays out is that this stuff is built into us in ways we don't understand. So, you know, Carl, who, you know, for a while sang my praises every week and dismissed Luke and many others in the comment section as being idiots. Eventually, he dismissed me as an idiot and went on to Peugeot's place. His big point is natural law. And, well, you can have a lot of discussion about what natural law is and isn't, but the whole, a big part of the Jordan Peterson movement was the assertion that there are things built into us that lead to outcomes that are not arbitrary. And the point I've made many times, and I'll try to make it quickly here, is that part of what human beings are always trying to get a handle on is everything. And, well, so we're always trying to do that. And so violence, well, violence sort of does some stuff, but is of limited value. And frameworks of good and evil sort of is a really helpful system, but only goes so far. And in the Renaissance, it was sort of this return back to, in some ways, the Renaissance is the culmination of the medieval period of an attempt to synthesize the classical and the Christian. And so it sort of meets its peak in people like Aquinas, because in some ways, the peak of the classical, and look at even what we're saying, a peak, a mountain penetrates, the masculine mountain penetrates the feminine sky. But this is so built into us, it's so built into our language, it's so built into everything. So so our so Aquinas synthesizes Christianity and Aristotle. You know, before Augustine attempts to synthesize Christianity and neoplatonism, they're trying to put things together. Luther, the Protestant Reformation is sort of the radical culmination of the turn to the text. And it doesn't achieve what the reformers want it to achieve. And so then philosophers look for another way to try to get a handle on everything. And they turn to two classical ways of empiricism and rationalism. And so they work that for a while. And that takes us all the way through the modern period. And it seems that empiricism and rationalism have kind of reached their end because we bumped back into the personal. And there was personalism, there were the various indications of that that modernity might be, you know, running out of gas. And so in some ways, the the new atheists are sort of the last attempt of modernity to maybe just maybe this old project will work. And and Jordan Peterson then becomes this liminal figure, because it says, you know, modernity gives us evolutionary psychology. And maybe we can get under the arbitrary nature of selecting stories and selecting textual interpretations. Maybe we can get under that by looking at these deep patterns of human behavior that perhaps and Jordan Peterson said exactly this to Bishop Barron in his conversation with him. You know, the Bible may will give the Bible its biggest, you know, time span, let's say 15,000 years, which is being very generous. So let's say the stories in the Bible, maybe 15,000 years, maybe even older, but that pales compared to lobsters and trees. And, you know, the the process that we see in the evolutionary development of the world that we have. So let's look at that as our foundation. And in that way, Brett Weinstein was sort of looking at with his sort of observations and hot takes on various strange human behaviors. And Jordan Peterson, in a sense, and Peugeot, I think, is doing this same work. They are sort of doing what Aquinas and Luther tried to do in that let's now synthesize the classical, medieval, and modern. So Peterson is much more trying to synthesize the classical, medieval, and modern. And Peugeot is more saying, well, maybe we can actually move forward in the midst of the postmodern if we just look at the modern as sort of a big distraction. We'll take the cars and the electricities and the YouTube and the microphones and the Discord servers and the websites. But the modernity was really the dark ages and medieval period was really the time of light because they successfully synthesized the pagan and the Christian. And but yet what Peugeot is doing is an enormously modern thing because he is giving explanations in the language of modernity to people who are trying to get over their modernism and trying to find a new certainty, a new framework, a new way of seeing the world. And well, along the way, these dangly things that men have between their legs and that other space that the women have that men are very interested in, generally speaking, always seems to come up. Oh gosh, why did I have to say it that way? And the funniest thing about the argument that masculinity and femininity itself is unimportant is that the world is full of unimportant things that we never talk about, and we don't talk about them because they're unimportant. And so if it really was unimportant, you know, then people would just say, I'm not going to bother talking about male, female, sex. I'm not going to talk about any of those things. I'm just going to do what I do. And maybe what we should really, this is sort of the libertarian dream, we should just let people do whatever the heck they want to do with their bodies. Oh, okay. And that's sort of proposed to churches. Churches need to stop telling people what they should do with their bodies. Okay. But what those priests did to those boys? Oh, the first rule was we're not going to police sexuality. And the second rule is, well, the priests need to police their sexuality because they're hurting people. Okay. But now we're also starting to police. See, once the church, the secular sacred distinction is lost, now everything is sacred. And so we're policing and deplatforming other authors who, you know, Harvey Weinstein made movies successfully, but he needs to be deplatformed because of what he did in bed. Well, it violated consent. Yeah, consent's a big deal. It's a really big deal. But then when a kindergarten kid says, I think I want to be a boy, not a girl, all of these rules about age and consent fly out the window. And everybody's watching that. We say, okay, well, I thought age and consent was like the one big rule. And that was going to be the one rule to rule them all. But you just threw it away over in that case, because you say anybody under 18 can't really give consent to a sexual act. Well, can they give consent to their, the sexual framework? I mean, chaos just abounds and what our attempts at symbolism and rulemaking are attempting is to bring some order to the chaos. So in a way, a lot of what happened in the process in a way, a lot of what happened in the Protestant Reformation was to look at a lot of the symbolism and throw it out the window. And sometimes they did that literally with symbols and statues and icons as they threw them out the window. And they always keep coming back because people didn't walk by, well, those who did stand by and watch George Floyd get killed by that cop, well, we're holding them accountable for that too. So does symbolism matter or not? Because if you say symbolism doesn't matter, well, then you got to live with it. And if you say sexuality doesn't matter, well, then you got to live with it. Because if on one hand you say, you know, doing stuff with these certain parts of our body that we tend to pay a lot of attention to has no greater importance or value than a handshake or, you know, so I spent the last couple of weeks, I spent some time in the dentist's chair. So I was the feminine because I opened my mouth and the female dental assistant put sharp cold steel objects and drills and other things in my mouth. So I guess symbolically I was penetrated over and over by strangers. Now I consented to it and I'm sure glad they did it because I don't have that toothache anymore. And I've always identified as a man. I've always used he, him pronouns. But I sure let myself get penetrated by a whole group of people. And they used metal objects. And I'm really grateful for it. In fact, I paid them to do it. Well, is a mouth a sexual organ? Wow. So I don't know, to me, it's just that even when we say something is overly valued, we're still playing the value game. It's that these issues are inescapable for us. We can't live without value. And so the point of Peugeot and Peterson is hierarchies happen. And I don't believe any of this symbolism. Really? Then you got to live with it. And I think part of the point of Peterson and Peugeot is you can't live without it. It's always going to manifest. So every single culture in the world, every single human culture in the world has paid attention in one way or another to sexuality because it's so foundational to the entire enterprise. You know, when I had, I used to have two Rottweilers. They were brother and sister. And, you know, they were always sort of humping each other. And we look at that and, well, that's what dogs do. But if we see brothers and sisters humping each other, which happens, of course, that's just what people do. We say that's not civilized. Okay, what is civilized? Kiwitas. Kiwitas. What's that? That's the city. Oh, what's pagan? Well, that's of Paganos. That's of the field. And that symbolism happens all over the place. Truly cultured and refined people know how to behave in a city. You know, humping your sister, that's for the country. That even, you know, jokes about Alabama. You know, what do you call your wife in Alabama? Your cousin. You know, stuff like this. It just keeps happening. And, you know, part of the point that they keep making, too, is even when you're trying to deconstruct it, you actually reconstruct it. Because, again, as Peugeot said to Peterson, in some ways, attention creates the world. And so, if you really want to deconstruct the gender binary, the only way to attempt to do it is to pay no attention to it, like the nitrogen in the air. Well, you're probably going to have to be out in a field doing that, because you won't be able to do it in the city. Just, you know, again, people have tried this. Let's, you know, you can go to Berkeley. I don't know if this still happens, but 20 years ago when I moved here, you know, you could still find people trying to walk around naked in Berkeley. And it showed up in the newspaper. These people in Berkeley have decided that clothing is patriarchal, so they're not going to have it. And, of course, the women are like, if you make me look at your penis, I'm going to call the cops. And men are like, hey, yeah, go ahead, women, take off your clothes. Good on me. I'm fine with it. And their wives look at them and say, are you looking? No, no, dear, I'm not looking. Oh, okay. So there's no escaping any of this stuff. And that's, so if you're not going to escape it, you have to learn to deal with it. And if you're going to deal with it in community, in the kiwitas, in the city, you're going to have to come to agreements. And if you're going to come to agreements, that means talking and not killing, because part of the purpose of killing is that you don't have to do the harder work of coming to an agreement. You just end the discussion. So I told Rick it was going to be a ranty Q&A today just by looking at the Q&A. So I don't know if that helps you at all, Richard. Look at what you triggered. He's probably like, if I wasn't through again, it will. Oh, yeah, maybe. But it was true that these were answered saying if you read the Discord chat. So I would recommend doing that. Okay. Yeah, I intentionally don't read the Discord chat when I do this, because I'm way too ADHD already. And that's like throwing gasoline on a fire. So. All right. H. Woozle. Hi, Paul. If you live according to the flesh, you will die. But if by the spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live. Romans 8 13. I take it to mean that we need the power of the Holy Spirit to live in obedience to God. That's one good way to take it. But if the spirit was only given after Jesus' resurrection, how was God's how was God fair in asking the Israelites to obey his commands prior to giving the spirit of Pentecost? How could they carry out his commands if his spirit wasn't in them? Was he asking them to do something that was impossible? There's a thing called the literal internet. And the literal literal internet came about because of literal modernity. The Bible has very subtle ways of talking. And Jesus uses hyperbole often, which is the opposite of subtle. If your hand causes it to sin, cut it off. And I, you know, one of my favorite podcasts, the rest is history, just recently did. I love that podcast. You know, 10 greatest eunuchs. Well, who else is going to do a podcast on eunuchs? And I think that's 10 greatest eunuchs. Well, who else is going to do a podcast on eunuchs? And the more I watch the transgender thing develop, the more I think, no, the eunuch pattern hasn't gone away. I very much want Jonathan Peugeot to do a video on the symbolism of eunuchs. I think it would be helpful and relevant to today. Let's look at Romans 8 13 a little bit. If you live according to the flesh. Now I don't have my Greek in front of me, but I'm almost positive that's Sarx. And flesh in the apostle Paul is a very tricky thing because flesh sometimes means human appetites. Sometimes it means human appetites. Sometimes it means physicality. So if you live according to the physicality, you will die. You could kind of read it that way. Jesus says, you know, no one can serve two masters, God and mammon and mammon is sort of like physicality, sort of like stuff. But if by the spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live. Now the New Testament talks about, there's a reason Christian theology is like it is because in the heyday of modernist theology making, the queen of theology was systematic theology. Today it's biblical theology, but systematic theology tried to draw the connections between the various aspects of the systems. Now when you talk about the Holy Spirit, it's very easy on one hand to say, well, the spirit was, the spirit sort of gets invented in the gospel of John after chapter 13. Let's say, oh, wait a minute, no, that dove came down at the baptism. Okay. No, wait a minute. Mary became pregnant by the Holy Spirit. Okay, wait a minute. But oh, wait a minute. Saul, after he gets anointed, is among the prophets prophesying. Oh, wait a minute, David. Oh, wait a minute. And then all the way back to Genesis 1, there was this ruach, this spirit, this wind over the waters. And if Christians are right about their Trinity, this spirit is co-eternal with the father. And then you get the philiocho clause that splits East and West in terms of how the spirit proceeds and on and on and on and on and on and on and on. So was the Holy Spirit present in Israel? Yes. How? Good question. Could Israel be held accountable for her desire, for her pledge to keep the covenant? Well, two people stand up in front of a church full of people and give their consent to being bound to each other for life. And hopefully they do so in good faith. And someone might say, well, and someone might say, well, all you have to do is live in the same house. Maybe all you kind of have to do, you don't even have to live with it. You just have to agree to call each other by weird words like husband and wife. And divorce is easy to avoid. Well, maybe not so easy. Because it's connected to a whole bunch of other things. So if you look at the Genesis or if you look at Exodus, where God delivers Israel from Egypt, and even that, was that consensual? God says to Moses, Moses, you're going to do this. Well, Moses first tried his own when he killed the Egyptians. And it's not entirely clear that well, the children of Israel on one hand wanted to be free from Egypt because they were slaves and their oppression was horrible. And the beginning of the book of Exodus, they're crying out to God. But after they're in the wilderness and the menu options aren't to their liking, they whine about the leeks and onions. That's just so human of us. So in Exodus, when God comes on Sinai after they're out in the desert and says, Hey, here's the deal. Let's, let's drop an agreement. And if you do these things, I'll do these things. This is the problem of not having Rick in the room. Oh, he muted himself. Okay. Israel says, yeah, we'll do it. Okay. Well, if you say you'll do it, should I hold you accountable to it? Now you might say, well, they said they do it, but they really couldn't. And as a preacher, you wouldn't be smart to ask me to do it. And as a preacher, you wouldn't be smart to ask me to officiate at your wedding. Cause I give the most unromantic wedding sermons you can imagine. Because there's two people like, we really want to do this. In fact, we want to do this so badly. We just spent a lot of money on this really big party and we're going to do this for life. Cause we really love each other and we've seen crappy marriages before, but that won't be us. We'll do it right. We'll have such a great marriage that, that people write stories about our marriage. Well, usually probably the stories told about that marriage won't be of one side or the other. So, you know, here's the thing about human beings. If we're not given the opportunity to say yes or no to something, we're offended. And when we fail, we place blame. So, and then if we could say, well, you know, we could say, well, does the church do any better than Israel? Part of the gospel, at least especially through sort of reformed perspective is misery, deliverance, gratitude. This is achieved by Jesus Christ. This is achieved by Jesus Christ. We respond in gratitude. It's not something we earn. Now that itself gets very complex and I'm not going to go into that, but was it fair of God to ask the Israelites to obey his commandments prior to giving them the spirit of Pentecost? They agreed. You can read about it in the book of Exodus. It would have been fair of God to just let them languish and, you know, there in the book of Deuteronomy, well, if you fulfill all the, if you fulfill the agreements, you'll be blessed. If you fail the agreement, you'll get ground up into the dust. The wages have sent his death. So, the wages have sent his death. So, God gave his spirit. The spirit was at work in Israel, but what Christianity says is that in Christ, a new spirit is given. Now let's pause for a minute and think about the way in which there's sort of a suspicion under the question that the spirit is something like, so I was watching the boys again, and basically, spoiler alert, superheroes in the boys are made and not born because there's some super juice that you inject into them that gives them their super powers. And in some ways, we sort of imagine the spirit coming as super juice, and that's not totally bad, but I don't think that's the whole story either. So, was it possible for them to obey his commands? Well, sometimes they did, and we read about that, and sometimes they didn't. David steps up to Goliath and basically doesn't exactly use these words, but a New Testament Christian would. We could say that the spirit of God filled David to step up to Goliath and slay him. Wow. The spirit of God was at work when Elijah was on the top of the mountain at Carmel, and fire came from heaven and lit the altar, and they all rose up and slaughtered the prophets of Baal. And Jezebel says, Elijah, you're a dead man. And Elijah runs away and cowers. Did the spirit of God leave him? Did the spirit of God send a fiery chariot uber to pick him up? And then Elijah comes with a double portion of his spirit. So basically, the idea would be that God is working all along. God continues the story in new and different ways in the New Testament. But part of what I've been doing when I talk about trying to get a clearer picture of what we mean by spirit in the modern age, and when I talk about school spirit, and then you look at Jesus and what he did and how his resurrection changes the world, there's just lots going on here. And if it was possible for them to obey his commands, then are we overemphasizing the spirit's role and obedience today on the side of the resurrection? Western Christianity today seems to be doing a good job preaching on living in the power of the spirit, but seems quiet on the individual's role and actually how to do it. And so, on one hand, we usually either say, well, the spirit is this super juice and I'm waiting for God to stick a needle in me and fill me up with it, or maybe it's by transmission. So when Benny Hinn or Jimmy Swagger or someone on stage lays hands on me, I get jolted and I fall over. And I'm not being cynical because I know people who are on stage and I know they're not going to be fall over. And I'm not being cynical because I know plenty of people who have taken that ride, and I'm not skeptical. I'm much more skeptical about our ability to frame these things because, I don't know, God picks the youngest sons of Jesse when there seem to be a nice, valid older sons available. And just look at the story of David. It's a phenomenal story. And David, the man after God's own heart, and Psalm 51, do not take your Holy Spirit from me. Well, is that sort of Christians tinkering with the text? Well, some Jews might say yes, but you know, you probably should ask Jacob how Judaism deals with the Spirit, because this stuff gets endlessly complicated. So I don't know, anybody else want to weigh in on that? All right, I'll keep going. I'm going to get a drink of water. Hey Paul, I have struggled with an addiction to online pornography and sex broadly. Many people are uncomfortable with the notion of sex as a form of sexual assault. And masturbation shouldn't be anything to be ashamed of per se, or per the cultural milieu, which as we know is a rejection of the classic chaste flesh purity that arises out of Christianity. But nonetheless, when I read about addicts and their mental health and social symptoms, aka the Golem Syndrome, I can relate viscerally. It's hard for me to differentiate between the erotic and the pornographic. I haven't had a healthy long-term relationship in like eight years. Many flings, flirtations, and half-assed attempts at growth, but the perpetual fantasy is both an unrealistic expectation and an easy fallback. I've been in the relationship for a long time, and I've been at it for a long time. What are your thoughts on the porn epidemic? Did free love ruin our society? Is another example of how the demands of Christianity are too much for any person to take on? Prophet Zacharias. This is a big, big topic. And it's a big topic partly because some of the... Well, let's talk a little bit about pornography. When they uncovered... When Vesuvius destroys Pompeii and preserves it, and so when they first started digging it out, the initial... There's also a great episode about Pompeii on the rest of this history. They discover all kinds of stuff that to... They discover all kinds of stuff that to... Modern eyes looks like pornography, and so they take all that stuff and they put it in a warehouse so that the tourists won't see it, which is interesting. And then, of course, as we get into the late 20th century, people are more like, hey, wait a minute. We have to own up to all of these pictures on the Roman walls. And so, okay, so let everybody know that the Romans like to present the menu of possibilities with these areas of the body that we currently want to say, oh, a penis and a finger. What's the difference? Oh, wow, the Romans were liberated. I think the Romans were pre-liberated because, well, gosh, all those pictures. And if you look at... This is part of what Tom Holland noted as the better he became aware of classical history. When they discovered the classical history, can you imagine your professor coming up and saying, oh, professor, I'd really love to stay in school, but I can't pay my tuition. Just give me sexual access to you and you can take the class for nothing. Well, if a finger and a penis are the same thing, just shake my hand and the class will be free. So Christianity inherits some Jewish attitudes with respect to sex. Yet despite all of the connections between Christianity and patriarchy, as Tom Holland and N.T. Wright talked about in their first meeting on Unbelieveable, what the apostle Paul writes about men and women was absolutely revolutionary to Roman years. And Paul says he got that from Jesus. So now, again, some Jews might say, well, I wasn't so revolutionary for Jews, but it was revolutionary for Romans. And so bit by bit by bit, what began as sort of Jewish ideas about sexuality continued to become changed by Christianity and continued to become a part of Christianity and developed over centuries and centuries. And it was always aspirational. I mean, basically, the argument became you should only have sex with your spouse. Okay. What about slave girls? And I've read some New Testament commentators that say, it's really interesting how there's not a lot of rules in the New Testament about having sex with your slaves. What are we to think about that? And we're really not quite sure, because we know that all the way even into the modern slavery and the... Well, if someone has no capacity to say no to someone else, sex is going to get involved. So, okay. So sex is always... It's a huge... Sex is a huge biological part of our lives. And so it's always an issue. And it's always an issue in community, because nothing can break up a community faster than disagreements over sex or sexual access. So the church actually sort of has some pretty strict rules about it that remain sort of aspirational. And then photography comes along. And of course, men are attention. Men are sexually stimulated visually to a degree that it seems women aren't. Oh, there it's that gender binary again. It doesn't mean... It just seems to be... If you just watch human beings, men look at women differently than women look at men, generally speaking. And so photographs come along. And now we might look at old photographs of the Civil War and things like that, but you gotta know once the camera was invented, one of the first things men started doing was taking pictures of women without their clothes on. And then once motion pictures started happening, you know the kinds of things that you would take movies of because... Well, if the point of the movie was to have people pay to watch it, it's about the most obvious and simple thing to take a picture of that men will reliably pay for. And I was quite sexually innocent. I remember, I think it was National Lampoon's Vacation and you had these two cousins and one was showing the other a Playboy magazine. And it's like... Well, it wasn't just looking at the picture, it's that looking at this magazine will be of service to another thing that you do, that you really wanna do. And so you see technology is coming along. And then when I was in high school, let's say, HBO was just starting and we didn't have cable at our house, but HBO was just starting. And guess what was on HBO? Oh, it was nudity on HBO and that wasn't on regular TV. But I've told this story before. I hope my father wouldn't mind me saying it, but I remember the first time I beat my father playing chess. I Dream of Jeannie was on TV. And it wasn't until years later that... Because I remember beating him at chess and I was just... I beat my father at chess years later after I was a little older. And when I was young, I just watched I Dream of Jeannie and there's Jeannie, Barbara Eden prancing around and Major Nelson. And it was just kind of weird because she's blinker eyes and things would pop in and pop out. I watched it as a boy. And then my father lost to chess because I Dream of Jeannie was on TV. Now I know why. And then comes the internet. It used to be that if you were a man and you wanted access to pornography, you had to get a magazine which could sort of be hidden. I remember a friend who once we were still boys came to me and was horrified because he discovered that his older brother had a Playboy magazine under his bed. And my friend was just horrified because his older brother was not the Christian he thought he was because he found that Playboy magazine. And I grew up just outside of New Jersey and some of my friends would go into New York City so they could get into the peep shows. But, you know, that was something that took a little bit of effort was sort of gross. Even if you were there because you wanted the peep show, you just looked around and it's like, and then the internet and the internet just makes all sorts of things available privately to almost anyone. And then the internet was on our phones and now what was HBO, now it's streaming TV and just on and on and on and on and on and on. And what does that do to men? Now, as Christians who have been trying to maintain a fairly demanding aspirational regard to this stuff, I mean, it's Jesus who says, you know, if you look on another woman, you commit adultery in your heart. It's like, oh gosh, well, you see, gosh, well, you sort of have a perfect storm with respect to this because you've got all sorts of people who are wanting to be Christians who now have to deal with a really basic conflict. Now, let's suppose you were a Christian in the first century and let's suppose you were wealthy and let's suppose you had servant girls. Yeah, there'd be some temptation there too. I think on one hand, Christians sometimes make too much of this. And recently on Twitter, you know, when the, when I don't even, I try not to investigate too closely some of these mass shootings, but you know, this young man kills a bunch of women in massage parlors and it gets directly related to the fact that he was in some way trying to live a pure life. Live a pure life and in a really twisted way, blames these women and kills them. You should have listened to the UNIX podcast, perhaps. No, if you're, if your, if your member causes you to sin, cut it off. Did origin really do that? We're not sure. It's going to take some time for the church to figure out how to deal with online porn. And I see, I've seen some ways the church has dealt with this in good ways and productive ways and ways that it hasn't. Whether or not, you know, addiction is a clinical world word that broke out of the laboratory. And I'll leave it to clinicians to deal with whether someone's porn habit is an addiction or not. If you use sort of an AA standard, is pornography making your life unlivable, unworkable. Now, as you've described here, you haven't had a healthy long-term relationship for eight years and it would be completely unsurprising to me and perhaps nearly inevitable that a porn habit will make healthy, having healthy relationships with women. I'm speaking as a man here, nearly impossible. Yeah, that doesn't seem unreasonable. But yeah, having a healthy relationship with a woman long before the ubiquity of porn was also really difficult. So we've just thrown another difficulty into the matrix. And, you know, and in my experience, this is really difficult for the women too, because the way I usually see this go is somewhere at some point, the guy starts looking at porn and it becomes something of a habit. And then his wife finds out and boy, then there's a real mess because, well, are you saying I'm not enough? I remember talking to a female therapist who said, it is really hard for women to understand what sexuality is like for a man. And the opposite I'm sure is true too. I think a lot of the ways that the church has tried to address this have been helpful. Get men together, have them talk about it, have them encourage one another on towards greater purity. I've seen sometimes the church be really unhelpful with this. You know, just like, let's compare pornography to alcohol. It's not a great comparison, but there are some aspects to it that aren't bad. Jesus drank, I believe. I'm not a teetotaler. I don't think Jesus would do porn, so there's an aspect that it isn't helpful. When I talk to men about this, and I do fairly regularly, there are a number of things that one can do to do it less in the pursuit of not doing it at all. You know, there's accountability ways, but if you can lie to your wife, you can lie to an accountability partner. When Vervecky was talking about addiction, he made a point that if everything else is really healthy in your life, this will probably be less of a problem. Sometimes people drink because they're depressed. I think men look at porn because they're depressed or bored, and it's sort of an internal chemical way of dealing with perhaps low-level depression. And men, you know, men have, I'll speak biologically, men have wet dreams for a reason. You know, our bodies, it's a biological aspect of our bodies. So this is a big deal, and this is also a big deal partly because we're getting married younger, or we're getting married older, far after we've come to sexual maturity, and there are good reasons for that. And, you know, when it comes to questions of masturbation, there have been healthy discussions about this in Christianity as well. How should you regard masturbation? You know, maybe we should talk about some of these things in our conversations about sexual issues. There's a lot of discussion about masturbation. Onanism, Onan was not really a sexual issue, but it was a lot of discussion about masturbation. Onanism, Onan was not really a story about masturbation. That was a story about ancient birth control and Onan's desire to not impregnate Tamar. So I think, well, let me maybe get to some practical points. Number one, don't fight this alone. Find someone you can talk about it with. Number two, there are resources out there. Give them a try. Look for what's helpful. Number three, a lot of times, often in the Christian church, we sort of try to just use willpower to deal with these kinds of things. I don't find that to be a particularly Christian approach. I'm not saying willpower isn't important. I'm saying willpower is insufficient. And finally, what Christianity does have to offer is grace. I make this point every week in my sermons. I build it into my sermons. Misery, deliverance, gratitude. Misery, deliverance, gratitude. The purity and chastity that I congratulate you for desiring is part of the grateful service you aspire to give to your God out of gratitude for what he's done for you. Because you are a sinner. And well, here's an area that you know you're a sinner. Here's an area you want to do better with. So, I will also say that for many of us, it is precisely in the areas of our greatest weakness that Christ sometimes does his best work in us. Because if you realize that you are in need of him for forgiveness and for self-control, you will probably seek him. And here's, if you use this to pursue him, to pursue him, he can make you into the kind of strength that Christians should have. Because Christian strength is not prudishness and self-righteousness where we look down on people who have weaknesses. Christians become both strong and kind. And that's a difficult thing for this world to understand. And it's different from nice. So, there's a ton written about this. Not all of it's good. But you're by no means alone in this. You're by no means alone in this. Because part of what internet pornography did was make this everyone's problem in a lot of ways. Thank you, internet. But don't pass up the opportunity for God's grace and to see yourself as a sinner saved by grace. And to pursue the purity and the chastity that you rightfully long for in the context of God's grace and in pursuit of gratitude. Now, this is tremendously tricky. But, yeah, it took guts to ask a question like this. And I think this is part of the process by which the church learns to work with this. You know, there's a Seitz Booning. Stanley Wiersma was a poet in the Christian Reformed Church taught at Calvin College. He would tell these stories from kind of early mid-20th century Christian Reformed communities. He wrote poems about it. And he has this one poem about an alcoholic in a church. And, you know, the alcoholic was under discipline in the church because he couldn't stay sober. And he, you know, he was under discipline in the church because he couldn't stay sober. So he's barred from communion. That almost makes me cry. The story is that this man would never miss communion Sunday. I'm probably extrapolating a little bit on the poem. So here you have an alcoholic who can't control himself. Probably there's not an AA meeting around and maybe his early CRC wouldn't bother hosting an AA meeting for some Christian Reformed dogmatic reason, which probably wasn't wholly bad. And so here's an alcoholic who's just struggling and he can't stay sober and he probably screwed up his marriage and his kids probably hate him and his wife probably left him. And on top of that, his church disciplines him and says, you can't come to the Lord's table and partake in the bread and the wine. And he's just a little bit of a alcoholic. And his, and his, and the bread and the wine, but yet he goes to church so that he can just be near someone having some. And in those days, the Christian Reformed church would have definitely served wine and not grape juice. And Stanley Wearsmith's poem basically intimates that in some ways. Here's the church's greatest saint. Why? Because he knows himself to be a sinner. And yet he clings to Christ. And he says, I have no righteousness to give you. So please give me yours. And when I read stories of Jesus in the gospel, Jesus doesn't turn such a person away. Does that mean Jesus is happy with his drunkenness and his inability to deal with alcohol? No. But in your misery, flee to him. Then you will likely have generosity and patience with the sinners around you. And that alcoholic in that church had patience with all the other different kinds of sinners that were taking the Lord's supper. And he was excluded. Although the bread and the wine never crossed his lips. In some ways Christ was feeding him. His body and his blood there in that room. He was probably in the back. He probably left right after. Didn't want to talk to anyone. So Christ died for you. You have a problem. Don't waste your problem. Use it to seek him. You know, and you get that from Paul and the thorn in the flesh. My grace is made perfect in weakness. And so, yeah, it's a good question. Next question. Further beyond Eddie. Do you think anyone could ever move off, move you off your faith? And if your faith were proven wrong, would you act any differently? This is where, you know, I've said many, many times before, I, I believe more now in the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ than I began my YouTube journey. Basically, because I've done all this talking and thinking about it. But I don't believe in the physical resurrection because of an argument that a professor at Liberty University makes. It's faith that I have. Well, what's faith? Do you mean faith? That means you don't have evidence? No, we've got lots of evidence. None of it involves rocks or heel prints in soft clay in the first century Palestine, Jerusalem. My faith has a lot more to do with what I just finished talking about because the hunger and desire that the purity and the grace and the sanctification and the redemption could apply to my flesh, my body, my soul, my body, my body, my body, my body, my body, the sanctification and the redemption could apply to my flesh and what I do with my body, which is decaying and dying. Just got word that a friend of mine yesterday got a phone call from a friend of mine. He, he had a prostate cancer scare and he got the results back from the biopsy and they were negative, no cancer. Ah, I felt so good. I was so relieved. I don't want to lose my friend. Pastoring a church full of old people. I bury my friends all the time. This morning, I got word from another friend that a mutual friend of ours was just diagnosed with stomach cancer. He's a young man. His boys are teenagers, young adults. He's, he's not on the Discord server, but he's, I got to know him because I started making videos and he hasn't been on the channel, but he's been a wonderful friend and he's got stomach cancer. And so prophet Zacharias, who I only know from, you know, little interchanges on the bridges meeting Discord server says, I struggle with this. What does my faith say? My faith says you long for a good thing and I'm going to lean into my belief system that you will get there someday. And when I learned that my friend has stomach cancer, well, maybe he'll beat the cancer. I certainly hope so. And I praise God for the doctors and the chemo and everything, but I've, I've walked with enough people through cancer fights to know sometimes the cure is worse than the disease. And is it possible that my friend might be ripped from his, from his wife and sons? Yes. He recently had a heart attack. Now he has this. Two days ago, I got word, three days ago, I got word that a woman who used to be a part of this congregation, she was here with her then husband and her husband, I loved him, had all these medical problems. It was covered from head to foot in tattoos. He was a musician who was nearly blind. He had diabetes horribly because he was part of a Christian sect growing up that says, no, you should only be cured by faith. And so they didn't let him have insulin. Of course, that wrecked his health for his whole life. And by the time I knew him, you know, he was blind. He was bipolar. And he was a very, very, very, very, very, very, very blind. He was bipolar. You know, he had history of drugs and alcohol. Of course you would. I was trying to, you know, he was a, he was a Christian, he was a believer and, you know, he used to play music and then it was a terrific musician. And then he loses his hearing. I met this young woman. She had had a history with drugs too. And two kids from a previous marriage and he had a kid from a previous marriage and they got together and well, I don't know. A situation like that, there's going to be ups and downs and there were, and you know, money was always a problem. Oh, they eventually left this church because, you know, transportation and housing and all that stuff. And they lived on another area of town. Their lives were always pretty chaotic and unstable. Three years ago, I got a phone call from his father. They found him dead. He had, he and his wife were trying to get back together and it was rough and but his health was getting worse and worse. And so his wife went off to work and he, he barricaded himself in a room, made phone calls to his friends. He tried to call me. I was on vacation. So I didn't answer. Said, turned off that number. And a big magic marker wrote on his chest DNR do not resuscitate because he knew if he started calling his friends and saying goodbye, that everyone would assume it was suicide. But he felt the fact that he was dying. He was in his forties. So he barricaded himself in the room. His wife eventually got wind of what was happening. So of course she rushes home, opens the door and he's laying on the floor and he's gone. Wednesday, I got word that she was in a U-Haul trailer. I don't know who's what was going on. I hadn't been in touch with her for a few years. I've heard now that on Facebook accident. Trailers engulfed in our truck is engulfed in flames. Highway patrol gets the driver out. She's the passenger. She dies there, leaves a 13 year old and a 19 year old sons. What would move me off my faith? People come and say, I can't believe God would have a world like this. I flip it around. I won't live in a world like this without hope of the resurrection, without belief in the resurrection, without belief that that alcoholics somewhere in the Midwest who was barred from the Lord's supper will sit at the feast of the lamb and that my friend who wrote DNR on his chest will finally get and talk to the Jesus that he loved and that there's hope for these sons and their children. And that there's hope for these sons who just this week lost their mother. And that my friend who has stomach cancer, whether he lives or dies, and we all do die, will someday be reunited with the family that is lost. And we've all lost family. It isn't hardship that will move me off my faith. It's probably success. Because I think the real enemy of faith is self-sufficiency. That I think I somehow have the money or the smarts or the technology or the power to make this world as I wish it to be. I think, you know, C.S. Lewis, Peugeot mentioned he was reading The Great Divorce. I think it's brilliant of C.S. Lewis to portray hell as a world where you can have everything you want just by thinking about it. A lot of us would say, that's heaven. Really? You know, the only thing you can't have in hell is peace with other people. So, and that doesn't, you know, if I'm proven wrong, I believe my savior lives. And people can judge me how they want. If you're going to stop the judgment of others, good luck. I believe I understand why Thomas said to the other disciples, what are you guys smoking? What do you mean he was here? No. I believe my redeemer lives. Because if that isn't the case, then what hope do we really have? And I don't mean just to live, hope do we really have. And I don't mean just a little hope of maybe little escapes or end of my personal consciousness or end of my individuality or the cutting off of this monologue that or this autobiography that I somehow associate with myself. And I think Lewis is right. We don't ask, it's the problem isn't that we ask for too much. We don't ask for enough. Because I don't just want, you know, memories of my friend covered with tattoos. I don't want just memories of the story of this alcoholic and some strange little Christian CRC out of the way place someplace. I want everything. I want healing. I want restoration. And I'm gonna, I'm not gonna stop longing for it. I'm not gonna stop wanting it. I'm not gonna stop demanding it. What's the shape of my demand? Well, I'm an evangelist in a lot of ways. I want you to believe it too. I want you to believe it too. So that someone might say, go back to the pornography question or the alcohol question. Well, if you know, if you didn't have stigma about alcohol, the Dutch didn't have stigma about alcohol. It was the Baptist that looked at them and said, those Dutch Calvinists drink. Yeah, they do. They like their drink. Sex, sex. Why don't, why, why is sex such a big deal? I don't know. You tell me. So move me off my faith. I'm faith is trusting and longing and demanding and not resting until I have it. So I intend to go to the grave saying, well, how many parables are like this? It's the unjust. It's the unjust judge and the widow in Luke 18. It's the crooked steward in Luke 16. The crooked steward, you know, has been cooking the books for a while and the master, he gets caught and the master says, see me next Monday. What the master didn't do was send the other servants to collect the seal and the books. And the steward is like, what an idiot that guy is. I'm going to go around to all of his debtors and reduce the debts so that when he lowers the boom on me next Monday, I'm going to go and, you know, cash in on all the favors and, you know, I'm going to rob the guy even more to preserve myself. And we would expect Jesus to tell this story and say, and greatly did he suffer an out of darkness where there is weeping of gnashing of teeth. And instead the master compliments him and, you know, just read the commentaries. Everybody's like, why on earth would he compliment the guy was a crook? And it's Kenneth Bailey that was helpful for me because Kenneth Bailey noted the guy was a crook. He didn't bank on his own righteousness. He banked on the zeal of the master for his reputation. And so, you know, that's where I am. So move me off my faith. I hope not, but I don't believe because of an argument. I believe because I demand a better world. And I'm going to keep asking God until he gives it. That's why. And I know I can't do it. So good morning, Paul. Thank you for walking with us and talking with us. You're welcome. It's been a pleasure. I'm new to the figurative party and recently tripped over James to it seems vital. I'll look that up. What are some ways every people can do this? Logos. Open, open up, open up, open up quickly. I should have probably just opened up Bible Gateway. I only have so many screens in front of me. And like I said, I'm recording this on my own. All right, James to my brothers and sisters, believers in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ must not show favoritism. Suppose a man comes into your meeting wearing gold rings and fine clothes and a poor man and filthy old clothes also comes in. If you show special attention to the one wearing fine clothes and say here, a good seat for you, but say to the poor man, stand there or sit on the floor outside and say, I'm going to go to the bathroom. I'm going to go to the bathroom. So I'm going to sit at my feet. Have you not? Have you not discriminated amongst yourself and become judges with evil thoughts? Listen, my brothers and sisters has not God chosen those who are poor in the eyes of the world to be rich in faith and to inherit his kingdom? He promised for those who love him. Yeah, there's that alcoholic in the back of the church, right? It's a lousy drunk. He won't even, he can't even let the wine and the, and the, and the bread passes lips. The best he can do is just be next to someone who it does. But have you dishonored the poor? Is it not the rich who are exploiting you? Oh, it sounds woke. Are they not the ones who are dragging you into court? Power. Are they not the ones who are blaspheming the noble name of him to whom you belong? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I struggle with this because, you know, this is status and, you know, some of you have been very generous with me and generous with my church and part of what has changed is I never ever looked at who gave money to the church. I just, Deacons, you, you handle this, you know, but I knew who in church had money and who didn't have money. I mean, it was obvious, but I don't want to treat people differently. According to, I mean, that's why I have the randos conversation. And that's why, you know, sometimes it's like, well, how am I going to decide who to talk to and not talk to motivation? And well, you know, if I say, if I go to Patreon and say, if you support me at a hundred dollars a month, I'll have a half hour conversation with you once a year. That's not a bad thing. But a lot of you can't, it shouldn't be sending me money and, you know, support your local church. So how do you not value those? You know, we see opportunities and threats, and that's how we evaluate people. And James Do says, no, no, no. And this again, back to the question of sin. It's so funny, people come into church and, well, not this church, but other churches, and they look around and they say, everyone seems to be so good. It's like, you don't know the half of it. And I'm like, it's like, you don't know the half of it. Some of the ones that you see are good are, have huge problems. And some you look at and think, well, I wouldn't want to be them. Do you see the car they drive? Do you see the way they dress? They don't have any education. That one over there can't even read. And I say, ah, but they cling to their Lord and they love their neighbor and they bless those who persecute them. And one day there will be a triumph in heaven and they will be at the center. And this world that valued them not will be aghast at the glories they receive. Even though they were the widow who gave two mites, they were the person that didn't know the left hand knew what the right, the left hand didn't know what the right hand was doing. They went and picked up the homeless and laughed with those who laughed and weeped with those who wept. The reversal is coming. Ah, that sounds so woke. Well, yeah, it's a version of that. Only it's not all corrupt like all of the times we tried to do it ourselves. It's Christ who is our servant, who strips down and washes our feet and dies for us and is our King. He runs up and down the hierarchy. Paul, you seem to like to talk about powers and principalities and how they affect us. It seems to me that a big part of what Jesus did was actively ignore them, starting with the devil. Oh, no, I don't think so. Because I was just I was doing I was we had our men's group and I was reading the Temptations and thinking about it in terms of Ren Girard. I wish I could, I should wish I could speak French because, you know, he was a Frenchman and every time Peugeot says, Ren Girard, something like that. It's like, wow, he can really say it. I can't. Ren Girard. I've been reading lately in the New Testament, you know, trying to get a handle on why the Joannine parts of the New Testament are so antithetical. And that that alongside the other and because it's very difficult to try to figure out the dance between the antithetical and the and the and the spectrum. So, no, all you know, especially if you read the Gospel of Mark, which is the shortest of the Gospels. So if you don't have a lot of time, start there. It's always about beating the devil in the Gospel of Mark. He's defeating Satan. He's defeating the Kingdom of Darkness. You know, some people will look at it and they'll be like, well, it's almost Manichaean. So but but this again is where I think here in late modernity, we have to come to terms with how do we how do we imagine this language is the devil some this sort of Cartesian dualism substance. See it and again, that's something that very quickly people are going to think I'm a modernist. I'm demythologizing it. No, I'm trying to I'm trying to fully integrate the logos and flesh. And I'll fail, of course. But that's the challenge right now, because, you know, Michael Shermer begins with a question about, well, Bayesian Hume, almost certainly not on that physical resurrection. Peterson's like, but you know, story and manifestation and how far does this really go? Yeah, that's Peterson's. Peterson's a telltale showing where the culture is going. So why is it justified to use these conceptualizations if you're supposed to imitate Christ and ignore them? No, he doesn't ignore Satan. In fact, I've just still have logos open. Good. End of John 14, you know, Manuel, if you're going to be swapping biblical interpretation with me, you got to be ready. End of chapter 14, John, end of chapter 14, the Gospel of John. You heard me say I am going away and I am coming back to you. If you love me, you will be glad that I'm going to the Father for the Father is greater than I am. Where's Sam? I have told you now before it happens. I'm right here. Okay. I have told you now before it happens so that when it does happen, you will believe. I will not say much more to you for the Prince of this world is coming. He has no hold on me. Why not? Same thing that happens in the, in the temptation. It's so interesting. We're reading the temptations in the Gospel of Matthew and you know, Satan is like, if you'll just bow down to me because I run the kingdoms of the world. Ren Girard wades in and says, how does he run the kingdoms of the world? How, how is Satan in charge? What, what does that mean? And Ren Girard basically says something to the effect of I'm just giving it just a little window into it says, well, the kingdoms of the world operate by the sword. That's how the principalities and powers work That's how the principalities and powers work in this world. And it's really amazing at the end of the temptation, Satan basically says, you know, if you bow down to me, I'll, I'll give you all this stuff. And Jesus says, be gone. And he leaves. It's like, wait a minute, who's in charge here? And, and the point of the, all of the exorcism that you see in the Gospel of John. And, and again, and again, and again, it's that the Prince of this world has no hold on him. Well, why? Well, that gets played out then in the crucifixion and resurrection, because the crucifixion says the Prince of the world has every hold on him because crucifying Jesus was the manifestation of the Prince of this world. But then there's a resurrection and you might say, ah, but that's just a story. Oh, okay. So you believe in the devil. You're in the devil's kingdom. You're anti-Christ because that's anti-Christ. Now, if Jesus really rose from the dead, then when he says he has no hold on me, and then this week's text for the sermon, I have to do the rough draft later this afternoon. I am the true vine and my father is the gardener. He cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit. Ouch. Okay. So maybe you're struggling with alcohol. Maybe you're struggling with porn. And you're struggling with alcohol. And you're struggling with alcohol. And you're struggling Okay. So maybe you're struggling with alcohol. Maybe you're struggling with porn. And you're struggling and you're like, I don't want to be cut off. And so what are you doing? You're leaning back into the vine and you're saying, feed me Lord, feed me. And I'll just a spoiler alert. Where's my sermon going this week? My sermon's going. Oh, come on. Oh shoot. I have the book over there instead. Mother Teresa, this woman who lived her Christian life, believing God had abandoned her and turned his back on her and she pleaded with him, Lord, why won't you give me the kind of internal spiritual solace that so many other Christians testify to? Why can't I have an experiential sense of your communion? And this drives her to go and do things that were controversial. You know, why don't you give these people medical treatment instead of just giving them morphine at the end of their life or, or consolation or not even morphine? Well, he bore fruit through her by pruning her. And well, church discipline is giving people over to the devil. No, Manuel, you got to read the Bible some more, read the gospel some more. Once you understand how they talk, you'll see that it's shot through with these things. And of course, we materialists sort of want to, this is an old thing, demythologize it and get rid of it. But yeah, no, Manuel, sorry, you got to up your game. No, no, no. Okay, go ahead. I'm going to defend myself here a little bit. Okay. Because like, at least what I got from your description is that he's actively ignoring the devil. Like that doesn't seem contradictory. And this is connecting to a thing that I'm busy with, with paradigms, right? So you can look from the perspective of Jesus and in some sense, they're not influencing him, right? But then you can look from the perspective of man, where you are being influenced in some sense, or you could be influenced in some sense. So like, I was, I was trying to highlight that tension. Okay. But yeah. Sorry, sorry to be so hard and dismissive of you. All right. Oh, I got two questions. I division slipped one in at the last minute. Ah, facet of Tyler. Oh, good to see Tyler around. Do you see any perspectives or stories that are consciously or otherwise missing from this corner of the internet? Oh gosh, the world is so big. There's always stories missing. What threads still need to be woven into the great conversation? I don't know. We'll find them as they go. Also, hi, Paul. I appreciate your candor today. Oh my throat is sore. Shadows seem to hide so much of what we need to be revealed. Yeah. Thank you. Yeah. You know, it's, it's so weird because, you know, you're crying a video and culture is so funny. Some people, if you show emotions, they'll turn it off. I don't need to hear this weeping pastor. Other people are like, you know, Sherry sometimes would be like, you know, she'd like, Oh, that's the, I'm feeling it right now, Paul. And it's, it's just the way we are. I, you know, I, I think I, you know, Tyler, I am just gratified, delighted, inspired by the kind of stuff we see happening in this little corner of the internet. Um, I mean, the, the, the, the conversation I had with the, you know, the, the conversation with, with Rafe and then with Rafe and for Vicky and then with John and, um, with John and, and JP Marceau. And then I was the other day, they were doing question and answer on the awakening from the meaning crisis discord server. And, and Joey says to Rick, Oh, you know, they're, they're, they're using some new facilities in, in discord because discords kind of trying to, you know, not have their market share taken by clubhouse, uh, trying to compete with clubhouse. And so Rick sends me a message and says, Oh, Joey says they're doing stuff on that. Verrake is on the awakening from the meaning crisis discord server, doing question and answer. And they're using some stuff that could be there. So I hop over there and I not, and I only had a half hour before I had my usual Monday afternoon family zoom meeting with my family out East. And, um, and there's a, Oh, Paul's in the room and right there, Strawn is asking a question about the conversation that we had. Oh gosh. But, you know, I feel, I feel so richly blessed by, you know, here's, I don't know how many of you are in the room today, but I just feel so richly blessed by your questions, by your presence, by, I mean, the vast majority of you, what you're bringing to these conversations are your honesty, sincerity, good humor. Um, you know, this wouldn't happen. This doesn't just happen. You're spending time, you know, I love how John would always end his awakening from the meaning crisis. Thank you for your time and attention. What a gracious man. So I don't know, I can't answer your question, Tyler, but it's, uh, I'm glad you're here. I'm glad what's happening is happening. It won't happen forever. These things always Peter out and they always, sometimes Peter out sadly and sometimes explode and that happens, but when the good days are, when they're fruitful and productive, we should give thanks and be grateful. So, yeah. So itemism slipped one in just at the last minute, trying to not keep you too long because I'm just impressed this whole thing is working. Um, because again, I gotta go talk to Rick, see if we can be ready for Sunday, find out what happened to our, our little setup here at the living stones ministry world center. Um, hi Paul and your conversation with burn power. You discussed, um, churches that are dumpy can't be homey, a tradition which I am well too acquainted. Most churches are, I share burns distaste for these bad aesthetics and the conviction that good aesthetics elevate and noble and ultimately create and convey more meaning than bad ones. However, I also have this nagging doubt that my tastes are a function of snobbery or coolness. Your response to burn that there is a way that the dumpy can't be homey may be its own way of meaningful or aesthetic was refreshingly pastoral. It's easy to sit in our armchairs and philosophize about a hierarchy of beauty, but then there's the world out there full of souls and all their radical singularity. Oh yes. As a pastor, how do you think about reconciling hierarchy of beauty to the variety of individual religious experience? Is there a way forward for beauty and the church without the taint of coolness and arrogance? I think, I think that happens. I think that happens. There's sort of this, there's sort of this rev- this, and when I say revolution, I don't mean like, you know, the French Revolution. I mean like going around and around a churning of, of kitsch and taste and so much taste becomes kitsch and sometimes kitsch becomes taste. And, and you know, authenticity, this, this buzzword comes into this here and so, you know, I spoke a little bit, a little while ago about, let's talk about the simple. Maybe they have a low IQ. Maybe they have a learning disability. Maybe they have a low IQ. Maybe they have a learning disability. Maybe they're just poor. Maybe they haven't had anything of beauty or refinement ever available to them. I've often seen in my life that such people can outperform the elites in generosity, in kindness. Sometimes, you know, I don't, I don't want to get elite about elitism either because sometimes the elites are amazing too. And when they are, when you find a very wealthy person who is humble and generous and quiet, wow, that's really something because that's, that's, that's really hard to pull off because we get, we get so full of ourselves. So, you know, I, I'm glad that, I'm glad that Chad brought us back to, you know, James too. Show no partiality as you hold the faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory, for if a man wearing, with a man with good taste and all the right selections of clothing and car and home and music and is in your assembly, someone who's really cool and some schlopp comes in with his, and play it any way you want with his bad taste and bad haircut. And he thinks it's awesome. And if you pay attention to the one with good taste and say, oh, we want you on stage so that everyone can see our good taste, while you say to the guy who likes all the wrong music and likes it loudly, you stand over there, sit down at my feet. Have you not, not then made distinctions among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts? Yeah, yeah, no, it's a good question. And I think that's a good question. And I think that's a good question. Have you not, not then made distinctions among yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts? Yeah, yeah, no, it's a good question. So, and the, and the, the answer to this again is humility. And that again goes back to the porn question and the alcohol question. And part of the difficulty of success is, it goes to our head. And, and, and part of the blessing of failure is we understand that when success comes or good times come, you know, can we attribute them to us? And, you know, I, I look at this channel and everything that's happened to me in the last three years and I, I see, I see people who are far smarter, better read. And I think, well, you should have a YouTube channel and they don't. And here, here I have one. And, and part of it is because I made a crazy really kind of a, didn't know what I was doing. It just hit the internet at the right time. And here we are. But, you know, I didn't pick my parents. I didn't pick the place of my birth. I'm not an especially flashy dresser. I don't, I'm not too into personal grooming. But I have enough taste that sometimes I look at my videos and cringe. But the joy is if, if it doesn't have to be about me, there's a real freedom. And so the video I posted this morning of, of Voiles. Um, Danny Voiles, that's his stage name. We'll, we'll use that one. You know, then he says, Hey, I got, you know, I'm in Sherry's art group. I think, yeah, that's what I want to see. I don't, I don't, I don't want, you know, if, if this estuary idea takes off, I don't need Paul VanderKlay's picture underneath it. Would that feel good? Oh, sure. In some ways, but, you know, because Sherry's doing the work and John Van Donk's doing the work and Rod Haer is doing the work and, and, you know, Rick and Joey and Job and Luke and, um, you know, I'm already talking about the elites, you know, uh, Jeff, because he started naming names. Is he going to name my name and, and Sherry and, um, and, and, and, and, and, and all of you, you all make the discord server. And I know you come and go, I get that. You all make the discord server and the limitations of time and space and hierarchy mean that most of the world will never see most of us. And within a generation or two, we will be forgotten. I didn't know my great grandparents, but again, will something move me off my faith? I believe you do not labor in vain and, um, and, and I don't know how to work everything out, but I do believe that any God capable of making this world can redeem it. And, um, and the fact that he involves us in this meaningful adventure is almost too good to be true and to be believed. So I give you skeptics. I give you skeptics. I understand why you're skeptical. But I want to invite you into the, I want to invite you into the adventure and the joy because I think it's happening. It's been happening for 2000 years. It was happening in Israel. So maybe that's a good way to end. So I can't tell Rick to cease trans. Oh, gosh, I got to figure out how to stop the recording.