https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=J5XTvdmWYEE

 with, you know, the baptism of infants. Okay, well you can, you can in a sense write a protest. There's different levels of protest. One is a protest that says, I think these are wrong and I want to challenge it all the way up the line of command. That happens every 50 years or so. Or you can say, I've got some personal reservations. I really want to participate in this church, but I've got these personal reservations. I'm basically going to file my reservations and I promise to not, you know, go to church every week and say, every time there's an infant baptism, dang on it, they baptize another one of those squirts. You've got to stop that. You say, I, and so there's also that sense too where the system understands that not everyone is going to agree with everything. And if it's to a point that you say, in good conscience, I can only participate if I have my yeah-butts on this and I file them formally with my local church. Okay. Which one church has been doing for years on women in office? Right? Yeah, yeah, there are, there's a church that, that's not technically a ground woman because women in office isn't a confessional issue. But before classes, at every class meeting, they will attach to their credential, which is the document that says who's coming. We don't believe women should serve in the office of the Christian Reformed Church. And so we will participate in this meeting, but our conscience is strained by this and we just want you to know. And so we always read that at our meeting. And that's. So I'm going. And we don't fight about it. I never fight about it. I'm just going to be there with a smile on my face. Well, but I think it's, but I think having, I know some people get really tired of that church sending it in. But I think it's a good reminder to all of us that there are differences in the church. And it's a good practice to, let's be a little generous and respectful for our differences. You might not think that this person's ideas are worth anything, but part of what we do in the church is that we respect each other and we behave each other well around differences. And that's what we practice. And so I personally want to see the church be a community where there are differences and where we figure out how to live with them. And I'd rather have them there and be honest. Yes. Absolutely. Yes. So. Paul, thanks. We run out of time, but that's been a good time. Well, it's fun going through this stuff. I hope this was helpful to you. Sorry, there's so much history involved in it, but I don't know any other way to talk about it without the history. Only in America you have to apologize that there's history. That's very true. Right? That's very true. Ah, there's history. Can I just say one thing that was missing that I'd love to hear at a future date possibly? And that's the history of mission in the Christian From Church. Because I was reading that document that you sent, and it didn't say anything about CRWRC or, now it's called World Renew, but the Christian From Church with all of its, I don't know if you read the document that Mark linked, but for all of its insular kind of stuff in North America, it's had an amazing history of sending missionaries all over the world. So I remember hearing people, when I was in seminary, people said, oh, Calvin, oh, reform. That's where they don't believe in mission work, right? Oh, no. Because it's all predetermined predestination. So, you know, right? But CRC has an amazing history of, and the mission wing, the overseas mission wing of the church, I believe very possibly has influenced the denomination. Because we've learned things all over the world that we've brought back and helped with the hegemony and racism of our stuff in the United States. Did you do mission work? I did not get through the CRC, but in China and Europe. But anyway, that's a big part of our history. You know, there's 150-year-old Nigerian churches and stuff like that. Great. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. We should close with prayer. Bart, do you want to just close with prayer? Yeah. Okay. Thanks, everyone, for coming. Appreciate it. Dear God, we are glad to be together to learn from what you've given Paul, the wisdom and intellect you've given him and the teaching abilities that you blessed him with. And thank you for the fact that we can be blessed with that, even though, you know, a lot of us in this room don't have a longer history with Paul knowing him or a relationship. But we can just be blessed by him opening up those gifts to us today. And thank you for him to have a meaningful place in this world to use those gifts and to share, you know, his unique mind with the world in a way that's super positive. Thanks for all the stuff that's been going on on YouTube and the way Paul's been able to connect with a whole new audience lately around a lot of very current things. And I pray you continue to bless him and bless that work that he's doing. Bless Living Stones, their elders and deacons and their journey as a church as they minister to a very different kind of population of people in a different part of the city. And be with us as city lifers as we feel, you know, nervousness and some fears about entering into, you know, the real world of church and being a congregation formerly in the CRC. And just keep blessing us and help leading us through gifts that you've given the church and some of those gifts we've explored this morning in the documents and the history of the church. Continue to work organically and help us to believe and hold to the fact that your spirit is very active and at work in the church today, right where we are tomorrow morning as we engage in the means of grace. And so go with us and let's have things on our minds, health issues, friends and family in trouble or in need and hear those requests and the concerns of our hearts and answer our prayers. And go with us as we go out to serve the world in your name. In Jesus name we pray. Amen. Amen.