https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=47Z8T0qBYu4

 There we go. Well, it's nice to finally get a chance to talk to you directly. Likewise. As opposed to a story cargo. So, where do you want to begin? You want to start with your story? What would you like to do? Yeah, a little background probably good. I always I listen to your story quite a bit and I see quite a lot of similarity. I was just listening about how you describe yourself as a missionary kid. That's very much my background. I grew up, I was born in Germany, Munich. And my parents did Chirk Chirk in the city there for about eight years. And then we moved to Australia. And we were there for four years. And I was 12 when I first got got to the US. So I always say I'm a I'm an MC. I'm a PK. I'm a TCK, which means a third cultured kid. Yeah. Now, that's a big part of my background. But I always say, even though I've lived now in Germany, probably. I don't know, over 15 to 20 years, I still still, you know, that those formative years I was in the state's high school and college. And that's that's always what I call my home and the culture I relate to. And that's kind of where I grew up. Right. Wow. Where did your parents grow up? They grew up in Oregon. OK. Yeah, they both of them grew up on farms. OK. And my parents, my family background, they grew up in Oregon. My parents, my family background Mennonite. And so my both my parents grew up, you know, wearing coverings. My my great my grandfather had a one of those straight coats that they called. And in fact, my dad, his family, they moved to Canada when he was a teenager out, out really way up north. And they live next to an Indian reservoir or a native Canadian reservation. And my grandfather was a pastor there. So they so my both my parents grew up in Mennonite communities, grew up on farms. And then they left Oregon pursuing ministry, really. And then took them overseas. Yeah. Where were your parents? In terms of immigration, did their grandparents immigrate or had they been in the United States for generations? Yeah, that's the to what degree? Definitely it was several generations already in well in the U.S. But my family was one of those families that kept pushing west. That's that's the story. They go, you know, they came in into Ohio and then they moved to Nebraska. There was Oklahoma. And, you know, there's a family story that I think it was what was that the the sodbusters there, the famine, the drought, you know, they had to pack up their bags, left Oklahoma, Oklahoma and came to a sign. Basically a fork in the road. Do we go to California or do we go to Oregon? And and so my family is probably about two, two, three generations in Oregon. OK, OK. Because there's, you know, I've noticed a fair amount of commonalities between, let's say, the the Christian Reformed Church, which tended to be, you know, Dutch immigrant, but also very quite communitarian, especially for much of their history. And Mennonite communities, you know, tend to be very deep, communitarian values within the tradition. Yeah. So what kind of missionary work did your where your parents doing? Well, they they in Munich, they basically did a lot of the missionary work. They did a lot of the missionary work. They did a lot of the missionary work. They did a lot of the missionary work. And so what kind of missionary work did your where your parents doing? Well, they they in Munich, they basically did a church plant. There was a young fledging church and my parents came in and gave leadership to that and started a church. German Mennonites during that period in the 70s where they they tried to plant a number of churches. And so they asked the mission board in America to help. And they my parents went over. So I was my mother was pregnant with me when they moved to Germany. OK, what kind of let's see, how do I ask this in an intelligible way? You'll understand it, but I want the audience to understand. Yeah. What was the what was the the. So in the Christian Reformed Church, of course, we recorded sort of had our Dutch immigrant CRC. But when it went into church planting mode, they usually sort of took missy ology off the shelf of what was going on at the time. Where were these church planters sort of located in those, you know, missy ological conversations? That's a really good question. I think I mean, there's two answers is that one is that I think my parents. I don't think followed necessarily any of the big trends of the day. And I think that's also kind of a little bit. The Mennonite community tends to do that somewhat, too. It's it's it's not a it's not a it was not a church growth type approach. OK, if that says anything. But evangelical in the American sense rather than the German sense. Yeah. Well, I think I think that's one of the things we'll end up talking about. I mean, I think I've heard just in general, where does anabaptism fit into this whole discussion about Christianity in the West, in America? I find I'm I'm always fascinated to hear you talk about the CRC. I mean, there's so many parallels there, but anabaptism has its own unique strain. And one of the things is it's, you know, I would say a metric that tends to apply to missy ology is that it's not one of effectiveness is as the center of value. You know, it's kind of the long term faithfulness. How do you how do you serve? How do you how do you connect with people? I think there would be in mission work, particularly, you know, there would be no problem talking about faith or talking about, you know, maybe in an evangelical way, preaching the gospel type of thing. But it's usually not one of a, you know, of of bluster or confidence in a way that maybe you would see in other other kinds of ways to be flashy, to be, you know, all those things just isn't necessarily what you find in Mennonite communities. Now, my parents moved to Germany. Imagine this, you know, my mother had a she wore a head covering when now during that period is when they stopped wearing it because it was just it was such an odd thing to wear that in a context like Germany, where nobody would, you know, would look at you very student Mormon or Jehovah's Witness type of thing. So that's the period of time where my parents changed their dress. Also, yeah. Well, and that's interesting to me because, you know, for all of the one of the things the Christian reform church has not done. And perhaps if you think about my estuary work as sort of, you know, undercover church planting in some way, maybe I'm doing it by having an estuary meeting in the Netherlands, but I have some questions about that. No, no, no Christian reform church ever decided they were going to send missionaries back to the Netherlands. Yeah. And so to have Mennonite, probably with German ancestry because many of the many of the Mennonites in North American or German Mennonites have Mennonite German, the descendants of Germany, German Mennonites send missionaries back to Germany in the 1970s and 80s is super interesting. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Certainly because of the unique. I mean, it's hard for people to appreciate sort of the unique religious context that these waves of religious immigrants made in the, in the, you know, in the American religious scene so you do have. There's so many Amish remain in Germany, but they're, you know, Pennsylvania, Indiana. And, you know, Julian who's, you know, in our, in our little corner of the internet with his hutter rights up there in Manitoba. So, the, and to a certain degree the Dutch Calvinist the CRC also came to America and something sort of freezes when you leave. And so, you know, Europe just kept changing. And so, the idea of sending missionaries back to do church planting just sort of really fascinates me. Yeah. Well, I had a quick question how long did the Dutch, how long did they retain Dutch as a language in in CRC church you can still find a few services now and then in Dutch but it was during the First World War. During the First World War, because Dutch and Deutsch were just too darn close. And actually a Christian Reformed Church was burned to the ground in one rural community, because anti German sentiment during the First World War was very hot. And so, at that point, the immigrants that came over before the First World War said, you know, we've got to learn English, we've got to have English in the service, we can't have people thinking we're Germans. Now, the wave that came over after the Second World War so there. So my family came over in the wave before the First World War, then there was a new smaller wave of Dutch immigration after the Second World War, that went to mostly Canada, and the western United States. They very much had an ethos of, we're in a new land, we're going to speak the language, we're going to, you know, they still weren't Canadians or Americans so much but they, they very much were going to accommodate and dig in, but they were very different immigrants than the ones who came over in the 1890s when my ancestors came. Yeah, yeah. No, I think the, the, the World War First World War had a big impact as well as language and many communities and it was probably even a double whammy because then there was also the conscience objector thing right you, you, it was definitely a lot of tension during that time as well. Now you you find in Mennonite some Mennonite communities in North America still still speak some German but they tend to be then the the immigrants that came through Russia, because they've come later, in a sense they were some like a later wave and so just like in in North America they retained their, their German, you know, culture and language for a lot much longer time in those parts as well so I mean the story of Mennonite history is really one of the migration, and it continues today, even because most Mennonites in the world are not of European heritage, and many are moving to the west, to, to, to, for all kinds of reasons and so for example we we lived in Los Angeles I studied in my theological training there and what's the missionary, missiology training there and we were at what school, where did you study in LA, I went to Fuller. That's interesting. Yeah, that's interesting. Fuller School of World Missions? Yeah, it was called the School of Intercultural Studies at that time. Okay, okay. Yeah. And my wife and I we were youth, youth pastors at a Indonesian church, and that was a Mennonite church. So at, at that point in time in Los Angeles there were about three dozen Mennonite churches or so, and probably only two or three had that, you know, that European ancestry they were from everywhere else from Guatemala to Belize, Indonesian, Congolese, yeah, and that's that's been the story for at least the Mennonite denomination of the last 50, 80 years or so is that it's become a global, global church. Yeah. Oh, that's really interesting. That's fascinating. Oh gosh, I mean, you put this stuff in front of me I'm just so fascinated by culture and church I've always been. Yeah. And, you know, because, so the closest Mennonite brethren church to us is Greenhaven neighborhood church which is just right down Florin Road. You know I know one family from that church quite well because one young man once approached me called me up cold and said I want you to be my mentor it's like well who are you. Well, I'm, I'm reformed, I said, Well how did you get reformed. Well I got reformed on the internet. It's like, and then you know I got to know him we'd started getting together with him and he grew up in Mennonite community and he sort of got swept up in the young restless and reformed and then got to know his father and his mother and his mother died and so his father is his father's actually been on the Freddie and Paul show a few times he's the Jesus man. So, I've been, you know, but so it's very interesting looking at, you know, whereas sort of the CRC system is sort of a small group. You know the Anabaptists are. They just don't fit easily on to all of these scales that sort of the usually the media hive mind tries to look at American Christianity through. Yeah. Absolutely and that's, I think we're well, the, the. I relate mainly to the, the Mennonite minute minute church USA that's the the church I relate to and there are many different groups that's all see it's like, it's hard to talk about it because it's a very decentralized thing. I'm saying we have affinity to the Jewish communities because we have that kind of, we have the ultra orthodox we know we have the, the, the kind of secular almost version because it Mennonite at least for the previous generations has often meant a kind of a cultural And it's always a, a something. How much of it is a religious, as well as a cultural identity, right and that's something that many have to work through. And I think is actually a big part of what's going on internally in the church. And I think that's one of the things that I'm really interested in is especially the kind of the bigger denomination that I'm a part of. And that's the fault line really in a lot of these debates within the church, as if you've been talking about in CRC I mean I find that strong pole to And then the pulling back, the pulling back, and into holy communities and and and finding, finding the, particularly the evangelical brand to be quite powerful because it's so clear on the church that we're going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be going to be but we all totally the opposite. Bhasin na modes a little of what he told me that as this victim sets out of office and thinks of her, its chaos. Not just her own its identity and Not just her own its identity and so clear and its conviction So, that fault line ranks, right through the middle. And we have this weird but we also have this weird you call it across wins and I think that's absolutely true because it's we have, you know, there's a, we have a different relationship to church and imperialism throughout history right well it's a, there's have given to the church. I mean, at least, you know, to the differentiation between the magisterial reform and the Anabaptists is that we do want to separate from state. We want to make it a voluntary religion. It's all those types of things. And yeah, and so it's fascinating to read a book like Dominion, which I think does a really good job of, I mean, we did, I had a whole Anabaptist group that we read it because it was so, it was actually healthy. I'll tell you this, it was healthy to read his perspective and to put the pieces of Christian history together and realize, ah, there's so much more to this story and how complex, of course, there is. But, you know, we kind of say there was Constantine, and then the church was never good after that, right? And it wasn't until, you know, the Anabaptists in the 15th century revitalized the true church, you know, and so we don't even go through the Enlightenment. We go all the way back to the early church, and that's when we, you know. So I picked up this book before. This is from Christian Reformed Church publishing, My Church, and, you know, basically you start, well, this is church, and you start with the Bible, the Old Testament, and then Jesus and the early church, and then, whoop, before you know it, we're, you know, back at the Reformation. And of course, the Anabaptists, well, you know, there never was, I assume there never was an Anabaptist state church. I mean, it's just. There was Munster. There was Munster. There was Munster. And it didn't go well. You know, that's when I think that's when Anabaptism kind of really took its form after that, and that was, it was a Dutch leader that Menno Simon's. Yeah, and he had the attribute of being elusive. He wasn't killed. And he did it for many, many, like I think he was 30 years or so in ministry, and he kind of, his ability to network all these different churches, all these different groups. I got a whole group of ladies here and someone just banged on my door in a way that I'm uncomfortable with. Just stay right here. Sorry about that. I just, I get women's Bible study here on Tuesday, and if most of our unmedicated schizophrenics, they can get a little, they'll try things with women. They won't try with me, so I just got to make sure everything's cool. But I know, I know who banged on the door and I know it's not a problem. Anyway, where were we? We were at Menno Simon's and Munster. And I was just going to say that I do think it's, you can't underestimate how important Munster was for shaping the future of Anabaptism, where particularly a leader like Menno Simon's clearly said, we are not going to, that is not us, and we will have a different approach. And I think that quiet in the land is often what people, that's how you sum up the experience of Mennonites and Amish kind of pulling back and then being quiet in the land. What's interesting about, but one of the things that's interesting to me about Anabaptism is how they've, so a lot of what has characterized Protestantism is either its full embrace or full reaction, reactive posture to modernity. And so some of those dynamics, I mean some Anabaptist communities became very theologically liberal, some became very politically progressive, and some have remained enormously conservative. And so it's interesting to see that whole spectrum just, I mean the same is true with Calvinists, you have tremendous, you know, but it's interesting watching how that plays differently among Anabaptists. Yeah. Well, I think we have a certain, this is the way I think about it, a certain susceptibility to, I think, kind of the modern, the current virtues of today that seem to be so good because when you really do believe in peace and say that that's a distinctive of our theology and our tradition, there is a critique of, you know, people of my generation and younger and maybe a little bit older that, ah, this quiet in the land, you didn't do anything, we need to do something with it. And so it tends to, people then start running with that and really get drawn into anything that is about peace really becomes what becomes important. And I find that that language particularly has very much taken over the kind of the idea of what the church is all about on the right and on the left. And it's one of those things is like, as somebody I've seen this dynamic, the snowball roll for, you know, a while now, you know, you can't say anything against peace. It's like, what do you, how do you, and yeah. Yeah, although some people are kind of making a case, I mean, woke ism to a certain degree has an anabaptism has that prophetic strain and its tradition to. Yeah, but always nonviolently, which is welcome. Well, and this is I think but this is why this where we're at in our cultural war today. You know, it's, it's all it's been something I've been, it's, it's had a long run run up already in our denomination, I went to, to university in the late 90s, I graduated in 2000. I went to a Mennonite University and I was part of the first graduating class with the degree of the justice, peace and conflict studies. Okay, that that was woke ism one on one, 20 years ago, and I struggled in that degree then have since with this. And what I always said it was, I felt like I was taught a worldview. And I really, I went through the wringer on it because I personally was not at a place where I was calling myself Christian or committing to that. But I also wasn't absolutely rebellious against my where I my roots or even just religion in general I just I was, I was still trying to figure it out. Whereas, that kind of pitchfork and torch bearing kind of nature of the people that it collected was very much part of the, the milieu of the people that I went to university of the we just got to burn this whole thing down and I'm. And so I still, I still have those that experience is still so formative that I find myself struggling with, even today like should I be this, I mean, I care about it so much because it's so much part of my story but I'm still like, can I just let this go. I mean, isn't there something else to focus on like, you know, and I have that internal struggle, I mean, and and and it's so visceral still because now it's not just on a little Mennonite campus this is out in this everywhere now and it's the same kind of thing that I dealt with for a long time ago or just an evolution of that I mean, you know, and and yeah so I, this is a big part of how I've, I've think about our denomination and so in some ways there's a lot of capture to that type of thing in our denomination because we believe in race as something it's very fundamental to like what the church's witness in the world should be right. And and and again it's that same kind of in woke ism like of course, you know, sexism racism all these things, who's against you know who's against those kinds of that you're put on a weird foot to argue against those kinds of things or argue against or try to articulate it in another Well, I very much had the same experience because I, you know, my father's church was very much a racial reconciliation church in Patterson, New Jersey, the, it was sort of a Dutch, you know, a CRC mercy mission to the African Americans who are taking these jobs in the New York metropolitan area. And, and then of course the civil rights movement came along and so the the church, which was mostly black had to at least have a posture with respect to that entire movement. And so you know in my college years I was reading sojourners and the other side and and so in many ways, you know the in terms of the, you know, the peace and justice side of the Christian reform church, you know Mennonites were, you know, you know, I was reading, I mean Russ The Fighters was a huge book in the 70s, rich Christians in an age of hunger. And you know before all the sexual allegations came out, you know, reading the politics of Jesus. I mean, if you were sort of on the left end of an even of an evangelical roughly evangelical church. I mean the man, the Mennonites were in many ways sort of that the Anabaptists were sort of the vanguard because they've been doing peace and justice and of course this is the 70s too so it's, you know, whereas during the first and second World War to be a Anabaptist is an uncomfortable thing during the Vietnam War. Now you guys are, yeah, we've been doing peace movement since, you know, we were getting our teeth kicked in by the rest of the Protestants and the Catholics. You guys were the OG, you guys were the OG, you know, peaceniks, and so that was so you know I always had a, you know, very good, despite what the Belgian Confession says which, which of course reflects a yarn of Leiden and Munster. And so the, you know, the Anabaptists have for many Protestants sort of on the left, not all the way over to liberalism but still because the Mennonites seem to be a peace people that could at least to many degrees maintain a degree of theological orthodoxy, you know and be about peace and justice and racial reconciliation, etc, etc. No, and I think, I mean that's what I think is the struggle today is how to articulate a peace and justice in that kind of perspective in the church and not get caught up in the nomenclature and the trends of the day, right, and that's a big, I mean I studied justice, peace and conflict studies but I, it's a very, I lament the loss of, I think, identity in where all that comes from, I think that, and that's why it's so fascinating to read Dominion which basically lays out all the, you can't take the Christian out of all the good virtues that we think of today. And, and, and I'm like, yeah, that's, I know exactly what that's, what's there and we always I think Anabaptists have always had a focus on the Christian life right but the disciple, the living out of faith and, and I think that that was the place or that was the intersection of where you could keep those, those things always together it had to play out in real life but now to be that I think the woke ism in a sense is applied in a way that it is not a theoretical, and it is a lifestyle in not just I mean it has an ideological bent of course as well, but it is so easy to then practice that in so many ways, and it's almost more permanent, permeable and or it permeates everything even more than how you would say it coming from a doesn't, there's no competition. Yeah, you're coming at it from a Christian church where you say oh we you know we pray well they saved the world. That's right. Who needs prayer when you've got saving to do. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. And prayer is prayer is just for people who, you know, prayer is just for people who are what have some moral defect that's keeping them from real action. Yeah, yeah. I do have a question in here because I think this has a lot to do with. I mean, I would say the leadership of and future leadership in the church right how young people looking to serve in church work in church ministry and I've been at that part of the conversation for a long time and been paying attention to that because I was one of the few that went to an evangelical, you know, seminary and one of the few that has studied missiology I mean, all my peers went and studied development work and, and you know peace studies international relations and, and I feel like there's been a whole my whole generation got trained as activists and organizers and world changers, you know, and I'm one of the few there's not I mean there's just compared to the generation before a lot less that are interested invested in the church as as the place of where we see our, you know, serve and to be part of it's just a dramatic drop off right and now you see that drop off again. And I'm working in a context like Germany where that's just that that that that clip that's just even a steeper cliff of like, who, who's coming after right that that's a huge question. Well, and I saw in. I mean, this answer of what why do you need to bear witness to something countercultural when, in a sense, you've won. So, the culture is all about, you know, there are at least pro forma This is what we say the culture the government, I mean, in a sense the Anabaptists have inherited the state, as such, or maybe half of the political world, and. I guess this, you know, obviously for eschatology comes to play in this. Yeah, yeah, because part of, you know, part of where, you know, oh, people are interested in in anti racism wonderful they're interested in anti poverty wonderful, they're interested in, you know, we're not going to marginalized, you know, we're not going to. Now I don't know who's knocking at my door, gosh what a hang out a second hang out a second sorry, you know, yeah, hey, I want to talk about ministry to the poor and the poor keep bothering me. I mean it's. We have so little confidence in our present systems that they either have the endure, they either have the, the durable commitment or capacity to actually help, instead of simply posturing in order to win votes and acclaim and moral status, I mean I sit here and I listened to all of the talk. And the but I sit here in the middle of it it's like, yeah, yeah I doing squat, and I'm not even convinced you have any. You have any interest in it and then especially when I see all these young white people that are just so woke and it's like, you know, if you really want to, if you really want to help people you can come over here and I'll, you know, I'll help you get to know people and you can actually help people they're like, they're scary. It's like, what did you expect. It was going to be easy. No, it's not easy. You'll probably spend your life and get almost nowhere. And that's why I have zero. Zero. That's why, you know, I continue to believe, and this is where I think probably we both end up that you in fact need a regenerated heart and a very vivid eschatological vision of the risen Christ to actually pour your life out sacrificially in service of the people you want to help, because in this age, you're only going to get so far in a lifetime so and I think that's where, you know, people who are theologically conservative. That's what they can continue to maintain and so when everybody decides that they can go out and use all of our skills to bring in the eschaton it's like, okay, I'm dubious. Show me your fruit. Yeah. What, what is CRC doing for developing the leaders of the future of the, I mean I it sounds from what you're saying. It's also more aging denomination I've heard through the lines a little bit there. The denominaries were such a bastion of leadership training, but it doesn't seem to be maybe this the same as it once was or, you know, in the stuff gets so complex so 100 years ago. The best and the best of the denomination would often go into ministerial service. Yeah, because that seemed to be the cutting edge. And then, you know, we have this, this world and life view, following Abraham Kuyper, Herman Bob ink of of sphere sovereignty and so many many went into other things. The cutting edge was, you know, there was a subtle theological shift from eschatology, you know, within eschatology to, well how much can we in fact bring in the kingdom with our technology and our social science and our money and our power. And what, what sort of shifts then is, well we've got these limited resources within the church. What if we had the kind of power a government has. Yeah, yeah. And, and for the, for the historically for the historical amnesiacs. And in order to forget that. Well, this is kind of where everything was at the end of the 19th beginning of the 20th century until of course, you know, Europe decided to. I love Philip Jenkins book on the, the religious aspects of the First World War, because that in many ways were these different empires and they all were empires, I mean Germany was an empire France was an empire England was an empire, the Dutch used to have an empire but sort of got eaten by the English. It was a catastrophe. It was a catastrophe. But yeah, here we are still imagining well we can, we can wipe out the sources of our suffering. But what what they very quickly realizes your anthropology is is way too materialist in that you think the sources of your suffering are what, privation. And right now we're in the midst of a world where, well we've we've we've done pretty well and wiping out privation in terms of material. But now we've got, you know, I was just listening to Jonathan height and Jordan Peterson Jonathan height makes the point, Gen Z is the most depressed generation we've got. Yeah. So, you know, more stuff. No, I didn't going to do it. So, And so yes, in some ways, the, the vision of the, the, at least the religious, the theological conservative Christians had their finger on an anthropological point, a theological anthropology that actually was telling. And many of those who rushed out to do community development and many fine projects that have, especially in other places in the world, you know, are certainly welcome, we can certainly use better sanitation and nutrition and all of those things in many places in the world. Yeah, we're our, our theological anthropology is deficient, and that deficiency is showing, especially in the developed world. Yeah, yeah. So I. Yeah. You know it's it to me, part of this is, you know, it's not arbitrary that Jonathan Peugeot was in the Congo with Mennonite Central Committee. I was just, I was just a few months ago that I read that I was like, oh, he was with Mennonite Central Committee, MCC. Yeah. And probably you know I in my first conversation with him I, you know, as I usually do, we do people stories out of them, because I'm nosy. And, you know, he was there to, you know, for him he was there to sort of look at the, you know, the, the, the crafts, you know, tradition that they have and he had a lot of his carving from that, from that soapstone that he'd get there and he's got to get a new supply because Congo is not the easiest place in the world to do business. And, but but what what's he, what was he, what was an artist doing from the Mennonite Central Committee in Congo. You and I sort of know, but a lot of people out there would be, what's that about? And, you know, that obviously was integral in in Jonathan's continued journey then into orthodoxy and icon carving. It's none of that is arbitrary. Yeah. So, you know, when he was there. I can't tell you off the top of my head, he's, he's at least 10 years younger than I am. So I would imagine, see I was in, I was overseas in the 90s he was probably there in the 2000s, I would guess. Yeah. I have a good friend who got killed in the Congo working for, he had worked for MCC. Well, Peugeot has a video out where he describes, you know, where he almost lost his life I mean that was a very dangerous place. Yeah, but, you know, and again, and this is this is back to. I have zero. I have very little respect for many of the current activists, because I knew the religious activists of the 70s, and I continue to know the conservative religious missionaries today where they in fact will put their lives on the line and lay it down. I'm not imagining that activism can be somehow at the level of watching Netflix, and you know still have a life of, you know, happiness and celebration and hedonism. I mean, I guess, you know, religious missionaries have always known, no, I, I entertain I pursue this work out of joy, fully understanding it's going to cost me a lot. Yeah. And I willingly lay down my life. That's what religion will do. Yeah. But okay well we're not going to be religious we're just going to jump straight to the fruit. Well then you're just going to Goldman Sachs helps the world to. No, it's, there's an ethic to self sacrifice that isn't just come from by itself. Exactly. And, and, and I, you know, as a pacifist I actually I spent, when I moved to Germany after after university I worked with US soldiers stationed here I worked in for a little organization during the first Iraq war. Sorry, the second Iraq war. And there was at that time still many stationed in Germany and many that were then deployed to Afghanistan and to Iraq. And we ran a organization called the military counseling network. And so we gave GI rights counseling to soldiers stationed here. And we did all kinds of anybody that questions about military regulations, army, mainly submarine. They would call us up and we'd help them but we work specifically then and quite intensely also them with conscience objectors right. But I got to know several hundred soldiers during that time and I think I was inspired by their understanding of sacrifice. And, and that is, that is the military knows that, you know, if they have to it's part of, it's part of it is the part of the way things operate in the military and people that go into the military under often and they don't maybe comprehend that they understand that that's part of the job. Right. And I think as is an interesting as a past I could relate really well to soldiers because there was an ethic of self sacrifice there that we could bond on because if you really do want to change things. It can cost a lot. Yeah. And that's just not part of the DNA of a lot of this new, you know, all the new ideas of how to make the world a better place and and it's missing that there's a fundamental component to that there's, it's not grounded in the same, it's all. I'm not saying it's all wishful thinking, but of course you can say, wouldn't it be great if there was no racism. Yes, it would be great. It would be great but how do you do that, that is a that is a that is a long, that is a difficult thing, because it's very complicated like you've talked about I grew up in our church in where I grew up in Virginia. was in in in basically the black part of town, and we were a multicultural church. We were on our church building was built where the, the colored pool that was that was the property that was belong to in the city there were the colored pool was and the we were able to give it to the church for free. And we decided no we want to buy it we want to own it, we want to show the community that that's and in fact my, my first pastor was black. So, I grew up in that kind of thing and that's just a very different starting point for any kind of conversation about any of this, that you just like, I don't even know where to begin on how to course racism bad I mean, that's easy to say. That's easy. Yeah. But, go try. Yeah, go try to go ahead and end it. Yeah, yeah. Now what are you doing in Germany now, what's your what's your job, what do you spend your time doing. We have, I have several different hats. We, we work for the German Mennonite church. I do, I'm employed by them and my role is to start as a church work, church planning here in Mannheim which is a decent sized city in the south southwest. And then I work also more regionally, basically in in resourcing for churches and kind of, I would say, what word you want to use mobilizing missional missional type stuff whatever the good buzzword is but I, it's basically trying to, I think, to encourage people to try to start to break through to try new things because that's a, it's a culture of not trying anything new it's in steep decline steep. It's it's nervous it's it's wounded it's it's it's hurt and it's very not sure of what the future will bring and so people just get more cautious and and aren't willing to try new things often so I'm kind of in a group of people that tried to try out new things. One of the things I do a lot of work with is young adults, and we do online discipleship program. And that's, that's something that I spent a lot of time with in terms of church planning, while we had a corona wasn't very fun. My, my main role is I think to connect. And I'm always interested about where people are at, and I'm, I feel like a role is you feel how to connect to people but you're also trying to connect to the deeper questions they have in life and I have of course, all set of pre suppositions and biases and everything. And I can, you could easily put everything into that framework but that's not, that's not the that's not the task it's it's also to understand the culture and where these, where are people coming from, and where are they looking where do they need connection not just looking for a connection because that's not always necessarily the right thing in their life but we're trying to figure out how to build community and to work in a more missionary posture in a church it's not a very good recipe for success because we're kind of starting with people that have no relationship to the church right and that in in particularly in Western Europe and most of Europe it's a very de churched culture I mean yeah some people have still some connections, but most people have absolutely no, they maybe went as a child still to the confirmation or were, you know, baptized, but most people have nothing to do with religion or church. And it's a very deeply secular and what we call post Christian context. And so that's kind of my starting point, and and and that's where estuary comes in a little bit because, naturally I have those kinds of connections and conversations with people, and I don't have a very good place to invite people to, though, to have more, you know, to have more meaningful conversation with others, you can't do that in a church context very well. A church church already has its program it has its, you know, this is what it's going to do and I actually, through church planning I've learned that you know it's okay to be church it's okay to say this is what we do we don't need to change. You know I don't need to be cutting edge cool whatever we're going to read the Bible we're going to pray those kinds of things. Because at the end of the day, churches for people that want that be part of that community. Right. Yeah. And that. Yeah, but, but the other part is, how do I connect and actually connect with people because people do want to connect that's the other thing is that people do want to be talking about these things, but have no, there's no space for that in our in culture like this, where maybe at the bar, maybe, you know, maybe when you're jumping, but it's it often the frameworks are not not there to talk about the deeper questions of life. Right. There isn't a forum anymore there's no, there's no synagogue or church or mosque at the center culture where people go to learn about life or wisdom or any you know all these things that we've been talking about that doesn't exist anymore in culture, go to Netflix. And that's probably the biggest place where people explore ideas, maybe implicitly about the life and everything, or YouTube. You know it's because, you know, now that I've been doing this I YouTube I think in some ways is becoming a space where these. There's, there are videos being made about these things, and you know we've got you know obviously on the discord server we have some of that going. But you know, grim gris has been making videos about mine and you know we're trying to use it to get some to get some kind of at least simulate conversation to a degree but no you're you're right and I, I mean it sounds, it sounds like you and I miss you logically are coming at this from a very similar place. And when I think about. You know more in the United States we have mega churches who have been. Gotta be careful here because, um, you know, where does, where does evangelism happen in the United States, and what does it look like. That's a very big topic. And, and even, especially in a culture where part of the woke ism has made religious proselytization, you know, forbidden. Because we'll know you're imposing your impose that's a colonial thing that you're imposing. Oh, well I suppose. I'll just have the Nigerian immigrants do it then. They are the only ones that do that downtown. Yeah. That's that's who you're going to find on the street corner giving out. Yeah. And the Mormons. The Mormons are going door to door and the Jehovah's Witnesses. The, you know, yoga studios are sort of preaching a soft Buddhism, new age thing I mean religion, religion is still happening. Well, but I, this is the funny thing is, as somebody who calls themselves a missionary, I proselytize very little compared to most people I know. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Until, in many ways, until YouTube. Yeah, that was true for me too. Yeah. And that was sort of what Jordan Peterson opened up because I could go a long time before having what I would consider an evangelistic conversation with someone one on one. And for me, you know, in many ways, most of what most of what I'm doing now when I'm having those conversations is in fact online, much more than in person. Yeah. And I don't think that's accidental, because I mean these black mirrors as grim gris likes to call them. Others have called that too obviously something's going on psychologically that I, I can, I can say things online. That are a little bit different to say in person. Yep. So, and you, and you can. When I said there's no space I think you're right when you say no YouTube is a space because then that explains Jordan Peterson you you you you can watch you, you can go and and and listen to somebody talk. Because, because well a, because it doesn't exist anywhere else, but it's so it is, it is, you can do that anonymously and you can, and you can, you can check things out and in a way that is is very true I think, and I think that what I think YouTube then reveals is I think it's much more of a, you can call it a yearning or a hunger to search those things out. I mean, it becomes YouTube in a sense becomes the meaning center. Yeah, I mean, where it expresses the people's desire to find meaning in a really interesting way in our culture. Right. And, you know, in the secret days, we. So, you go into a church in the 60s and 70s are still you go into certain churches today, and you're a visitor they want you to stand up and say your name and where you're from and, and in the secret movement they said, yeah, cut that out, because people want to slide into the church, sit in the back row. They might sing a little bit like this because I feel a little uncomfortable singing in public but it's loud so and and all the music coming at them so it's sort of like singing with the headphones on so they sing a little bit and they'll listen to and they'll sneak out. And that's the way they want it YouTube is of course, you know, the total, you know, stay anonymous you don't even have to log into YouTube I mean, a third of my viewers are not, you know, and they'll contact me say I don't have a YouTube channel so I don't leave. So I don't leave comments. I got somebody else at the door. You know, where are deacons to take care of the poor for me so I can preach the word. So, you know, the, the YouTube is just perfect for stalker mode but the thing that I noted right away with Jordan Peterson was he was really, he was really getting people going and they needed to talk about it because you can't just absorb absorb absorb you've to, if you're going to process you need a back and forth and that's of course where groups come in because, but you needed something you needed the YouTube was, you know, in some ways was supposed to be doing the, the teaching preaching homiletical and but you needed the you needed the, you know, you needed the fellowship, you needed the coin in the, and, and there's no place to do it and again, the, the difficult thing is is that churches are not are not it. And that's why we're not built to it because we've had small groups and small group Bible studies. We've had some of that but that's not the entry that people needed. So, I mean I have a, I have a lot of thoughts on this because when you're doing church planning your you ask a lot of fundamental questions about what what is church right it's what what do you what, and a basic one is what am I inviting people to And again to go back to the early church, I am inspired by. I think I sent you the book ref wants to recommend to you. patient ferment. So it's a Mennonite author talking about what made the early church unique in its context and why, why did it actually what why did it have the story and maybe the success it had. And he puts a frame on it and and one of the things he points out in the whole chapter on the catechism, which was a pretty pretty long process for new people people to come in to the into the church. And it was fascinating to read this because I thought, wow, there are so many parallels to today, where it took a long time and it even took like a year sometimes before they would even invite them, allow them to join in worship, or in any kind of Now, there was a context there which is persecution or maybe political tension, those kinds of things, not always but that you have to factor that in. But the idea that I thought was so But I thought was such a powerful one is that the church in itself was fairly invisible in in the culture. You did not, you did not when you encountered anybody that was Christian you encountered Christians, not the church. So it was people in everyday life, it was in the market, it was the neighborhood in the courtyard. That's where all of this happened with any kind of learning about what and maybe watching these communities from afar, but you did. But you did. That was the visible part. It was not. And it changed quite a bit. And I think this is where this is the mindset that we still deal with today is that church became very visible in our culture. And we still assume that as the church that all we have to do is be visible and then people will come, you know, I think that's really deep down in what many churches, when they think if we just do the right program if we just do the right type of service or you know and that's kind of the seeker. You know, they did it well. They did it really well. Yeah, but the culture changed. Yeah, it's not a it's not a it's not a culture anymore. Looking at the church as a place to. That's where you go with life's questions that's where you go with problems that's where you that's where you seek out community that that just doesn't. That's not that's not reality today. Yeah. And, but we still act as if that is and so that's what I mean sometimes we put so much pressure on ourselves to be the church to the world when sometimes that's not even it's we're not used to being Christians in a world that doesn't know who Christians are. That's the mythological part of me, which is says that's we need to learn that again and for me that's what estuary absolutely is is that I can be a little bit visible in that and it's not because I'm trying to get them into something else but it's it I can be who I am and I really am excited about the potential of being more authentic in that in that space because I think other people are looking for those kinds of authentic encounters with people that say hey I I look at the world this way. You know, I think that's true. Part, I think of what has changed to Allah. Again, Tom Holland and dominion. So I'm working on just a couple of different things one. You know the. So the last couple of weeks I've posted my adult Sunday school recording to my main channel. And it's, it's always interesting and I've done my rough drafts from fairly early on in the channel, but they are really rough drafts, but that. So the recordings, I've met, I don't usually post my sermons, I've got a variety of reasons for that but the. What you what you say about me what we're doing in church is in many ways for us. Right. This is for us, and that hasn't changed. So now I'm paying a lot of attention to the Roman Empire. And the context of the Eastern Roman Empire and the first century. Various. You know we know a lot more about that historically than we did, even 100 years ago. And the, the Christians. And of course not all of them were, but the Christians had to be in some ways, deeply, deeply countercultural. Yes. On some in some pretty significant ways. And again, in Christendom and now post Christendom. That's not what we're used to and we haven't been used to it for 1516 1700 years. Yeah. And so, when. And that's uneven, especially in places like the United States, that's very different in Texas, that it is in California or Oregon or Washington. It's different still in New England where obviously you're in the land founded by Puritans, and some of that remains in the architecture in the culture, but a lot of that is our in the congregational the hyper liberal congregation or the Unitarian churches that dot And, you know, this time of year people are taking lovely pictures of those beautiful Unitarian churches with the colored leaves and you know there's a nostalgia there but how you know how the church can function in this culture now evangelistically, when in many ways, even in the church. We're by no means on the same page, with respect to our posture towards the culture. Right. And that's where mainline fundamentalist evangelical and a Baptist, you know, I know now Orthodox and Roman Catholic, you know, Yeah, so many pieces that I mean I think you bring I mean as an Anabaptist I'm like yes there's always a countercultural component right to. It's just the kingdom i mean that's for me that's that's something I would say theologically is just there but And I think that's what I'm trying to say is that when we come back to the Mennonite experience right now. We've been so counter Christendom for so long that it's so easily to now become counter Christian because the culture is so critical of Christendom right And there are allies now in the critique right and so that just takes more out the door and you suddenly are kind of going against the wrong thing almost and that's what I see happening. The in our tradition, when it comes to. I'll speak, this is very broad and I'm going to make some people mad but that my observation in in from the liberal more liberal context of Christianity in Germany and northern Europe, particularly that Those expressions of church are very are almost they're going extinct. I mean it's it's and part of the challenge there. And I think again Dominion just does this so well they become they have a hard time then Distinguishing themselves from culture, eventually, because there's so much overlap. So with what the values of where of what you think the ultimate highest values are in the world and and they struggle often the more left side or the liberal side of struggle more with that. Then the conservative side. Yeah. And, and it's so I just to give an example here in Mannheim, we have it's a Protestant area for the most part, kind of mixed, but the city itself has been a historically a more of a Protestant city and has a very large established Protestant apparatus here and we work like we actually one of the projects we were partnering with the Protestant Church, so we I'm very close friends with many but you just there's about 22 churches here in in Mannheim, quite a large and you probably have a membership of 80 to 100,000 people right But you go to any church service in any of those and you will hardly find you'll probably find between 10 to 30 to 40 people gathered on a Sunday morning and you're going to probably and then they'll all be all over the age of about 60 probably. Wow. Okay. And the church is basically financially struggling. You know, they have these old buildings it's it's so hard. And there is no youth group in all of, there's no young, young adult youth group in all of Mannheim for the Protestant Church that's organized with the church they have their, their confirmation groups. Those numbers are all down but then there's no group older than that, that the church, because I know the youth pastor for the whole. He's trying to do stuff, but that's massive I mean for a city and to have no youth group. Wow. I mean think about that for a minute. Yeah, yeah, not in America. No, no, but that's that's very different. I mean, and just the, the amount of post Christianity is just absolute almost, and it's existential right now for churches like the Protestant Church or the Evangelical Church, because now they're trying to figure out what to do with all these bills like there's like millions in debt here in the city because you have all these buildings you can't get rid of, because anybody who's going to buy them have to invest millions into it. And then you, what do you do with the church building unless you're a church so no church wants to. You can't really tear them down and then, and you can't really commercialize them in the way that you wouldn't meet the investment, or you have to do saying, you know that the sacred whatever you call that process I mean, it's all very complicated. Yeah. Is it different with the Roman Catholics. Interesting. Now, this is not as a Catholic area, but from what we what I've learned. They're much more of a vibrant expression, mainly because of again migrant populations, we have good, we have good Croatian friends that are Catholic they live right here in the neighborhood. You know, they'll go to Croatian Catholic mass, and there'll be hundreds of people there and I asked him, you go to the German Catholic mass. Oh no no no I said well have you been there yeah yeah but like how many people go there, you know, like 20 people or so. So, it's. That's the first time we actually went and visited them. They have daughters that are kind of young adult teenagers, and they were all at a at a at a festival, I forget what the religious service that's church service in the evening. And I was like, where am I like what young adult. Go to a go to a church service in the evening you know that just doesn't. That just doesn't exist. And so they came later to the dinner because they all were at this. No, the Catholics in general I would say have a little bit more. It's hard to generalize in the German context, the, the Protestant church has been a little bit more educated a little bit more, a little bit more part of the elite culture. I would say that Catholic, I like to say they're more countercultural because they they they have the odd position of being more countercultural today compared to most other churches because of their stance on divorce, and women in leadership all the all the social issues. They're, they're at odds compared to all the other churches. And so they have this they have a different, they have a different presence in Germany, they have a little bit more. I would say vibrancy in German but they're also in steep decline but not as not as not as quite like the Protestant Church, are the dynamics between the former East Germany and West Germany different in terms of church. Yes, the East Germany is considered one of the most secular atheistic places in Western Europe. And then you have, that's probably where then the Protestant Church was the strongest right i mean that's been again that becomes more biographical my wife is from East Germany. She grew up there, and her whole family is from the Evangelische Kirche and they all. That was a vibrant community during that time and her parents then moved after the fall of the wall and they went to the churches in the West and they're like oh this isn't the same at all and so then they looked for pre churches because they wanted to have that same sense of community and, and life that they had experienced in the Protestant Church in in East Germany in the Protestant Church in East Germany under the communists. Yes, yes, because there was mass like there was lots of like prayer walk and protest I mean the church was at the center of that in many ways and, and so my mother-in-law I mean she was not allowed to study. She did not study, do university studies because she did not join the communist or the socialist party and because and then she actually studied to be a deacon and she took care of. She did children's service and she worked in the church in East Germany. Wow. Yeah. So much to talk about. I think the broad frame is that I think the culture has shifted around us and we're still adjusting as Christians. Yeah, all over the place every denomination and we all have our different, you know, inertia or place where we've come from and we're trying to translate that into a new but the commonality we're all in a different in a new place. Yeah. And, and we and it's maybe similar to some other parts of history but it really is a new, a new context and so that's, you know, what energizes me is when I find others that are interested in talking about culture because we're I think to get back to the Anabaptist thing there's Howard was Stanley Howard was once said at like a commencement address I think was at one of the university men and universities he said it's the Anabaptists, the Anabaptists have inherited the world they've always wanted. And, and it's true it's this, this idea the idea that it's a voluntary now. And then he said it very challenging he said though but you guys don't know what to do with it. And, but I think we're all in that boat a little bit it's it is a voluntary world now around us and I, in a way that we don't, I don't appreciate quite yet. And that that goes from my state college, my state church colleagues to to the Anabaptist I mean, they, there's still so much, I think, value in the in the process that they go through with children and the confirmation and all you know, but it's, they see that also changing dramatically. Right. Yeah. It's. Yeah. Because because I think that's, I think that's right because I mean, Anabaptism, the meek have inherited the earth or at least a good part of it. Because in many ways so many things have sort of, you know, flow toward flowed in your direction. I'm just taking notes. And I think, yeah, we don't know what to do with it and I think. Yeah, I mean I lament a lot of things. But it's, it's hard to not know how much to obsess about the culture war and then just on the other hand just to try to be just to be faithful and just to live out what what you were you placed and where the people you relate to. I mean, we're, we're really excited about the project where we're involved with now because we work for an organization that works with children and and and it's not a midnight organization but is Christian and we work with the Protestant church in a neighborhood here in my mind that one of the poor neighborhoods it's definitely more has social challenges high alcohol and high, high immigration rates high unemployment and it's a fascinating neighborhood it was on the outskirts of the city was built by the Nazis in the 30s for Nazi member, Nazi members to get like single dwelling houses and has this fascinating history and it's just, and we got connected with this wonderful. We have a father, like a reverend there who has spent the last 12 years of his life just being with people and is excited to work with us because we started to community center. So it's right it's in an old kindergarten right next to the church. And we do a cafe, essentially, and it's all donation basis and people come in there because there's no restaurants in that neighborhood. There's no pizza delivery. There's no like place to gather like a cafe or anything just it and so they come in there and they're like, we can come in here and they, so it's just been, it's almost been nuts because there's been so much going on we only started in October, but you know it's it's for me it's really exciting to not only do that in that neighborhood to also be connected because the church is so energized by it too because they have now something to do to relate you know it's it's a really, yeah, it's been a vital mission. Nothing that I love. They have a vital mission nothing the church loves better than a vital mission. In some ways, you know, some in my congregation feel exactly that way about my YouTube channel, they don't listen to any of it they lot of it don't understand anything I'm talking about but it's like, talking to people on the internet. Yeah, that's, we got something. Yes. It's so true, isn't it. Yeah. So we're kind of basking in that right now just the good, the goodwill and, you know, but it's like you, I mean, we don't have maybe it's a very similar feel to what maybe you around your corner you know who's going to knock on the door now and what, what, what kind of Yeah, it's, but it's, it's, it's, it honestly that's what that is the antidote for me, and all of this is that it's not all just up here and talking about all these heady stuff, I actually have to rub shoulders with people where, you know, maybe they You know, you vote for the nationalist right party or whatever you they probably some of them probably did right it's it's that's that's the corner where they do where the highest percentage of it was right. But I have to, you know, if I, it's a whole nother way of dealing with real people and that that you just can't replace that you can't replace that for how you see the world how you see what it means to be a Christian in this world I just I don't, I don't. Yeah. So I'm very. Yeah. But speaking of real people. I usually don't get this many interruptions but I knew you'd understand hang on, it'll just take a minute. What you just said now is exactly true and it's part of why, you know, people sometimes ask me well Paul if you could, you know if you could like not work for living stones and just do YouTube all the time. I wouldn't know. I wouldn't know what I know now. And the, the, the on site ministry is acts were sort of like a BS detector that you know ideas can just start flying around you get all involved with them but you got to see them, you got to see them land and work on the ground otherwise you, you know, you just kind of can float away with them so. Yeah, absolutely. So we've talked for about an hour and a half I don't know if you had anything on your list you want to get to and we don't want to spend all the time with my nosy self badgering you with questions about your world. No, I think we, we covered a lot I definitely, I had a whole bunch of questions but I in topics but I really appreciated this and I wanted to talk about church planning and estuary and post Christianity and an abaptist so we covered a lot of the things that I wanted to get to. I am, I think going forward I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm curious about estuary as something that. And this is to the people in your audience to come more from maybe the Christian side of things as something how we have to participate in that and how to create that type of space, because, you know, from what we're both saying, we, we think church is a public space in some ways for our culture but that's not, that's not how it works anymore. Yeah. And so how do we take part in in that space we would love to be part of and I think you, we also noticed that YouTube is definitely part of that. Yeah. And, and we have kind of learning how to be Christian and that kind of pluralistic, you know, the different kind of space that we're not used to being in the world in that sense and we're all I think we've always expected our ecclesiology to do the whole all the work for, for what, who we are in this world but we kind of care about that more than anybody else now. Yeah. And so that's where you know that's my bottom line about miss the ology i mean i think i'm not throwing anything else but there's always a relationship between the ology and ecclesiology but we're, we're not. We've kind of the church is always itself done the work of describing ourselves to the world and that's just nobody's not people aren't really come into that space anymore and it's not. Yeah, that's just the way it is right now. Yeah, yeah. Well, and it's different in different little places and it's different in different culture but in terms of northern European culture in the Western spaces. That's certainly true. And so, you know, figuring out how to continue to do this and again for me YouTube was a total Jordan Peterson was making videos on YouTube I should have had a clue and you know that young Anabaptist called me up and said I want you to mentor me. Why, because I'm reformed your reformed minister Yeah, I want you to mentor me well how did you get reformed on the internet. Oh, well, okay. What did I know. But I learned, you know, and, and that's, you know, so, you know, we just talked about on the ground and in the locale and at least in America and a zip code you know, but I think, to a degree. I think I'm going to joke about Rick, because Rick, you know Rick Rick was the one who gave me this poster. He, the first Sunday after I started making videos, he marches into church and says never been in a church before here this is for you and he gives me this poster. And, you know, and Rick and I, you know, have been on this adventure ever since and Rick continues to teach me about the internet, because, you know, he's a decade younger than I am to these much more of a denizen of the internet than I am. And, you know, every week he'll, he'll show me something and I learn, I learned through his eyes and his reaction knowing him and that's so that's part of the in person that you can't really do without because, you know, people might watch me. And so I had a conversation with Chad the alcoholic, and I was, he came here with his wife on vacation when I was gone on vacation so we didn't get a chance to meet but he left me these little guys, and he, you know, but he said you know I it was just helpful to come to your living place and you know see the homeless people and you see all of the mess and oh oh okay and I regularly now have people who will stop by. And, okay so now Paul is in context, and I understand him a little better because just watching 1015 hours a video a week from me won't tell you what walking on site might inform you love in ways that you probably can't even describe. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I've appreciated your YouTube channel, particularly because of the way. Well, again I think this is the theme I'm trying to say learning how to be in the world and learning how to talk about things that are often so implicit in our own context but learning how to be to do to translate that or to communicate those things and to do that in a, in a mutual way and I think we're. It's your you model that in your, your channel. You're, you're, you can be a pastor you can talk as a pastor, but take part in in a conversation that isn't just about Christianity or, you know, and that's I think what I I watch very carefully because I think that's, that's where I'm, that's how I feel like is just on I'm not in the YouTube world but on on like a one on one level so right. Right. Yeah, that's that's helpful and thank you and it is. It is, it is good to compare notes. Because I very much get the sense that, you know, even though I'm obviously older than you. I mean, my parents did grow up sort of. I mean my parents were missionaries in some ways into Patterson. Either of my parents had lived in a community quite like that. And, you know, they, they dedicated 36 years of their lives, doing counter cultural work and of course I went overseas and so I'm always, I'm always sensitive to culture, but also always with a desire to say okay how, how can my knowledge be used. I'm so evangelical to share the love of Jesus with, with others. I don't know any better way to say it. You can't escape what we are patent is on that. I know how to an Anabaptist would say decided yeah. I don't know how an Anabaptist would say I think pretty much the same way to to serve to serve. There's a big, big word for the Anabaptist. Yeah, well thank you David this is special and those of you look forward to you coming to Europe. I, yeah I want to I've never been to Europe so oh my goodness. I don't want to get over there. Yes. I don't want to I don't want to make I've been really slow to make big plans, still because coven, you know, are we going to have another twist, you know and border lockdowns or, you know, so it's kind of like, let's get this let's have this thing sort of settle down and that at some point, definitely want to get over to Europe. So I think well there's a whole bunch. Well, we'll we'll organize a whole thing here for you you know the our local estuary will be happy to have you. Yeah, I look forward to it. I look forward to it. All right, David, it's great talking to you. Thank you. All right, and it's okay for me to post this. Yeah. Okay, good. I just got just kind of make sure I want to post it it's like, what have you done to my ministry. I didn't know. Take care.