https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bCX5xt-aaMU

 forever have a blackmail material on me I suppose. That's right. Release the tapes. If social media continues, we'll all be equally blackmailable and so maybe no one will pull the trigger. But Colin, why don't you tell me a little bit about yourself? We've never really talked before except on Twitter. Yeah, so I'm from Sacramento, California. That's where I was born. Cool. Where you live right now. So I was born there. I was basically raised there my whole life. Family was just, I guess, non-religious overall. Really great family, very small family. Maybe in my early 20s, late teens, I started kind of really getting into science and Carl Sagan. And I read, you know, I kind of went to the New Atheist Path early on there. That was kind of my group. I had my angry atheist years. I've mellowed out quite a bit and I cringe looking back at some old blog posts I used to write. So yeah, but I still see those in the wild now here and there. What was, why were you angry? What was behind angry atheism? Angry at what? So it wasn't, okay, it was mainly, so I was really into evolutionary biology. Okay. And it was around that time when Dawkins and Harris and everyone was first starting to come to prominence is when you saw a bunch of actual challenges to school curricula trying to get evolution out of schools. And there were just, you know, just the boilerplate Young Earth creationist argument that teach both sides, intelligent design, that type of stuff. And, you know, people want to believe that it's fine, but, you know, I was very adamant about, you know, keeping these things out of the scientific classroom. And so that was the main threat I saw to science and evolution in particular was kind of coming from the religious right. And so that's kind of where my anger was stemming from, these arguing with these types of people online. It wasn't so much just arguing about purely theological points. I mean, I would argue that with people as well, but it was mainly the practical application of some beliefs to, you know, real world things like, you know, like science and evolutionary biology and school curricula, that type of thing. That was, I think, the fuel for some of my anger early on. And probably also just because I was a teenager and I was, you know, everyone goes through a phase where they're a little angrier and rebellious. But I mean, I still, I'm less angry, although I still hold many of the same, you know, the foundational beliefs that I had back then. I think a lot of the, I mean, I've written about this before where I think a lot of that threat to science has kind of faded on the right to some degree. And it's still there. There's still the young earth creationists. I don't know why I don't see them online. Maybe we're just, you know, maybe just social media bubbles have just like, you know, created these other worlds. So they could actually be just flourishing perfectly well. It's actually very disturbing. Facebook and Twitter just segregated them. Yeah, yeah, they're going to come back like, you know, like some forgotten civilization that's just like multiplied out of control. They're going to come over the mountain. And they could. But I don't see the same challenges, I guess, to evolutionary biology specifically, because that's, you know, that's my field. That's something that's close to my heart. And so when I see attacks on evolution, that's when I get, you know, that's when I get defensive about things. And so I don't see that so much on the right anymore. But I do see that, you know, strangely enough, coming from what I view is, you know, the what do you want to call authoritarian left, social justice left, whatever, like, progressive, that any word you want to throw at it that we're it's common now. That's where I see is like the main source of some of this anti-evolutionism and just anti-biology in general, I guess. It's more than just evolution at this point. So that's my that's my long answer to where the anger come from. OK, OK. So you you you went to you went to high school at Sacramento. Where did you go to college? So I went I went to Delaro High School in Loomis. I don't know if you know where that is. Yeah. And then I went to I went to Sierra Community College in Rockland. Yeah, I know where that is. Yeah. And then I transferred from there to UC Davis as a evolution evolutionary biology major. OK, then from there, I spent a year working. I worked for for Bayer Mon Santo doing a crop pest work there, working in insect lab. But then I went to grad school. I actually started at the University of Pittsburgh. But then my lab moved back to California. My my advisor took a job at UC Santa Barbara. So our whole lab kind of went back to California. And so I actually got to graduate from UC as B, which was a much better university than then Pittsburgh, at least for my degree anyway. So that worked out really well. And then campus. Yeah. Oh, my goodness. The best years of my life were there. But then fate somehow brought me back to Pennsylvania. I never thought I'd come back here. I was in Pittsburgh and Pittsburgh as a city is not so bad, but I just don't like the weather. I don't like I don't like Pennsylvania. So as I was like driving away from Pennsylvania back to California to go to UCSB, I remember like the you were now leaving Pennsylvania sign. I just like, you know, gave it the middle finger, like never come back here. And then and then I got punished. I was too cocky. And now I have the only job offer I got after grad school was Penn State University. So I had to drive all the way back to even more rural middle of nowhere Pennsylvania. So while I'm here, but it's a it's a really good job. But all my family and friends are back in California. So it's just kind of a tough situation living out here just alone in the middle of. Yeah. Well, I grew up in New Jersey and then I went to Calvin College in Michigan. So we always drove through Pennsylvania. And what I'm about to say will get me in trouble with people from New Jersey. But coming from New Jersey, Pennsylvania always looked beautiful. But then again, I had never been to California and I'd certainly never seen Santa Barbara. So yeah, I think that Pennsylvania is beautiful when it's like lush and green. But then you get the humidity, you get the cold and you only get like maybe a month where it's just like dry and like you can go outside and light sweater or something. You certainly you certainly do get spoiled by the weather out here. And you know, oh my goodness. Yeah. Especially Santa Barbara. I mean, you don't even look at the forecast. It's like scattered clouds, 73 degrees. Like every day. Yeah. I've got my youngest son goes to UC Santa Cruz. And again, another just gorgeous campus, beautiful, beautiful mountain covered with redwoods overlooking the Pacific every day. Beautiful. It's like, wow, not quite as warm as Santa Barbara. But yeah, Santa Santa Cruz, that's the place I almost went for undergrad as well. But I kind of had my eyes set on UC Davis for their evolution program. OK, so a little. So I'm interested in talking to you because one of the things I don't like is echo chambers. And most of the people who contact me already like my channel. And so they want to talk to me. And so I want to talk to someone with at least a little bit of a divergent view on some of the things compared to a lot of the people that talk to me. Oh, I love it. You know, a lot of the people that talk to me, they aren't necessarily religious. A lot of the people that watch my channel aren't religious, but they're interested in some of the same issues. So so, you know, via the the, you know, James Lindsay and Peter Bogosian and Helen Pluckrose, that whole movement. Do you do you see in real life or just on social media resistance to science and biology? Do I see it in real life? Yeah. Strangely enough, even in in my own biology departments when I was in grad school, I mean, I went to Pittsburgh and it was watching undergrad presentations on things of, you know, of was just feminist science, which is supposed to be just a new way to like impose certain cultural narratives to scientific questions. Where it's just like, you know, it's just science. Why do you have to, it's meant to like counterbalance what they perceive to be as like an inherently masculinized science without demonstrating what particular is wrong with the science it is. And they just they just add like a counterweight without even verifying that there's a weight that needs to be countered. So I saw presentations like that. A lot of people in my departments would just kind of go full deconstructionist and, you know, I have a lot of friends who are anthropology majors. These are anthropology PhD students, and we can't talk about anything. We talk about the concept of of race or even just like genetic, you know, genetic related clusters of populations. And they they don't even accept that they don't even accept, you know, just basic hereditary groups. Because, you know, maybe there's no there's no single trait that is going to like completely separate one group for another. And that's kind of this univariate fallacy that people are using these days to kind of deconstruct biological realities. So they'll say because there's not like you can't point to one single trait that these two groups have that separates them neatly. Therefore, none of these categories exist. You know, even though you get population biologists and they can construct these models using many, many different genes and traits, and they can show that like, oh, there's there's there's genetic structure coming over here in the Philippines or, you know, in India and even inside countries like India. You can see genetic structure between the different cast that they have. So, I mean, there's there's real variation there. But due to these PC narratives they have, they just cannot bring themselves to acknowledge these things. And in the same anthropology students, it's mainly anthropology. I don't want to act like I'm just like crapping on them, but I wouldn't crap on them if it wasn't always coming from them in my in my point of view. But there are even ones that are basically going for the social construction narrative on things like biological sex itself. And they'll fall back again and say, well, point to the single one trait that definitively separates males from females in every single category. It's like, well, I mean, you can't just pick one trait. So then they use that as the basis for, you know, obliterating the categories to speak of. You know, we can't even talk about these concepts because, you know, they're just not real. It's just our minds, you know, creating these these categories where they don't exist. And it's been at every university I've been to, even within the scientists that I've known, mainly in grad students. I don't know how prevalent it is among faculty. I assume probably less. But there's a lot of politically active graduate students that I worry are just kind of having their science take a backseat to some of their ideologies. So it's not so bad here at Penn State, actually. I haven't run into it, but I haven't I don't get to interact with undergrads as much here or even grad students. I have a postdoc here now, so it could be more prevalent than it is. But I don't really I haven't seen much evidence of it here. I know if supposedly if you go more east towards like Boston and stuff, it gets it gets a bit worse. Do you think this is a bigger threat to science than, let's say, what you saw from the creationists, the younger creationists? One hundred percent. I've even said this before that I would rather it's creationism that's just spreading, you know, because the way that this is getting a hold, it's kind of it's in the academy now. And it's kind of eating it from within. Whereas the threat from creationists, I mean, you got he had the occasional, you know, creationist or intelligent designer who was in a biodefartment like Michael B. He's out there. I don't know if Stephen Myers is he in a scientist at the university. I'm not sure. But they would they were just, you know, they were islands in their departments basically. And it wasn't a threat to the departments and the science as a whole. Whereas now I do see it as sort of this insidious kind of this malignancy with its in the in the academy that could potentially erode it from within because just in my departments, you know, I knew my advisor. Well, he knows what I thought about things. But, you know, even before I was going to publish my article, my advisor told me, you know, I should if I publish it, I should probably not put my name on it. It should be a pseudonym. And then I had another another mentor I had. He was he gave me a call. He was just extremely worried. He said, you know, don't even publish this thing anonymously because they'll they'll find out who you are. And so I had to just kind of have a, you know, a moment to myself and ask, you know, the one thing no one was criticizing who I sent my article to was the validity of it and the facts that were not they were true. It was always these external like you can't put it out there because it could ruin your career. And you're trying to get your postdoc now, but you're trying to be competitive for faculty jobs. So, you know, wait till you get a faculty job and then you can, you know, speak your mind or, you know, and then I was looking down the road and it's like, well, if I get a faculty job, then I still have six more years when I'm trying to get tenure. And so, like, well, then that the stakes are even higher than I get. I have way more to lose than if I was speaking up. And so, and I have no idea how much how long my postdocs gonna be. So I'm looking at what a decade of self-censoring before I can I can actually speak my mind. And then and then people say like, well, you know, tenure is not even the same as it used to be. It's not even it can't even help you. And this is like, OK, well, so I have to chew between like this life of just like narrowly focusing on my discipline, which I mean, I work with social spiders and ants and wasps, which are awesome. I love studying them. I would love to study them for my whole life. But like, I don't want my intellectual like environment to be nothing but ants, wasps and spiders. Like, I think much more broadly than that, I'm interested in sort of science as a whole and sort of like the meta the meta narratives about science and things like that and and attacks to science. And what does it mean to have an epistemology? And how do you know when things are true? And so this is these are just I'm into the big questions. I mean, I got into evolutionary biology in the first place because I thought that evolution was one of the few sciences that really kind of get at those deep questions on who we are, where we came from, explains our behavior in a certain types of context that we can we can look at it as a lens where you can really peer into look at our present condition based on the conditions we may have had in the past. And so it was just it's a very I think a very philosophically rich discipline to get into if you choose to make it that way. And there's some people who are just, you know, they just calculate allele frequencies per different generations. And, you know, they're evolutionary biologists. They're not necessarily philosophical in that sense. But I'm interested in the philosophical side. That's what got me in to evolutionary biology in the first place because of these how it addresses what I think is these fundamental questions. I suppose. Well, you just gave me three things that I'm interested in right away. The first was that I noted that your strategy, the strategy proposed to you by your advisor is the same as the strategy posed to, let's say, Christians who imagine they want to work their way up a political system. They got to keep quiet about their faith until you get to the top and then you'll talk about it. That's always a really bad idea because the truth is that if you have to keep quiet in order to try to gain power, you're going to have to keep quiet in order to try to keep power. So it's you've got some wisdom there. So that's a that's a very interesting thing. I want to come back to the philosophical thing. But tell me about the social spiders and ants and wasps. That sounds so cool. Tell me about that. They're super awesome. So like my my dissertation was on social spiders. I had never heard about them until I just applied to work in that lab as well. I was I always thought I'd work with honeybees or ants probably. And I'm going to work with ants now. But the lab I joined, they had a lot of funding and there was it was a fairly new lab and they worked with several species of social spider. The ones I worked on are species called Stegodyphus demicola. They're in southern Africa and they're as far as social spiders go, they're pretty large. They can you know, they're when they're adults, their their their butts can be about as big as like a jelly belly or something like that. So they're pretty large spiders and they can be in colonies anywhere up to about, you know, ranging between sometimes 10 individuals up to a thousand individuals in a single colony. So they build these big like three dimensional silk retreats that are just so dense. They're all those like leather. You can barely get inside of them and they have all these like tunnels all throughout these retreats. And then from these retreats, they have all these these two dimensional capture webs that are sort of radiating in all directions from it. And so they spend their time in these in these retreats. And then as soon as something gets caught in the capture web, all those vibrations go back to the retreat and then they're all just recruited out. And like a like a team, there's almost like a like a pride of lions is like attacking something because it's all orchestrated like one of each grab like an antenna, one will grab a leg and they'll just like pull it until like, you know, when they inject a venom in its legs. And so what I was interested in this species. So I study animal personalities. So that means what you probably intuitively think about personality that differences between individuals and the way the way that they behave consistently over time. And we usually think about this in the context of humans or pets. If you have multiple, you have two dogs, you know, they're not going to behave the same way. And so this is kind of how we intuitively think about it. But usually in nature, people would always look at like individual differences in behavior and just kind of treat it as this like background noise that it's not really important for describing any really big phenomena until they actually started measuring this in a lot of different animals and shows that these differences in behavior are actually the ways that these some single species can can partition their environment in terms of like what types of resources they're using. What kind of resources they're getting or how they interact with other animals. And then if you look within like a social group, well, then we notice one one thing you notice inside basically any social animal that you'll ever study is that they tend to have much higher degrees of personality variation within their colonies than you'd expect. You know that you see in just populations of of solitary individuals like like deer or maybe communal organisms. And so what a lot of these animal societies do is they have all this behavioral variation is a lot of times this is actually correlated with which jobs individuals are doing inside their colony. So they they structure task participation division of labor is often based on just cryptic traits like you know how aggressive a certain individual is. Some colonies might have a you know a continuous distribution. It's you know you can range anywhere from really docile or really aggressive or really bold and really shy. But in some groups will have you know a strictly like binary set where like there's only aggressive and really docile individuals in there is no one in between. And then we can basically we'll get like a big colony of spiders. We'll break it all apart isolate every single spider test all their behavior every single individual and then we can like create artificial societies like I can make a whole spider colony composed of like 100% you know aggressive spiders or 100% shy spiders and docile ones and then any mixture that I want. I can just I can play God with these little societies and then you can see how does changing their behavioral composition influence things like reproduction how well they tend to their young how well they you know cooperate to capture prey and repair their webs and any it basically just like a whole whole spider colony composed of like 100% you know aggressive spiders or 100% shy spiders and docile ones and then any mixture that I want. And then we can break it all apart isolate every single spider test all their behavior every single spider test and then we can create artificial societies like I can make a whole spider colony composed of like 100% you know aggressive spiders or 100% shy spiders and then any mixture that I want. I can just I can play God with these little societies and then you can see how does changing their behavioral composition influence things like reproduction how well they tend to their young how well they you know cooperate to capture prey and repair their webs and any basically anything that matters for the life of a social spider. And so that's basically what my dissertation was on I was looking at that and then also how that matters in the context of you know being being raided by predatory ants for instance so if their if their personality changes in the presence of things like fear the different different environmental stimuli and how that influences you know group decisions and things like that. So that's in a nutshell. That sounds like outrageous fun. It is. So doing the actual like behavioral tests on the spiders themselves couldn't be more boring but once you get this once you get the colonies up and running because sometimes it can be two weeks of nothing but like 10 hour 15 hour days of just testing individual spiders. But once you get once they're all tested and you have all the experimental colonies set up when you're actually starting to collect real data then that's that's definitely the fun part and they they're really this the system is so amenable to to writing really interesting scientific papers because there's there's such interesting narratives and kind of you know I don't want to say like stories but you can you can you can construct. More or less straightforward narratives about you know how these things work and why and and and why they might not match populations in nature and they're pretty fun fun to write so they're in there and because I did a lot of work with like ant raids on spiders you know you can have cool titles like warring arthropod societies like literally have a paper called that and and yeah and people people tend to like it it's a good educational tool because it's just intuitively interesting to most people like right away. And the concept of animal personality doesn't have a big you know it's there's not a big hurdle to understand that so it's a really great system to just get people interested in science and it's also good to just do as a scientist forever so that's what I plan on doing. It sounds you know it sounds like computer games I used to play in terms of I was like. Exactly. Maybe it's because I'm a pastor I always like the god games you know where you set up a thing and see how it goes. So I'm really interested in so now I'll connect to the philosophical thing so when you talk about a narrative so you test I can't even imagine how you test a spider's personality. I mean. Yeah, so it's cruder than like so with humans you can like give them questionnaires and things like that. But for spiders you have to be more sort of obvious traits so you can look at something like how aggressive they are like how how do they respond to certain like an aggressive stimulus in their environment. So for our fighters we look at a trait that's called a boldness which is basically just sort of a measure of the propensity of an individual who engage in risky behavior to some degree. Yeah, so yeah, you know, are you bold individual and we can some people measure this as a measure of like maybe neophobia like they'll put a novel object in their environment that they've never encountered before and maybe they'll put like a little reward on this novel object. And see how long it takes for them to approach this this strange object in their environment and you know individuals will differ consistently and how how willing they're are to approach you know novel objects with which could you know it could be. It could be a good or bad. They don't know this is unknown factor which you know boldness then like it's measurable with our spiders. With our spiders, we do a test where we puff them with air and that causes them to pull their legs and they'll build us a little huddle and they'll be like those just kind of remain motionless. Because when they when the air is disturbed around them, it's not a very common in their environment is usually inside like a retreat. So when there's when there's an air disturbance that usually means that there's some predator nearby or something large is close. And so they they they'll they'll huddle and they'll kind of like do a death fain. And then spiders vary consistently and how quickly they'll they'll emerge from this death fain and begin to move move about normally. So spiders that like you know you puff them they'll like death fain for like a second and they'll just like start walking normally. So those are just we consider those to be to be shy spiders basically. So so do you then do a colony with really bold spiders and really shy spiders and see how they both perform and yeah exactly. And so what have you learned? So is diversity good? Here's the question. It really depends actually. So we had a most of our experiments that we've done. They were in a laboratory setting and they always showed that any in the field as well when we did like field forging tests. Well, we always found that the proportion of bold spiders in your colony is directly related to how of how quickly the spider is going to respond to prey in their webs and how many individuals are recruited to the capture web during the when they're attacking prey. So we we simulate these attacks by getting like a small piece of paper and we'll put it in their capture web and then we get looks like a literal like sex toy vibrator with a wire on the end of it. And then we'll we'll vibrate this piece of paper in their web and then that'll cause the spiders to to attack it because you know it just it mimics like a you know a winged prey item that's struggling in their webs. You should see the papers we write because we have to actually describe the instruments we're using. And so we have we have a scientific paper and it's like we used handheld vibratory device and we have to put the make and model. Was a go vibe by Fun Factory in the scientific paper getting cited. Yeah, we use those. And so that's how we measure their like their their base of the colony aggressiveness overall. And so we see that you know if you have a lot more really bold spiders those colonies tend to to attack much faster and with way more individuals than really shy colonies. But then when you look at colonies in nature, they tend to be mixed composition. So if in all the context in the lab, we seem to like that we see bold colonies outperforming all these all the other compositions and why don't we see these bold compositions in nature. And then I did an experiment where I wanted to see how they responded to to predator cues because they do this interesting behavior. Because these these spider colonies are constantly raided by this really, really voracious ant is called the pugnacious ant. And it's just like everywhere. It's it's so rabid and only eats meat. And in some areas, these spider colonies can like experience up to like 90% extinction rates just over and over one year just from these ant raids. And we noticed that when these answer in their capture webs, you'll see the spiders, they'll kind of they won't attack the ants right away. They'll kind of start making this special kind of silk and you can see them. You can see them doing and it's a whole different type of behavior. And it's the silk called a crebellate silk. And it's basically just like a really tangly silk that normally they use to like line their capture webs because it's good for ensnaring prey. But in the context of an ant raid, what they're doing is they're creating these like tangly web barriers that are trying that are they're put up to try to to keep the ants from advancing into their retreats. And so you can you can see just sort of these waves of of crebellate making behavior occur when these when these ants begin their raids. And so I wanted to see if personality variation in the colonies is related to like which individuals are making these these silk walls basically. And we found that the mixed colonies actually performed the best at in terms of how many individuals are participating in this this interesting defensive behavior. And the bold colonies actually were just all over the map. Sometimes all the colony would do it. Sometimes like nobody would do it like from from trial to trial. There was almost no consistency in how they they they behave towards towards these ant raids, whereas the mixed colonies were both you know three times higher and very consistent all the way across. And so we don't know for sure. But this is could be a plausible explanation for why we don't see bold colonies in nature. If they're not able to respond consistently to a very consistent and and dangerous threat, then that would be a problem. Maybe they're sacrificing a little bit on the how quickly we attack prey side of things in order to better defend ourselves against raids, which are extremely prevalent. It was prevalent enough in their evolutionary history where they have this interesting stereotyped behavior that they do only when this ant is in their web. We've thrown other ants in their webs that are the same size, but are like seed predators. And so not a threat to our ant colonies and the ant colony and the spider colonies don't respond in that same way. They don't make the walls. They just attack it like a beetle or something. So how do these spiders differentiate between the ants? Their world is most almost entirely vibrational, but it seems seems bizarre that they could be able to detect the small differences in the identity between species of ants. So it could be a combination of either they just have a different vibrational stimulus when they're struggling in the web, or maybe there could be a chemical component. There is some evidence that they are able to respond to chemical cues because I did an experiment where I had those those pugnacious ants sort of beneath their colony. They couldn't access their colony, but they were like trapped in like a space between two cups and with holes in the bottom of the cup. So like this, the ant cues could just like, you know, permeate throughout the cup containing all the spiders and the spiders would would reduce. Therefore, they would they would become way more cautious in those treatments, even if they had never like encountered an ant, one of these dangerous ants. So they appear as probably a combination of chemical cues and also vibratory cues, because the answer are releasing these these alarm pheromones as well to recruit more ants. So it could be that the spiders are picking up on these same these same pheromones as well as a kind of a cue to to what this thing is in the web. Wow, that's that's that's just fascinating. Now, here's the question. I can't believe I'm painting to do this. Well, it is so cool. It is it is really so cool. It's pretty fun. So so here's a question. So these these spiders have personalities. And now, again, we have a question of whether that's the right word for them. That's probably the best word we have for it. We're. Yeah, that's that's going to a lot of pushback in some papers. You know, we we define it in our papers as like, you know, consistent differences between individual over time and context. So like when we call that personality, but some people like to call it temperament, things, things like that, you know, so personality, they constantly say that's too anthropomorphizing. Yeah. But we use the word personality. I mean, it basically it seems intuitive that that's what it is. I mean, we when we talk about human personality, you know, we say like, if this guy's a jerk, it means he's a jerk now and he's probably a jerk tomorrow. And that's just something about them. You know, they're they're consistently consistently behave a certain way, you know, over a different, you know, over over time. Or at least some sort of pattern that's behavioral consistency. That's yeah, yeah, that's what we're measuring. I think it makes sense and it makes it more, I guess. I think it's better for the general public to because it's an intuitive thing and it's it's not too far away from what we're actually seem to be measuring. So it's we we put our foot down. We use the word. So so what if we were to talk about the consciousness of these spiders? Is that a word we could use? It's a tough word. I mean, they'll talk about their their cognition and just like what sort of comprises their entire sensory environment, which can differ from species of species. Because for spiders are sort of interesting in a way because they almost completely like interface with their environment. So at least the spiders I have that I study and some other spiders, too, is, you know, their their sensory input isn't just doesn't just stop at the end of their bodies. I mean, their their webs are quite literally these extended phenotypes of their bodies. And they they basically sit in their webs and they use these. They use the web is just basically this microphone, super sensitive microphone for everything that's going on in their webs. And there's some orb weaver spiders that they can they can detect just the faintest vibration and identify what's in the web. Is it just a, you know, a leaf that fell on my web? That's I need to get out of it because it's going to, you know, tear a hole in my web. Is it a male that's approaching me? They can distinguish, you know, if it's a if it's a the same species or if it's the if it's another female that's going to challenge me for my web or if it's a male, they can distinguish the sex of the spider that's coming on there. They can distinguish if it's the same species or not. They can detect if the if the prey item is dangerous or not. So they can they're so finely attuned to like these different vibrations in their webs and just the way that these these interface with their environment. So, yeah, they have a whole different different public that the um belt of the totality of their their sensory experience, I suppose. So it's a it's interesting, definitely interesting topic. I'm actually writing a paper like I was just doing that before on the ways these these social spiders respond to different types of vibrations. So hopefully that'll come out soon. That's that's it's just it's just fascinating now. And before you were talking about I mean, obviously they I don't know, obviously. How much how much can we really know what life is to you know, this this spider and and what it's I mean, they and what their capacity is to I mean, we use imagination. We use imagination. Even when we're talking about this spider, I mean, these these areas of our brains are using imagination to in a sense model and I know nothing I can't I didn't even know what these things look like. I just have what you've told me. And then of course, I'm constructing images, not really thinking in images of images based on this. But and then then you get these, you know, narratives of it. And and you're I mean, even even I suppose if you if these are from South America and you transport them and you keep them in some environment in the lab, then of course, you've got obviously an artificially controlled environment in the lab, which of course changes the animals to. Yeah, for sure. Wow. So you so earlier you said you you got into you really got into evolutionary biology because of the of kind of the philosophical or of what what interest of the yeah, it gave you a degree of certainty. What was that for you? I wouldn't call it a degree of degree of certainty. It's just that, you know, from the beginning of life on Earth, basically, we had to pass through all these intermediate forms. We had to get here, you know, through the process of natural selection. So the way we perceive our world is going to be affected by, you know, this this process, the way we behave, the way we behave subconsciously, you know, this consciousness itself is essentially it's all been controlled by the mind. It's all been constructed by by this process. And the more we know about this process is the more we're going to be able to to detect the effects of, you know, natural selection in in shaping our behavior and shaping our our bodies and shaping our interactions with people in that sense, I suppose. So, yeah, that's sort of what I'm getting at. The thing that always fascinates me about how and we all talk this way is when we when we use the the first person plural with this, because even even that and say, OK, when we say, you know, how we developed. So here's this we and it's like, I mean, humans in general are even because because I mean, I was I was I've always been a lover of, you know, nature television. So when PBS showed any anything nature, PBS type I watched as a kid growing up and couldn't couldn't get enough of it. But, you know, at some point I began listen to them. I thought, you know, we were on the we were on the African savanna and it's like, Well, I wasn't there. Exactly. And so and so well, these were our these were our ancestors. And and so then it's and so this this we this and now, you know, obviously with the with the with the culture war. So you we we we don't have any other word to use. But we so so I'm a white, you know, I'm a white guy whose great grandparents came to America in the 1890s from North from Northwest from the Northwest reaches of the Netherlands. But because I'm white, we held slaves and it's like there's, you know, and and you know, by gender. So then then you get into the you get into these categories by identity. And and then and so it just strikes me that there's there are these constructs that we have we have that we so seamlessly employ in talking about these kinds of things that I still I have zero idea what to make of it. I've never I've never I would say I reject a lot of it on like the on the grounds that you you mentioned sort of like when we get down to like our identity groups, as soon as we start splitting up individuals and, you know, hold say like white people responsible for slave ownership, you know, because, you know, I didn't donate slaves and you didn't either. So when I when I talk about the we and like an evolutionary sense, and you even mentioned it, how people talk about like when we were on the savanna, like the way I interpret that a little bit too is like, you know, the savanna in some way is still still with us today because there are adaptations that occurred in all these different environments going back and back and back that are still carried over. And it's not just you know, there's no there's no time when it's just like it's not as an etch a sketch you just shake and like it's a new it's a new thing. It's built on previous forms. And so adaptations that we've gained in certain environments that they're carried forward that can be they can be lost and shaped in certain ways. But those things are they're still like it's with us in a way. So in a way that, you know, part of us was shaped by that savanna, or, you know, the whatever environment you're going to talk about in the past. That's the kind of way I interpret these like deep history like we were there type of thing, at least in an evolutionary sense. Yeah. Now, the now I'm really interested about this this adaptation with the building the silk walls when this particular ant comes into the. So the the current The current idea of why this adaptation developed. I mean, it's a it's a very, I mean, how on earth does that happen with us with a spider? I mean, its brain isn't that big. But and you would also think that the communities, you know, when the if the if these ants are so voracious, there wouldn't be survivors that someone would say, you know, we got this silk and I wonder if we could, you know, that's of course how humans process. Yeah, I mean, it could it could just be, you know, before these species interact. I mean, they've they've probably shared environments for for millions of years. So, you know, just they're already making Crabbella silk in some contexts and, you know, sometimes it takes just like one spider to build it in a different context. That it had an incremental influence on, you know, on making the colony last that much longer or lasting the next day because sometimes you'll get like a an ant raid that will happen, but it will happen like later in the day. And, you know, the colony is going to be completely wiped out. But like nightfall comes and then the ants no longer forage at nighttime and go away. And then sometimes in the next day, ants don't come back. They're just they forgot about where they were. And so, even that, you know, just think about that. We don't even know why we forget things. And then we watch this behavior and we say, well, the ants forgot and it's like, I wonder what that means. Yeah, but, you know, I don't know the exact trajectory of, you know, how a higher species gets to, you know, to all take on this this this behavior. But they're all like super inbred and close to related. So definitely like if there's any traits that's going to matter for certain individuals, they tend to spread really fast from generation to generation because these are practically clones, which also adds a whole different layer to it. Because if there are almost clones, like how do you get all this behavioral variation that appears to be heritable in the species, too? Yeah. Well, that's a bizarre adaptation that they can be so genetically similar, but yet so behaviorally diverse. Bizarre. Yeah. And also these we've looked at. We have a different different scientists. I'm using we now in terms of like old scientists who did stuff that I had no part in. But I guess we as in people who study this species, they looked at environments where this spider coexists and then doesn't coexist with this ant species and environments where they co where they coexist. The spiders will actually sort of prophylactically create these those silken barriers on like the attachment points of their capture webs to like the surrounding substrate. Like, presumably, keep the ant from even like getting on their capture web in the first place. But in the environments where they don't their ranges don't overlap. You don't see these these these barriers on the attachment points. They're just not there. So it's, you know, this could be like something that evolves maybe quickly as the different populations are moving around or if they're getting chemical cues, maybe that that triggers them to to create these barriers. But super interesting. Yeah. How do new colonies form? Yeah, so they can form several ways. So the most common way is for them to just it's called bridging. So you'll have one big colony and it'll get you know, it'll start getting bigger, bigger and bigger, bigger and it'll get to certain a certain mass where there's just so many spiders and the capture would only be so big. You know, there were there's a there's a point of diminishing returns for food collection and feeding the colony. So they'll basically send out like a little strand of silk. It'll attach onto like a neighboring bush, sometimes, you know, a few feet away, sometimes a meter away, sometimes like another just a bush, you know, 10 feet away. And then some group of spiders will then just sort of move from one colony to another location and then they'll just they'll just start a new retreat over there. And they'll often share a big capture web, too. They just have they just have different nodes now. And so you'll come across these like I don't even know how there's not really any data on how old these colonies on a single bush can last. But you'll see like sometimes a whole tree that's just like covered node to node to node with upwards of 50 of these colonies. And they're all like all the capture webs are being shared between all of them. It's just like this huge like spider metropolis. It's ridiculous. Wow. So, yeah, we don't know like how long does it take like a gene and for this for the spider on this side of the tree to even like make it to the other side like do that. Are the spiders moving like through the entire or do they have they have sort of a home base in the in the retreat they were born in like that's people don't know any about about this stuff. And how do they decide who's going to go. I mean, because actually a Christian Reformed Church used to plant churches that way. So they get too many people in one church. It's like, oh, we need another church. So then they start second Christian Reformed ripping. Well, we need a new name. Let's not be second because there are they've already got first. So we'll call it a manual. So people who are a little less satisfied with the pastor, they go over start this new church and they call a different pastor. It's fascinating to me. Yeah, I don't know which ones are the ones that are going to be participating in the bridging. But if I thought about that before, and I get if I had to hypothesize anything, it'd be probably the bold ones because they're going to like a new, you know, it's a new environment that whole neophobia type thing. So, yeah, so they can either bridge or sometimes they can also do something that's called ballooning. So when they're when they're you can get this in, usually in an adult females that are that are grabbing so they have they're ready to lay eggs. They'll basically send out like a bunch of silk on a particular windy day. And then the circle just catch wind and then they'll just let go of the substrate and then they'll just they'll just fly off into the wind. And wherever they land is where they where they decide to just build their new colony. And it's probably the most dangerous for it because, you know, it's not an active migration. It's completely passive with the wind. You could there's a lot of bushes around in some environments. So you might land on a good bush or you could land on the ground and these these spiders don't do well on the ground. So so that's another way they do it. That's probably how they, you know, the long distance dispersal from different habitats. But usually those is either bridging or ballooning. Basically what they got going on. See, I listen to this stuff and I think cosmological argument because I think, you know, look at how much we as human human beings know we can't make these spiders. I mean, we can. I mean, not yet. Yeah, not yet. Yeah, eschatology. Yes, someday we'll be able to make these spiders. But it is it is just so I mean, it is just so amazing. And this is just this is just a spider, an obscure spider that I've never seen or heard of before. Yeah, this random if you if you were even if you were in South Africa looking for these things like you wouldn't even believe what their nest look. They look like someone just like wiped a giant booger on a plant like they're they're they're nests. They're just they just looks like maybe a trash bag got caught in a tree. But it's just like they're just these silken like they look terrible. They're filthy. They have no hygienic behavior. They're they're they're webs are just littered with carcasses. When we tear open their treats, there's just beetle parts and everything. And they're just they're just filthy animals. But they work and they live in the most intense environment in South Africa. We they're in the middle of the Kalahari Desert. We've even found them in the Namib. Just there's a little bush in the middle of nowhere. You know, zero precipitation just dunes everywhere else. And here's this thriving spider colony. And they're basically just like they're I mean, they're environmentally filter feeders are almost like the equivalent of coral, I guess. But on land, because they're just, you know, they're sending out their they got their capture webs and if anything that happens to fly into it, that's what they're that's what they're getting. Wow. I'm it's that is just so cool. Like you'll be in areas they'll be like, there's no way we're going to find spiders here. It is like 120 degrees out here in the middle of the desert. And then lo and behold, you'll just find like the spider Shangri-La that's just like, well, this is nothing else to hear except for these things. There's it's amazing. Wow. Wow. So I've I've I've occupied a lot of your time. I mean, we can talk about more stuff. I don't know how much time that you have. I see the problem with me is I've I'm just I got the interesting gene and I'm just interested in everything. And so I've probably got like another hour if you do. All right. Yeah. My my wife is she's working. So she has. So so if I didn't talk about Jordan Peterson on my channel, some people had unsubscribed. So and you and I talked a little bit about the Peterson, the Peterson Harris talks. Did you see any of that or all of that? Yeah, I've seen I saw all of them. Yeah. And I rewatched some of them not too long ago. Yeah, I really I really enjoyed those talks. Some people didn't get much from them or some of them they say they talk past one another. But I thought actually a lot was a lot was achieved. I don't know if achieve is the right word, but I got a really good understanding of I think maybe I maybe I don't. We'll see. But a little while. I'm sort of where where they're coming from. I think I have a better idea of Peterson than I did way before before I did before that. Yeah, I thought it was I thought Brett Weinstein was a great moderator for that whole series. Yeah, I thought it was. So what so tell me about what you learned and what you thought because I'm really curious. I did a lot of video on that. And even since then, I've watched parts of it again. And and I my my estimation of what was achieved. Such a broad question. What I what did I think of it? I ask open ended questions because people talk about what they want to talk about anyway. So might as well. Yeah, I'll probably come at not as a surprise to you, but I I agreed with Harris almost completely. OK, what he was saying. I understand. I think think what Jordan Peterson is saying. But I feel that I can sort of interpret what he's saying in a way that doesn't conflict with. With what I with what I think about the world, I think he sees a lot of the same things that Sarah that Harris, I think they have almost like identical concerns. But I just think that like the the layer they're putting over the interpretive structure they're putting around these things, at least is quite different. But I think they're both able to be distilled to the same the same things. In almost every way when I was like when I was look at it, when I hear Peterson talk about things I could I could just reinterpret them in in sort of what I would call, I guess, like a secular way or something. I don't know if that's enough to go with. What do you think Sam Harris's goal was, you know, besides, you know, make money or anything like that. What do you think Sam Harris's goal was? Did you listen to any of the Sam Harris podcasts before the two Sam Harris podcasts before the thing? Okay. What do you think Sam Harris's goal was and what do you think Jordan Peterson's goal was? I think that they were they're both, at least in my estimation, really honest actors in the whole the whole debate scene. I think, you know, when you get past, you know, they got paid to do it when you get past that I think it's probably a combination of trying to just understand where each other is coming from because there is some overlap in their audiences. I know Sam has felt that a lot of his fans are have become sort of enchanted with Jordan Peterson in a way that he didn't understand why. And there's a lot of Jordan Peterson fans that, you know, like Harris to some degree. And, you know, I'm sort of one of those Sam Harris, like Sam Harris is one of my favorite thinkers, public intellectuals, I guess. And I'm a Jordan Peterson fan. I don't want to come across as like someone who doesn't like Jordan Peterson. I think he is excellent in many contexts. I've always just sort of veered away from what he when he starts talking about religion and Christianity and truth and some aspects of morality. But I think he's actually on a similar page with Harris. They just have sort of different intuitions. But so what was there? Harris's goal, I think, was just to understand where Jordan Peterson is coming from and maybe to address this this disconnect that I think he that Harris has and what I also shared between Jordan Peterson and his audience a little bit. That's that's a criticism that that I had before that debate was set up and I know some people had as well is that in my view, Jordan Peterson, I don't think he's being dishonest or anything like that. But I feel that when he talks about Christianity and religion, he's he's using these these these Christian words, these these Christian symbolism. And this is being interpreted by people who have vastly different ideas of God, of the afterlife. When I heard when I heard Peterson talk for the first time, talk about religion, I just remember thinking like I've never heard anybody talk about Christianity in this way. And then I see a lot of people who I know hold more fundamentalist beliefs, who love Jordan Peterson. And I'm saying, what do you mean? You don't even have the same idea of what God is. I always had a feeling that there's just a lack of like the people think Jordan Peterson is is is in agreement with them when he's actually not. Yeah, that's kind of like in a way, if I can put this like so when Jordan Peterson talks about God, I've sort of come up with an analogy. Let's say that a bunch of people in the world, if you go to like a UFO convention, okay. And they're like little green men UFO convention where everyone believes extraterrestrials have visited the Earth Roswell Roswell. Yeah, I went to Roswell actually read out the book. Did you see him? I did. I didn't. They could have been like walking around, but they could have had like. I don't know. But I can imagine going to like a convention where everyone is just like a hardcore fundamentalist like UFO person, you know, got the UFO hats on and all that stuff. And then you if someone comes into there to give a talk and they talk about UFOs in a way that you know the person giving the talk doesn't believe in little green men UFOs. They believe in a literal like unidentified flying objects and like that, but then they're using terminology of the UFO community of you know we've been being visited or like you know they've they landed my backyard. This can be like you know it can be like a spiritual landing, but when you actually get down to it. Spiritual landing. Like you know. They landed in my heart. Yeah, you can construct these like these narratives that are lofty sounding, but that are still like there's a complete disconnect between the audience like you can have this UFO audience just like you know giving you applause to everything you say. But your actual your your both your concepts of UFOs couldn't be more distant more more far apart. And if they if but you've for some reason unable to bring yourself to say like no I don't believe in little green men. I believe in just you know objects in the sky that we have no explanation for. And I feel like. And I feel like. Jordan Peterson has a difficult time to like for the analogy of saying that telling this crowd that he doesn't actually believe in little green men, he just believes in an unidentified objects in the sky, but the crowd is still thinking that he's supporting little green men. See what I mean like that's that's sort of. For maybe a maybe not perfect analogy. That's where I see like a disconnect between him and his at least a portion of his audience because again I've never heard anyone speak about God and Christianity the way Jordan Peterson does. He's got this parish of one thing going for him. And. And yeah I mean I like his version way better. Like if if I could turn every Christian into like a Jordan Peterson Christian like I was I think that would be a good thing. But I don't think it's the best thing. So so I for me the you know one of the one of the real moments of the whole of the whole of all the talks came at the end of the first session when Sam because I think you know Sam was really motivated related for session so you know but but really in some ways the climax came at the end of session one when Sam. You know similar to what you just described here the sense I think you I think you laid it out that there's a whole group of people many of whom subscribe to my channel who who listen to Jordan Peterson and say well deep down he's really one of us and he's not one of them. And so he's on our side and and then Sam watching this I don't know if you saw it there's a there's a there's an interesting video done by a young man. There's a video done by a YouTuber named mouthy Buddha who had a video why basically why Jordan Peterson is eating is taking over Sam Harris's fan base which is it was put out something like June June of 2018 which mouthy Buddha and actually mouthy Buddha really loves conspiracy theories a lot of his videos are about little great UFOs and all of this stuff but he's very interesting. He's a he's a he's an atheist and but he's very interesting YouTuber. You just sent me that link when you're after this or something. Oh yeah it's a it's a very interesting video. But you know for me as I mean I got into. I think I think. I've talked now for two lots of people hundreds and hundreds of hours about Jordan Peterson and why they're interested in it. I've talked to atheists and religious people I've talked to a lot of people who were atheist and are kind of become God curious. You know this has happened through the Jordan Peterson thing. You know I think a lot of what Sam towards the end of that first one Sam basically says no you're giving aid and comfort to people who believe in little green men and and and maybe you should stop it. And at one point in fact in that in that in that video they you know Sam Harris really pins Jordan Peterson down about the why don't you say almost certainly not about the resurrection and kind of keeps pushing Peterson and then then Peterson says it. And he says he says you win Sam. But of course they're going to talk for another six hours and on from that. And for me that the key moment of that was when Sam Harris asked Jordan Peterson you know well tell me what God you believe in. And then Jordan Peterson reads these. Rather esoteric points and then Sam Harris says you know no that's that's not what that's not what people think about when they talk about God. Yeah. And then he lists then they have the very interesting God who cares whether or not you masturbate. And so Peterson and that's where I got my videos of the scott number one and God number two because Peterson has this axiomatic God that is built into our filters that helps us navigate the world as a form for action. And then and then Harris has this you know denial of an anti-masturbation God who is a guy who lives on a cloud and has a rather simplistic filter in terms of these are the things I want to see people these are things I don't. So when I see people doing things I don't want them to do I'll punish them either with hell or just you know give them cancer or annoying children or ugly feet or something like that while they're here. And and and so and for me that was probably the most interesting part of it because what it showed me was. Here's here's a thesis I have. Most of us don't know what on earth is going on even inside of ourselves and we get attracted to people or ideas based on things other parts of our brain our reading but our consciousness doesn't necessarily get the memo. And and so what I part of the reason I got interested in Jordan Peterson was I saw a lot of people begin to. One begin to be curious about the Bible and God and Christianity when they weren't before. And so my question was what's going on with that why are they what is Jordan Peterson saying that is eliciting this phenomenon. Yeah. And and so so I just got interested in that and then I made a video and people started watching my videos which kind of surprised me and I just have kept making videos since then. So so when I when I watched the when I watched the video I was like oh my gosh I'm going to be a Christian. I think Sam came to I think Sam came there wanting to make the point that you just made very well I think in fact you made it better than Sam did because your illustration gives a nice gives a nice format to it that Sam. Because your illustration gives a nice gives a nice format to it that Sam. I think Sam came to. gives a nice format to it, that Sam wanted Jordan to start giving aid and comfort to people who believe in little green men. And I think Jordan had a different goal. I think he, even though he and Sam, well, you know, when Jordan tells Sam and earlier had told Matt Dillahunty that he doesn't really act like an atheist, of course, Sam got upset because, well, what do you mean I don't act like an atheist? I say I'm an atheist and I don't go to church. Well, Jordan doesn't go to church either. So that then got interesting because, of course, Jordan has this idea of God, which is, see, then I had to kind of distinguish it and figure out where the difference lies. And that's where I had God number one and God number two. So Jordan Peterson sort of has God number one and Sam Harris is always trying to debunk God number two. And then Brett Weinstein was kind of in the middle and listened to Jordan Peterson and said, OK, I think I kind of understand what you mean by God. So, yeah, so I would jump in here. Why do you think Jordan Peterson uses the word God to describe what he's talking about? In my view, I usually try to not use the word just because it has such a, it's just laden with so much historical baggage. It's a very, there's a lot of baggage to the term where if you say, I believe in God, like everyone around you is going to have a different idea of what that means. And so everyone's going to think that you mean what they mean. I remember when I was an undergrad, I had a philosophy, someone who's an undergrad at Berkeley for philosophy. So we would have had a lot of good conversations. He was raised as a Christian and he would say that he believed in God. But through when we'd go round and round, he would always distill it back down. And his definition of God was just like at the core was just something like value. Like he believes in value. And I remember saying that like, well, I mean, I think things have value. I believe in value. So they like that's, I don't have a problem with that. And then we had a guest over who was a more of a fundamentalist Christian who had a more of a literalist interpretation of God. And she came over and she was talking with someone else and she mentioned that, you know, she's a believer, she believes in God. And I remember my friend looked at her and just kind of said, oh, me too. And then they shared like, you know, a nod and they acted like they were on the same page. And I just remember I had to, I even said, I was like, this is, you guys don't agree on it. Anything like, like, this is like, you could not be further away from what you guys believe on this. And so that's why I don't use the word. I don't like using the word God. I just say, I want you to just explain what it is you mean when you say God. But then I feel like so many people then just like wanted to shoehorn in and just say, no, but that's God. Like, well, how many other people are we going to allow to say like, no, this is God, no, this is in this context. Whereas for Jordan Peterson's God, like I have, I don't see how it contradicts a notion of just, you know, innate evolved senses of behaviors and motivations. We know that, you know, we know that things like desire to have sex is separate, separable from, you know, the desire to procreate. Like, you know, people use contraceptive, but they still have the desire to procreate. Is that desire to have sex? Is that, is that God that's doing that? But we can, that can be explained in another context of just, you know, evolutionary psychology, where we have these evolved, you know, mental capacities that are going to give us certain drives to do certain things that are going to be conducive to our survival. And yeah, they're, I feel like this is what Jordan Peterson's, in a sense, is his idea of God. It's just like this selection among generations for, you know, the hierarchies of leadership and everything like that. And then it creates sort of like this ultimate, you know, King of Kings version in your head. And then he'll like, he'll lay a layer of Christian symbolism over that when to me it's just like, you don't need the symbol, just talk about the evolutionary psychology of it. And that's, that's, that's, that's why I don't like how Jordan Peterson has this new definition that he calls that God. Like, what do you think is the utility of Jordan Peterson calling it God? Because I just see it as sort of a placebo effect for instilling good behavior in people in a way. So I want to know what you might think about all that. Well, the thing that struck me when I, when I heard Sam Harris say that what Jordan Peterson was describing is not what is not, cannot be associated with this word God, or it's improper to associate it with historically. The thing that I immediately saw was that Sam Harris doesn't know much history because what happened, you know, sort of what's been happening is that as people leave, slowly leave Christendom, they tend to split into two tracks. One of those tracks tends to be pantheistic and the other track tends to be atheistic. Okay. Of course, you've actually the biggest track is kind of spiritual, but not religiously. But you know, that's kind of how they split. And that's actually an important split. Because when Jordan, there was a Verizon commercial a few years ago with a woman named Lisa and she was walking around and she's talking to the universe. And the universe was saying, hey, Lisa, get a new phone. And then she sees a Verizon store. She goes in and she gets a crappy LG phone and she says, thanks universe. And what's interesting is that in terms of the language game we're playing, universe there has replaced God. Okay. Now that's a very interesting thing. Because what do you think is particularly interesting about that? Because she could easily be talking to God and everyone would know what she's doing. Because God has these two, historically the Christian God has these two aspects. His transcendence, which is kind of like a conscious being who is above watching, impacting, reacting. That's the God that Sam Harris recognizes. You know, someone who is above looking down, impacting, has concerns. Has all of these aspects of personhood and consciousness and identity. So I call that God number two. Okay. Real quick. Do you think that God number two is the God that most people believe in? In my experience, I would say yes. But I don't have like stats on that. I mean, I know that they've had stats on like people and their belief in angels and in afterlife and that seems to be maybe like whether or not they think prayers are answered. Those tend to be pretty high. So I'd be interested if you think that's what people are... Yes, right now. I would say yes, right now, the further we've gotten away from Darwin. Because one of Jordan Peterson's favorite books is The Metaphysical Club, in which he walks through... He takes the observation that what changed with Darwin was not so much... Darwin didn't invent evolution. Darwin popularized the idea that you didn't need a built-in God in creation to result in this amazing environment that we see. He had the natural mechanism, basically. Yeah. Right. So when we use the word natural, we mean something without mind or intention. That's where the intelligent design, that's exactly why there's that line there. So when we use the word natural, we mean without mind or intention. That happens after Darwin. And so what happens historically after Darwin is that the West has so much sunk capital into God and Christianity, philosophers and theologians keep trying to rescue God from his lost job in terms of maintaining the creation. And so actually, philosophically, before that, there was another step called providential deism, when you had the clockmaker universe, where you had Newton and a bunch of the early scientists of his, where you basically said, here's God and here's the world. Before that, if you read theology, like the confessional statements of my particular religious tradition, you have a lot of ideas that say things like, if God were to remove himself from this world for a moment, everything would disappear. Now, that's obviously before providential deism, where, you know, the world kind of stands on its own, and God is sort of another thing being in the world that interacts with it. That's very much the thing that Sam Harris is complaining about. But before providential deism, you have all of these, all of this language, like out of the New Testament, where the apostle Paul says, quoting a pagan philosopher, in him we live and move and have our being. And it's sort of like, if, let's imagine JRR Tolkien is, you know, making up a story about a hobbit and telling it to his children. And, you know, one evening when JRR Tolkien is telling his children about the hobbit, and Tolkien has never told anybody else outside of his family this cute little story about the hobbit, and then a bomb goes off, maybe the Germans dropped one, and his whole family is destroyed, then Bilbo is no more. And in a sense, that is also a part of the definition of God, historically, and beyond Christianity as well. This gets really complicated. Would you say that definition is more of a will to live or something like that? I mean, in terms of Bilbo, that's kind of what we mean when we say, like, you know, Bilbo was no more. Like, he had no reason to continue on because everything he loved was killed. Well, Bilbo is no more because Tolkien is killed, and anyone who Tolkien told about Bilbo is dead. Okay, I gotcha. And so then Bilbo is no more. In other words, part of Bilbo's existence is dependent upon Tolkien. And that's a part of the idea of God too, which is something that Sam Harris continues to not be aware of. Because he's so set into this, he's so set into his location in history, when he talks about God, he's not aware of how all that other stuff is built into the programming. Which is why Lisa, when she says, even though we assume that Verizon Lisa never goes to church, might be spiritual but not religious, she's having a conversation with the universe because the universe has been directing her path to the Verizon store to get this new cell phone. So when you're discussing these different, I guess these different ways that religion had been practiced, you know, going back in different time periods. So I understand that the way that religion had been practiced around the texts has been different. There's been the scriptures, you have the Old Testament, New Testament, or whatever. And those have been the static bits, at least before, after they came together in one book. And the religion as a social thing that people have practiced, those practices have changed around the book. But the book still acts as sort of an anchor, I think, if you will, where things can float away from the text, but the text still has a sort of a social aspect to it. And the things that pull people further away from the text are influenced by when another orbiting body is introduced. Say that, let's say, different updated views on morality or something like that. People don't want to stone gay people anymore, things like that. And so there's this great sense of, you know, the text is still there. And so there's this greater cultural process that's going, it's a conversation that's sort of away from the scriptures themselves, that's introducing a certain gravitational pull in a different direction away from the text. So what I think that Harris is usually against when people are promoting something like Christianity, is they're also promoting this anchor, this, the gravitational force of something where if the gravity becomes great enough to pull you in, it basically pulls you back into the iron age, to the morals that are in the book, that many of them we can identify thanks to, you know, a lot of what I would call moral progress since then. But we now correctly identify as bad passages and ways that we should not treat people. And so this is what I think, and this is what I think Sam also thinks, is this is the danger of bolstering Christian narratives, specifically Christian narratives, and then imbuing them with a sort of, you know, that it's not just a book that has a lot of profound things and you can't read it like Plato, it's to be read more deeper than Plato, it's not written by a person, it's the inspired words of God. And because of that, it's read like no other book that's being read, and there are dangers for that gravity to take over, especially in times, if times get incredibly rough, if, you know, I'm imagining like, you know, World War III and people are in despair, like, well, what's the node that they're going to be pulled back to in these darker times, when there's not much to grab onto? Well, it's going to be this thing that's maybe not the place in time we want to be constantly dragged back to. And so I'm for religion being practiced differently, and I think the history is very interesting over time and how cultural forces shape the way that people sort of behave around the text and how they drift away from it. I would just, yeah, I guess my main thing is that, with Sam Harris, is I just wish that that wasn't just like the stake in the ground, the anchor point that people have, what I would do is a danger of being sucked back into and can be sucked back into it in the here and now. I mean, there are religious fundamentalists today who are essentially believing very literal interpretations of it. We see in other religions too, such as Islam and things like that. Why do you think gay people shouldn't be stoned? Well, I think if we sort of based just on the social behavior, if we're a social species, we realize that our consciousness isn't just, well, we have our own perception around us. We don't like to be hurt and feeling pain. We evolve with certain moral sentiments that are more conducive to our survival and well-being, conducive to happiness in that way, where if certain of these rules are violated, we can sort of realize that we wouldn't want to be subject to these same rules where we're going to be stoned due to properties that we had no control over, such as sexual preference. And so we can sort of, the fact that we can put ourselves in other people's minds, we can then say that we witness to be done to ourselves in a certain way and that this isn't a conducive thing to a functioning society and where everyone can not have to look over their shoulder constantly about who's going to come there with a bucket full of rocks and start throwing it at them. And you would agree that one good rule of thumb generally is that we should treat other people the way we ourselves want to be treated? Yes. Which is also in the Bible. Yes, yes. What I say to that too is that again, these I think can be explained by these evolved moral sentiments that we have that are conducive to our well-being. It's no coincidence that something like that showed up in the Bible because this is something that people have within them already. Things that people come across, like really good moral rules like that, well they're really impactful to people. Like when we hear them, they have a big impact and we're like, you know, hey, that does sound, that really resonates with us. Well, we can't control what resonates with us. But the reason these things do resonate so well is because they basically are of the structure that we have evolved in our brains, whereas it's a rule that we're unconsciously going by. But that's the process of social evolution, consciousness. And so to me, it makes perfect sense that rules like do not kill, treat others how you want to be treated, that these would find their way into a canon of some sort. Because yeah, they do resonate with us, but they resonate with us for a really good reason. Because these reflect real structures that we've gained in our minds through evolution. So that's how I interpret at least those types of things. So two things found their way into the canon. One said stone gay people and the other said treat people the way you want to be treated. How do you know which one is good or which one should be kept and which one should be dropped? Yes, I think this is a process that we sort of arrive at through certain trial and error. So I think there's going to be a conflict between some baser instincts that we have of things like disgust and repulsion that we have and that the people initially don't like. Like if I stumble across gay porn, I'm not gay and it's not appealing to me. And so I've grown up in a society where we're just, you know, we can be like, you know, these people shouldn't be stone, they can do what they want to do. But in the past, I think it's somewhat understandable that breaking of certain norms that we've evolved to do would probably be reinforced through certain barbaric acts like killing gay people, for instance. But over time, in different contexts, when we come to know more and more about our environments, about the nature of our minds and how societies function and what type of rules we wouldn't want to be subject to, you know, if you take like a Rawlsian veil of ignorance type thing, you know, would we want to live in a society where, you know, we were a gay person, would we want to roll the dice and live in a society that was stone gay people? I don't think people would choose that. So there's human nature is a mixture of these reptilian instincts that we have that are tribalistic, that are bigoted, that are violent. But then there's also these evolved moral sentiments that we have to our in-group that are really good, like reciprocity, you know, taking care of other people's young, all these good and bad things. And so there's going to be a tension there between what's going to be conducive to survival as we move forward and as we kind of broaden our social context to others that aren't in our close tribe, I suppose. And so I think morality kind of progresses as we learn more about the behaviors that are conducive to well-being of people, if that makes any sense. Well, the stoning gay people certainly was also an evolved, a norm that evolved through time, wouldn't have been? Maybe not like the specific act, but like general aggression towards maybe certain aberrant behaviors that people didn't understand and may have. There also could be layers of stories over that too that are causing people to do certain behaviors as well that maybe aren't totally evolved. But yeah, I mean, it's aggressive aggression towards certain aberrant behaviors that is likely involved. Well, we could pretty easily construct a story that would explain why a tribe would stone gay people, couldn't we? I suppose you probably maybe could, but I think it's the process over time is when we start adding more context and we learn more about just our relation to others in general and how we'd want to be treated. Well, let's say, for example, in the Bronze Age, Early Iron Age Israel, the, you know, really all the way up until the modern period, the hero of the tribe was the woman who bears, you know, many sons. And she's the hero of the tribe because the woman who bears many sons means that the tribe has more sons, more men, and the tribe having more sons and more men, these sons and men can go out into the fields and they can work on the farm and they can produce more food and then they can also compete against the rival tribes who are, you know, always looking to come and raid their food and steal the women and children. And so the value in the tribe is obviously towards, you know, producing a large group of strong men. And we would imagine if that quality and characteristic is necessary for the survival of the tribe and the group, that anything which threatens that behavior would be known as bad. And so therefore, it would be reasonable if the goal was the flourishing of the tribe in competition with other tribes that you would stone usually gay men. Because these, having a large group of gay men is problematic for over long periods of time, multiple generations, tribes that stoned gay men outperformed tribes that didn't stone gay men, let's say. And so, I mean, whether or not this is true, I don't know, but we could certainly construct a story that would say within this context, there's a value of stoning gay people. Yeah, so I think there's, what we're looking at is sort of a difference between what is sort of, I guess, useful in an evolutionary sense of like competing tribes and ones that are going to be more likely to be, you know, to reproduce more and overtake other tribes or something, all these evolutionary dynamics that would, you would expect to create like a more dominant society. And that's, I'm not saying that we're going to evolve the best tendencies that we're going to look at now. But I think we have sort of a benefit in the present of not being in a time where the only thing that it's a, you know, that matters is sort of this unthinking rules of thumb that have gotten people, had them out compete other groups of in a certain way. So I don't think, I'm not a person that thinks that like morality is something that's out there, like that is not wrong to the universe and to the rocks and to the stars. Like morality is basically exists only in a, only among conscious minds, only among, and particularly among conscious minds of our types. I mean, there could exist maybe other, other, I don't know how spider societies get along. If they were conscious, they might have different rules and different things that create wellbeing for a certain society with different brains and different types of societies. But at least our species, now that we're kind of, you know, not in a position where survival is the utmost important thing, that these, I guess these evolved traits that we can now sort of step back and look at these and analyze these things in a way that it's that we have time to analyze them. But back in the day, you know, there's no time to just like ponder on a couch about like the way we should treat things and the best way to set up a society, you know, like, you know, the Rawls did for instance. And we can expand, and now that we live in environments too, where we expand our notion of what a tribe is to other people that surround us. And we can sort of, I guess, more critically reflect on the behaviors that we have evolved that may not be applicable to, you know, the present time, if that makes any sense. Well, our tribes are more ideological, and I don't know that we're any less competitive between ideological tribes than we were. Our battles, well, you know, so you've got the social justice warriors over here, and you've got the creation scientists over here, and you've got the Quillette tribe over here. And fortunately, at least at this point, we're not deciding we want to rule the kingdom by killing everyone else. I mean, we've certainly done that plenty, you know. I think that's an update. I think it's an update. So that's a good thing. But at the same time, we're also living in a, we're also living in a period of unprecedented abundance, where unlike, let's say, you know, Bronze Age, early Iron Age Israel, where it was, you know, it was very much a matter of life and death in that situation. If you didn't have enough men to counter the Philistines or the Midianites or the Amorites, if you didn't have enough men in your tribe, you were, I mean, basically, the Bible is just full of those stories, and anthropology is full of those stories, which makes some of the people you're talking to quite ironic, because I think, how much anthropology do they really know in terms of history, in terms of how people, what people actually do when they are in various context and situations, and therefore the norms that they follow? Yeah, I mean, I don't think we necessarily are going to continue down a path of moral progress. I mean, it just, as soon as, you know, the resources run out or something and it creates a panic, I mean, people are going to go back to complete chaos. I mean, it's definitely, we are at a luxury of being in a time of abundance, where we can think more reflectively upon best ways to treat individuals, that we might not have had that luxury, you know, back in the day when your infant mortality rates were through the roof, and you don't know if you're going to get raided by another tribe the next day, yeah, so I think that's why I'm really afraid of a lot of the postmodern deconstructionists, because once we move too far away from the facts, you know, I know it's something that Peterson and Harris both think, you know, we evolve and devolve into a state of cultural relativism. Well, I don't want that either. I really like that part of their talk, where they talked about the different poles of relativism, you know, complete chaos, and then, you know, the whole thing, you know, chaos, and then, you know, the Bible being something that's, you know, this complete order, if you will. And so I agree that we want to avoid both of those things. And so I'm concerned with, as I mentioned before, using, you know, having the Bible be that anchor, because that's just a snapshot of our moral progress up until that point, until it was written down in a book, and then that's the way it stayed. But maybe if that book didn't get codified, you know, until now or something like that, then we'd be in a, we'd be, the gravitational pull would be in a spot that is maybe, maybe better, you know, because I think if, you know, if you remove some passages of the Bible, it would maybe be a document that I would be happier to use as an anchor for society, for instance. But then people could also say there were maybe forms before the current Bible that, you know, they might have wanted to use the anchor back then that had even more barbaric things. So the Bible could be an updated version of what used to be, you know, oral traditions or something. Progress, though, is a really, is a really tricky thing, because, for example, what you would argue in terms of science, someone could easily say, well, you know, that view of science reigned basically from the, from the 19th to 20th century. But here in the 21st century, moral progress dictates that we know that you being a straight white male, that you have ingrown biases which prejudice the way you see the world. And we now know this, I mean, they certainly feel that they know this as surely as you and I feel that we know what we know. And they call their transition progress. I mean, they, they literally do. They're progressives. And they're progressives. And, and, and you say, now, wait a minute, we, we, we learned all these things. And we, we learned all these patterns. And all of these patterns worked really well for our society. And in fact, our society has been able to achieve what it has because we have practiced science without these other external, what practically look like religious biases that you are imposing from your social justice ideology. So in a sense, you've also got a, what would, what would fundamentally be seen by the progressives to be a conservative, a conservative dogma that is retarding the advance of their progress. You say that the concern, the conservative dogma is the new progressivism? No, no, no, you're the conservative. Yes, I am. And you're a conservative and you hold dogmas like, well, you shouldn't, you know, the best scientists should win. And that should be based on facts and data. And, you know, you should leave ideological biases out of it. And so in other words, and so perhaps, I don't know if we would say Francis Bacon wrote your Bible or, you know, someone, you know, someone wrote your Bible, but your Bible then is in a sense, a, a weight or a drag or an attempt to have a fixed point that relativizes the so-called new findings of this group. And obviously what was so dramatic about the, the hoax papers was that it basically exposed the new findings to be just, you know, I forget what somebody in my meetup called it, woozling, you know, just kind of going round and round the tree. You get enough scholars to agree with it and it's a fact. Yeah. They did. They've, they've perfectly closed the loop on that, that machine that just pumps out that, that nonsense. Yeah. And so here is in a sense how one way that you might imagine the Bible is operating because, well, let's take a look at, you know, not that I certainly would critique it, but let's take Jordan Peterson's understanding of what the Bible is and why he still reads it. He understands what the Bible to be is encoded wisdom from, you know, hundreds of generations that has been sourced over many, many different contexts in a whole variety of ways and places and kind of distilled into mythological, symbolic rule-based forms. And, and what that does is basically always give our ancestors a voice in our perception of values and the reality of this world. And that is something that is now, here's the thing, it's in a book, you're free to close it and ignore it or listen to it. That, that in fact is a very useful tool if you're moving into realms of the unknown. And, and I would argue for the fact that I've been, I've been a minister for now, you know, over 20 years and we've yet to stone our first gay person. You know, I, I, they just get in and out the door and I don't say, why don't we stop them and stone them? You know, we're not stoning gay people. And there actually is, I mean, if you talk about what the Bible is, where you can find some people that Sam Harris is thinking about, you know, you've got Westboro Baptist, Baptist Church, even they aren't stoning gay people as far as I know, or they'd all be in jail. But, you know, there, there's actually a huge amount of very reasonable process that goes along with this book. And in fact, all of what's happening in religion in America is usually a great deal of conversation and debate and reasoning and all of those things that, that get built into what one might think about if you were thinking about it in terms of Jordan Peterson's terms as a way of saying our, our perspective on the world is based on this tiny little window. And there has, there have been smart people throughout human history that have faced a myriad of challenges and they have distilled wisdom down into certain forms that have been tested throughout history in unimaginable ways. And what we actually have now is the record of all of this. And now let's bring God back into it. When you think about, you know, the, when you think about God in terms of my Frodo Tolkien story, God in fact has his fingerprints all over, God number one has his fingerprints all over this entire process. It actually makes a great deal of sense when we start trying to figure out, well, you know, how should, how should we regard various behaviors? You know, what did our ancestors say? Did they, you know, you know, here's always a fun question. When the, when the pilgrims, when the pilgrims landed in Massachusetts, what should the tribes have done? Yes, tricky. Should have killed them, but, but it always depends on. In hindsight, we know that they should have just kept launching arrows. But we also know that, of course, then you get, you read someone like Jared Diamond, have you ever read Guns, Germs and Steel? I did a long time ago. Yeah. So, you know, fascinating book, you know, why they had not, not no natural immunity and why the germs and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and all that happened. And of course the pilgrims landed and the, you know, the, the local groups said, hmm, this group might be useful in terms of our competition with the other groups. What they of course couldn't have known was that there's an entire world out there that has all of their own stories and they're just gonna keep coming, even though they, you know, the view from the Indians is that, you know, these white people, they don't know how to live. They're really stupid. They die like crazy. They suffer horribly. And so basically let's just kind of keep them alive. And if, if, if our own little political winds change, then we can always just stop feeding them and they'll just croak anyway. So I mean, it really was a very rational perspective that they had in terms of dealing with these strangers that came over the ocean. It was very rational, but what they lacked obviously from our point of view was a far bigger picture. And so really what Bible and religion give you is a far larger picture on the world than what the rationality of usually a very tiny window can offer. So that's, that would be an argument. That would be a, that would be a rationalist argument for religion. Yeah. And I could almost agree with all of that. Like I'm, I'm not the person who wants to throw out the Bible. I think in a part of a lot of what Jordan Peterson and Harris talked about is like, you know, we've got to, we've got to distinguish the baby from the bath water. And the problem is, you know, like, well, how much baby is in there? How much bath water? Can you take the baby out of it without killing, killing it? You know, it's, it's, it's, it's an issue. And I think if I had, if I had to choose between say like the, the gravity of, you know, the, the Bible and the gravity of complete, you know, chaos, basically, complete just deconstruction, cultural relativism, everything, I'd probably pick the Bible because there's at least some good, true things in there that people can latch onto that are going to be aligning with, you know, their evolved moral sentiments that, you know, can be kickstarted to potentially do something, something good from that. I mean, it's a, it's a point in time. It might not be the point in time that I think is like the best point in time to, to stick a, you know, a pin in it and say like, that's where this is, this is where we're going to have the anchor, but it's, there could be, I think, worse anchors for sure. Yeah. And so I, I do see the utility in having a document that has, you know, received wisdom from thousands and thousands of years, you know, that's, there's, I don't think, I think we should take the Bible very seriously. I think we should have, you know, updated conversations about, you know, what things we want to parse and which things are going to be. We should be, you know, they shouldn't be believed based on just, you know, the dogma, but there needs to be some sort of rational argument for things that are, that are in the Bible as well. But yeah, I think that it's definitely has usefulness and I wouldn't throw the whole thing out just, just because I don't think it's the best thing. There is. I think it can be extremely useful for a lot of people. And so, yeah, that's, I think that's a good rationalist argument for it. There's just a lot of spin offs, spin off problems when you get people that are just going to go back to fundamentalism at any moment in time. And so, I think that's a good argument for it. And so, yeah, I think that's a good argument for it. Fundamentalism at any moment. I mean, who knows in a thousand years, we could be stoning gay people again. Like, I don't know. Maybe we'll eat them. I don't know. Maybe. Like, it's again, we're going to wax and wane with how close we get to and from the text. And, you know, the problem is like, we need to stay, I would hope, far enough away from it as we can where we can, you know, not be drawn back to the parts that we're, that we can kind of come to a consensus agreement that are not the way that we want to treat other people. But we're not going to just float off into oblivion. Like, that's something we can't do. Well, I'd actually argue that you probably want to keep the fundamentalist around. And for this reason, that what, so what happens is you have the Bible here and that doesn't change. And you have all these communities around the Bible that see it as authoritative and are always working on it. But you'll notice that even though all of these communities recognize the Bible as authoritative, and they're all reading it and working on it, they're all coming out of it with different ideas. And I know a lot of people argue that that's a, well, that just shows the inconsistency of it. See, I don't think so. That shows the, that there's actually multiple ways of obviously of interpreting it and then expressing it. And if you're thinking about human beings as an ecosystem, and you're thinking about us learning by watching each other and gathering information, you know, it's really a good thing that you have the Amish who are obviously fundamentalists by any standard, who are, you know, living this crazy lifestyle and horse and buggies and doing organic farming way before organic farming was ever fashionable to do and are making really nice quilts and pies and all of this. And so what you actually have around religious communities are all these really interesting tiny test cases of ways to live life. Because part of what's really fascinating, even about conservative religious communities that you, if you go there and say, well, you haven't changed since the 1950s. Well, actually, they've all changed since the 1950s, because the context has changed. And they're also not only continually trying to, trying to stay connected with this authoritative text, they're also having to make their life work out in the out in the world. And so what you really get is a nice group of diverse experiments on how to live being informed by our ancestral past interfacing with the contemporary world and figuring out what works and what doesn't. And you know, what we know from biology, especially in terms of our, our food supply and some of the concerns about it is, is these monocultures, you know, let's say, we'll give, we'll give Sam Harris a magic wand and he can make the Bible disappear. And you know, all these religious communities will run around like ants that you've destroyed the trail and they don't know where to go. And actually, that's, that's one of the dumbest things you can think of, because you've got all of these groups running these experiments in terms of how to live with respect to the wisdom of the past. And what you see is that over time, some of these communities flourish, and we learn things about flourishing from them, and others of these communities disappear. And usually they don't flourish or disappear in the animal kingdom by just all dying, but people actually enter, they either leave or enter those communities. And so I would argue that even from a rationalist perspective, even from a materialist perspective, it makes a whole lot of sense to have these religious people voluntarily trying all kinds of ways to live. And, and I think this is part of the reason why freedom of conscience and religion in America proved to be such a such a flourishing space for religions that you actually had all of this experimentation in how human beings should live. And what's also really cool about religious communities is they keep records, they write their stuff down, they write theology and books. So actually, most of the records we have about how humans can live throughout most of history, they're almost all religious records. So and then if you would say, okay, I'm a scientist, I'm going to study this. But to study all of that diversity, what I'd really love to have is sort of a constant. And what you actually have from that is in fact, the constant, which is the constant text of the Bible that a good number of these communities, at least the ones that say Jared Diamond would draw from his world story would all be connected to this text. And so if let's let's imagine now let's give the simulation argument that's due, let's imagine we're living in a simulation, I would very much imagine that if they're running a simulation and they want to see what human beings do, ooh, we need a constant, let's give them the Bible. And let's watch all of the things that happen with respect to that. So to me, it's really a fascinating thing to think to imagine. No, I totally agree with the utility of, you know, having the different experiments being run. And it's, I think there could be good arguments that you need maybe that some anchoring text that's been imbued with some profundity is a good thing to some degree. But it's, at the end of the day, we have there are still I think, there could be better versions of a book that we look at with profundity. And I think we shouldn't ever look at something with, you know, that they should be profound, and they should be books that we could pass on and like in and say that they're imbued with such wisdom and that we should, we should, you know, take these books very seriously. But then to go the extra step and, you know, say that these things, well, they're not even, they weren't, they were inspired by some, you know, this, the actual creator of the universe. And then some of the passages may not be the best, the best anchor, the best starting point that you want to have to start these experiments on. I mean, I think, I think there could be updated versions that would be a better place to go. I think there's probably some changes that you could, you know, if there's a 2.0, you could go and make some edits and use that as the starting place. I think that would be preferable to what we have now, for sure. Well, I'd argue that people have been doing that all along. When Thomas Jefferson took his scissors and cut out all the pieces. And in fact, just about every time someone writes a nonfiction book with a tone of admonishment, they're in fact throwing their hat into the ring to say, here's some, and even when people, especially when people are writing theology, I mean, that's essentially what they're doing. They're taking this book and they're saying, this is my read on this book from the 18th, 19th, 20th or 21st century. And then the really interesting question though is, if you would think that there is a better, there's a book that articulates better adaptation than the book that we've got, that that book would eventually out-compete the Bible. And in fact, I mean, you might argue that the Book of Mormon, Islam, you know, various cults that start, the difficulty that we have, I think, especially in our culture, is we're so individualistic that our frame of reference is a good life for a human being, which only lives a certain amount of time. And that the books that are actually competing for this are books that, and it makes good sense, books that actually prove their value, again, over a huge diversity of cultures, framed both by cultures contemporaneously and cultures throughout time. So, you know, one could argue if the human race is around for another 10,000 years, everybody's, you know, everybody's then, you know, reading this as their Bible according to the psalmics. I probably prefer that maybe. The Bible's a lot more fun. There aren't enough stories in this book. I mean, you don't have. Which is surprising given Jordan Peterson's, like, stories and narratives. That's right. I've only read parts of it, but yeah, I haven't. I should probably try to make my way and slog through it, but. Well, it's like a daunting task. My word for it is it's a tortured book. He says, I poured through, I poured over, I poured over every sentence 15 times, and I think, yeah, it reads that way. You might have trusted. Sometimes you think your first go is going to be the best. That's right. That's right. Well, I don't know, Colin, you have any? We've got about two hours. That's a pretty good amount of time. Do you have any last things you want to throw in there? This has been delightful for me. I hope I. I love fun. I don't want to lean in on you too hard with all of my religious dogma. Oh, no, I love these conversations. I live out. I live in Pennsylvania by myself and I don't know anybody out here, so. I'm thrilled to like do podcasts and talk with people about things that I think are interesting. So. Oh, wonderful. Wonderful. Yeah, absolutely. So anything you want to promote, you got your quillette piece and I can put the link to that you want me to put your Twitter handle in this. And you can follow me at Swipe Right. W-R-I-G-H-T, my last name. About it. That's all I got going on. Is that a is that a Tumblr reference or a? I guess it's like a Tinder or a Fumble, if there's any type of, you know, swiping dating apps. I was shocked that it was available on Twitter when I signed up for it. I've only been on Twitter since the middle of last year, so I'm surprised it wasn't taken. So got lucky there. Has it gotten many girls for you? Nope. Oh, well. I have a girlfriend back in California. So back in Cal. Oh, the whole distance romance thing. Rough. Yeah, that's hard. That's hard. Anyway, it is what it is. But but this is I'm so glad you said yes. I mean, I we had that little exchange on Twitter. I thought, oh, you could be fun to talk to this guy. Talk to I'm surrounded by way too many people that that agree with me, even though I have a meetup of all people who have zero and agreeableness because they just fight. Yeah, I think I try to be as agreeable as possible. If you ever want to do it again, I'd be happy to talk about something else if you if you'd like or. Whatever, I'm open. Well, wonderful. If you think of something that's kind of religious and you think I want to talk to a pastor about this, just let me know. Then we'll do it again. Awesome. That sounds good. Well, this this has been a pleasure, Colin. And I'll post this I might post this tomorrow because this is I think I think I think the people who watch my channel a lot of people really enjoy this. So cool. I think I know my parents want to watch it. So they watch all my podcasts in a fun way. Do you have your own podcast or just when you guessed? I've been thinking about it, but I haven't quite gotten there yet. I think I need to get more comfortable doing podcasts and just getting, you know, talking in front of a camera because, you know, some I've been trying to record like audio papers, like reading my papers, audio version so people can like listen to scientific papers is kind of like concept. I'm trying to like get out there. And sometimes I get like stage fright just talking to my own just to my microphone in my room. I was like, this makes no sense. It's I take it for me. It's a little weird talking to your computer all by yourself and I do it all the time. So I don't know how people do it, but maybe it's definitely something I'm considering. But yeah, we'll see how that goes. Very cool. Okay, Colin. Well, you have a good evening. You have a good one, too. Good chatting with you. Bye bye. But.