https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=G-OtKYPFDDI

 Hi, this is Paul, and I'm doing a five-part series on the Solas. I started last week with a Solas Scriptura, and this is my Rough Draft to Sunday series where basically I'm walking through the sermon that I'm going to preach on Sunday, and I edit it and I talk it through, and so I'm going to be talking about faith and Solafide this week. Now in my experience, most people I bump into imagine Christianity goes something like this. The Bible is a list of rules, B-I-B-L-E, basic instructions before leaving Earth. If you follow the rules sufficiently, you will go to heaven when you die. If you break the rules dramatically, you will go to hell when you die. Now this, I think, plays into what I call common religion, which is common in the West, and it goes like this. I think it's common in post-Christendom areas. If you're a good person, when you die you go to heaven. Now with pluralism, this gets more complicated. More and more people I know are playing around with ideas like karma and reincarnation, and they think these ideas sound cool. Materialists basically say, you know, when you die you go poof, and you're done, and you're the place, this place will remember you no more. But for many people, if you're a good person, you'll die and go to heaven, and if you're a bad person, when you die you might go to hell or you might disappear. A lot of people are finding hell reprehensible, and so only reserve it for Hitler and genocidal dictators and neighbors that let their dogs bark. Now then, what this usually gets into is people then say, well, okay, so basically this is all about rules, and so we should talk about the rules and figure out where are the rules and what are the rules, and so then people debate the rules. What about murder? Well, yeah, murder is bad, but maybe they're extenuating or justifying circumstances. What about child abuse? Well, child abuse is always bad because those kids are innocent victims. Well, what about gays? Do they go to heaven? And what about people who drive SUVs and put all that CO2 in the atmosphere? What about people who refuse to recycle? Surely, surely God can't welcome them into their heaven because they would litter up the place. And so what we usually wind up doing is we read these rules into our sacred texts and we make our sacred texts say whatever rules we've already decided are really the rules. Now, when it gets funny because then you start talking to pastors or preachers or other people and say, well, what's in the Bible? Well, if you start reading the Bible, you'll discover there's a lot in the Bible and these questions start to get interesting. And, you know, for example, if you read Deuteronomy 28, which is a really dramatic passage towards the end of the Torah where basically the Lord says to Israel, look, if you obey the rules I give you, then you'll have utopia. Then your children will be healthy and they'll grow old and your fields will grow and the enemies of your country will no longer raid and invade and take your children and wives as slaves. But if you disobey the law, oh boy, then it's going to be really horrible. There's going to be drought and earthquake and storm and raiders will come and steal your children and you'll have blight in your fields and your animals won't produce young and your kids will die when they're young and it'll be horrible. And so, okay, well, this kind of sounds like common religion. Do, you know, kind of sounds like my name is Earl. Do good things and good things will happen. Do bad things and bad things will happen and karma will get you. Now, if you read Ezekiel 18, I'm doing my adult Sunday school in Ezekiel. That's a fascinating chapter where basically the premise of the chapter is that if you do good, then God will let you live. And if you do bad, then God will kill you. And there are places in the Bible where this happens. Judah's first son is evil and so God takes his life and his second son is Onan and he spilled his seed on the ground instead of impregnating his older brother's wife as he should have done. And then Judah doesn't want to give the third son to Tamar because he's saying, oh, this woman's bad luck. And that launches a very important thread in the history of the Old Testament. But so here you have in the Old Testament where, you know, do good and God lets you live and do bad and God's going to kill you. And you'd be surprised, well, maybe you wouldn't, how much of that kind of thinking remains out there in the general population. People don't talk about it in polite company because, or in public because it's frowned upon and it's thought to be maybe superstitious or regressive. But boy, when something happens to someone, people whisper it. And so then there's the parable of the sheep and the goats. And so some people look at that and say, aha, here in the New Testament, we found the secret. If you are good to the poor, if you feed the hungry, if you clothe the naked, if you visit the prisoner, that's usually not the one that people want to do. If you visit the prisoner, then Jesus in the last judgment will welcome you into his kingdom because Jesus identifies with the poor and the least of these. Therefore, this is finally the key and this is the reason. It's always interesting how we're always looking for the key and the reason. But now if you keep reading in the Bible, there are other things that pop out at you. For the Son of Man is going to come, that's a term that Jesus used of himself, the Son of Man is going to come in his Father's glory with his angels and then he will reward each person according to what they have done. Oh, so are we back to the rules and rewards and punishments? Jesus seems to be saying that. In Matthew 16, in Matthew 3, surely I tell you people can be forgiven all their sins and every slander they utter, but whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will never be forgiven. They are guilty of an eternal sin and now suddenly, oh boy, and people come to me and say, Pastor, I think I've done it. I think I did the unforgivable sin and I'm going to hell because I did it. And I usually tell them to relax because if this is something you're worried about, you're probably not going to commit it. But that's not what this sermon is about. But this is another example of how everyone's always trying to bottom line me on what Christianity is and it comes down to, well, if I just do this thing or if I avoid these things, then somehow I get my butt into heaven. And I remember as a young man reading the Bible, you know, for the first time with kind of adultish eyes with this frame of reference in my mind, realizing that if this is the dominant question of the Bible, well, they sure don't talk about it much. And then if you really want something that's going to torment you and you have a tender conscience on the wrong kind of life, read Hebrews 6, 4-6. People will sometimes throw this up at me sometimes. It's impossible for those who have once been enlightened, who have tasted the heavenly gift, who have shared in the Holy Spirit, who have tasted the goodness of the word of God and the powers of the coming age, and who have fallen away to be brought back into repentance. To their loss, they are crucified, to their loss, they are crucifying the Son of God all over again and subjecting him to public disgrace. So there you go, backsliders. You're cooked. You opted out. You checked out. You did wrong. You're done. But then is that the rule? Is that the bottom line? So what are we left with? And then of course, in our global world, pluralism comes along. And then we decide, well, shoot, they seem to be, you know, my goose seems to be cooked in terms of Christianity. Well, maybe I'll pick another religion and get that straight. And then religion becomes a game of whose law or whose schemes are finally right. And again, it boils down often into the rules that they think are right or maybe the least common denominator rules. So then you line up a whole bunch of religions and they all seem to say that murder is wrong. So okay, I won't do that. And they all seem to say that stealing is wrong. So okay, I won't do that. But those kinds of general things aren't terribly helpful because, you know, things come up in life and then what you wind up doing is justifying what you do according to your rules. And then someone will come along and say, boy, your rules seem awfully convenient. Now I want to go back and because this series touches on the Protestant Reformation and we will have to talk a little bit about Martin Luther, we should mention at least the medieval sacramental system in the Western Roman Catholic Church. And Brad Gregory in his great courses course on the Protestant Reformation had a real nice quick summary of, you know, what it was like to be a regular old Christian in the Roman Catholic Church prior to the Reformation. Every Christian was expected to observe basic religious and moral prescriptions and avoid sins. So here are the rules of sins. These are what you should avoid. Here are virtuous things. These are what you're supposed to do. Normally once a year before receiving communion at Easter, yep, you only got the mass once a year, Christians would confess their sins to a priest. Well, you only have to go to confession once a year then as a part of the sacramental penance. And in fact, the entire sacramental system was from from christening until last rites insured to deliver comfort and assurance to the faithful Christian that their sins could be taken care of and that they could make the cut eventually into heaven. Now you might have to do some time in purgatory, but you know, everybody's got to do that and you've got to get cleaned up before you get in the door. And so that was in a sense the program of the medieval Roman Catholic Church and to some degree that pertains today. I don't want to turn this into a conversation between Protestants and Catholics, but this is kind of the starting point that Luther began with. And then of course he had his famous trip through the woods and the thunderstorm and of tender conscience and devout heart, you know, thought that the Lord was going to take him right then and there. And so he cries out, help me St. Anne, I will become a monk. Because in that world to, you know, if to become a monk meant, well, you're really going to make the cut and you're really going to do what's right. And we, I see Protestants do this too. You know, there's regular Christians who have regular jobs, but boy, if you're going to go be a foreign missionary and if you're going to suffer for the Lord or if you're going to work in an inner city place, well, then you're really something and you're really helping the world and therefore you really must be a good Christian. But Luther started out, you know, then he became a monk and he was becoming a lecturer and then he was, you know, had full time to study the Bible and to read and to learn and he discovers that none of this is helping him. He sure is still not sure he's going to make the cut. And he was driving his poor confessor crazy because Martin with a tender conscience would confess all kinds of things and this confessor is like, oh, that's hardly a sin. But you can see that the same basic framework remained the same. And then Luther starts reading some parts of the Bible like this. For it is by grace that you have been saved through faith. And this is not from yourself. It is a gift from God. Not by work so that no one can boast. For we are God's handiwork, created in Christ Jesus to do good works, which God prepared in advance for us to do. And so then Luther starts getting on this track about being saved by grace through faith. Now we're going to talk about the grace part in a week or so, but we want to talk about the faith part today because pretty clearly faith seems to be this avenue by which this grace comes to us. But then what is faith? Well the Heideberg Catechism, which is a reformational document and one of the doctrinal standards of my denomination, has questions and answers about this. And this is one of the questions and answers. How are you right with God? Only by true faith in Jesus Christ. Even though my conscience accuses me, Martin you should have listened to that, even though my conscience accuses me of having grievously sinned against all of God's commandments, you probably have, and never having kept any of them, that's likely true, especially if you're a sensitive person who is more aware of what you do than what is common. Nevertheless, and even though I am still inclined towards all evil, and this includes all the Christians, so yes you non-Christians out there that love pointing out the sins of the Christians, usually a good Christian will hear you and say, yep that's me, I'm guilty. Nevertheless, without my deserving it at all, out of sheer grace, God grants and credits to me the perfect satisfaction, righteousness, and holiness of Christ. As if I had never sinned, nor been a sinner, as if I had been perfectly obedient, as Christ was obedient for me. All I need to do is accept the gift of God with the believing heart. And this of course is only by faith. This is one of the hallmarks of the Protestant Reformation, where following Martin Luther and those who came after them, who consider themselves Protestants, they said, this is the way I'm saved. It's not finally by what I manage to do for myself, but it's by what God has done for me through Christ, and this comes to me through this thing called faith. Now a lot of people when they hear this, they smell a rat, because they say, boy, if picking and choosing your things out of the Bible or out of real life sounds awfully convenient and like post hoc reasoning and justification, this just sounds like a free pass. And people have been watching churches and looking at really, real scoundrels who slide in there and come out and say, oh, it's done. I got all my sins taken care of, and I didn't have to go to penance, and I didn't have to go to mass, and I didn't have to say a certain number of Hail Marys or do some labor of Hercules to somehow win my way. I just went to church, went up to the front and said, Jesus, forgive me, and it's all taken care of. And everybody says, boy, that sounds cheap. It looks like a cheap tribal trick to avoid accountability. And then there's, you've got Stalin and Hitler and Chairman Mao. I spelled Mao wrong, more like the president of Fuller Seminary. Better fix that a second. I put Richard Mao, and some of you might know who he is. I put Richard Mao in line with Stalin and Hitler. Now Mao is a wonderful, humble Christian man. So if you ever want to go out there on YouTube and look up stuff by Richard Mao, go ahead and do it. And he would likely be a good Pauline Protestant and claim along with the Apostle Paul that he is the chief of sinners, but that kind of spoils my illustration. So we'll use Chairman Mao instead of President Richard Mao of Fuller, ex-President Richard Mao of Fuller Seminary as my example. But again, this gets into the idea that, boy, these Protestants are worse than the Catholics because they just let people off scot-free. And you mean to tell me that if Joseph Stalin or Adolf Hitler or Chairman Mao decided right at that last minute to be like the thief on the cross that all of their genocidal horribleness would simply be wiped away? That seems like too much to swallow. And what is the ticket price here? It's faith? Well, what on earth can you be talking about? Not just recently, there was a big, there was a lot of attention paid to a pastor who admitted a sexual incident with a teen. I think he had been a youth pastor of a church and he and this member of his youth group had had this sexual encounter and this was a number of years ago. And so he confesses this to his congregation and they give him a standing ovation. And this plays so many different ways in our cultural conversation and it is just the greatest, it is just the best illustration I could find of people looking at the church and saying, see, you see, this business about saved by faith is a game. And in fact, the Heideberg Catechism addresses this. But doesn't this teaching make people indifferent and wicked? Now the Heideberg Catechism says, no, it is impossible for those grafted into Christ by true faith not to produce fruits of gratitude. Now it's important here to point to the fact that the Heideberg Catechism does not say those who are grafted into Christ no longer sin. The Heideberg Catechism in fact says very clearly they keep sinning. And it doesn't say those who are grafted into Christ no longer commit big sins. No, they keep sinning and probably some of those sins will be big. And we might be a little surprised at what Christians imagine are really big sins and really small sins. And that's its own very complicated conversation. But what it says is that they would produce fruits of gratitude. Now this gets into misery, deliverance, gratitude, which if you listen to a lot of my stuff, you'll hear me talk about quite a bit. But still, is this adequate to take care of this complaint? What is this faith? Well the Heideberg Catechism says that true faith is not only a knowledge and conviction that everything God reveals in His Word is true. Oh boy, some folks are going to have a real hard time with that one. It's also a deep rooted assurance created in me by the Holy Spirit through the Gospel that out of sheer grace earned for us by Christ, not only others, but I too. And right there you get a sense of the Heideberg Catechism, of the posture of the person, that this is a confession of a person who looks around and has, in a sense like Martin Luther, a tender conscience. And realizes that they have made a mess of their life. And what you find already is humility. And right away we're beginning to get a sense of that faith, the kind of faith we're talking about is not some flippantly, I'm going to walk into here and I'm going to just get my sins taken care of, kind of like I'm going to walk into the dentist and have them take care of my tooth decay. No, this reveals a process in a person's heart where they begin to take a real reckoning of themselves and they have discovered that, like G.K. Chesterton is reported to have said, what's wrong with the world? I am. That God somehow has done wonderful things through other people, but I have taken what little He has given me in my life and I have messed it up so thoroughly that I don't think God can do anything with me. And this is why I quipped earlier that someone who comes to me and says, well I think I've committed the unforgivable sin, and actually I learned this answer from my father because he would say, well if that is your concern, you're probably not only just fine, but on a very good road to something really good. And this is what we're talking about with true faith, that not only others, but I too have had my sins forgiven, but I can hardly believe it. That I have been made forever, not just in this moment, something that can slip away, but I have been made forever right with God. Well, I can hardly manage to believe that and have been granted salvation, and that's a big word, but it's meant in this case to be a big thing, which not only includes what happens to me in the afterlife, but includes my life right now. But even this might sound a little bit theoretical and perhaps cerebral, and then a really smart person who knows their Bibles will say, hey now wait a minute, what about James, the book of James? And James says some things about faith and works, and in fact Martin Luther had problems with this book and he called it an epistle of straw, but Luther didn't prevail and it stayed in the Christian canon. And James, who was perhaps, we don't know exactly who wrote the book of James, but one of the candidates is that it was James the Just, the brother of Jesus who began to believe Jesus laid in Jesus' ministry perhaps even after his resurrection. James says, what good is it my brothers and sisters, if someone claims to have faith but has no deeds, can such faith save them? If one of you says to those a brother or a sister is without clothes or daily food, and if one of you says to them, go in peace, keep warm and well fed, but does nothing about their physical needs, what good is it? In the same way, faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is dead. But someone will say, you have faith and I have deeds. Show me your faith without deeds and I will show you my faith by my deeds. You believe that there is one God? Good. Do you believe that? And shudder. You foolish person, do you want evidence that faith without deeds is useless? Was not our father Abraham considered righteous for what he did when he offered his son Isaac on the altar? You see that his faith and his actions were working together, and his faith was made complete by what he has done, and the scripture was fulfilled that says Abraham believed God and it was credited to him as righteousness, and he was called God's friend. You see that a person is considered righteous by what they do and not by faith alone. So James is saying, hey, wait a minute, it can't just be a mental thing. It can't just be that I walk into church and, okay, I'm going to align with this tribe, and now that I'm aligned with this tribe, I'm good to go. In the same way, was not even Rahab the prostitute? Now James is a really high standard for righteousness in his book, and so even this woman who was a prostitute was considered righteous for what she did when she gave lodging to the spies and sent them off in a different direction. As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without deeds is dead. So where does that leave us? Are we back to the beginning? Are we back to this business about doing right deeds and then God somehow fixes us or grades on a curve or we make the cut? But then Hebrews comes along and says, now wait a minute, James is right. It's only by faith and we're saved by faith. It's actually none of the things that we do save us, but faith is, now the NIV here says faith is confidence, and even confidence is too weak a word because the word itself, huppostasis, is, you know, this is a deed of trust. That's in a sense what faith is like. It's like a deed of trust to a house. It's not the house, but it is the legal rightful claim of ownership in what we hope for. Now right there he's playing a game. He's in a sense saying faith is this thing that is confidence. It's the real deal, but physically, experientially, we have not yet quite received it. So it is confidence, it is the sure thing in what we hope for, and it is assurance of what we do not see. And so right away the writer of Hebrews says, now faith is this tension in the middle between what we know is coming. And now here I don't mean to exclude doubters, but he's trying to describe exactly what faith is, and so he's going to illustrate it in a number of ways. It's the deed and trust in what we hope for, and the assurance of what we do not see. Oh, so in a sense it's between two worlds. This is what the ancients were commended for. By faith we understand that the universe was formed at God's command. We can't prove this. So that what is seen is not made out of what was visible. By faith Abel brought God a better offering than Cain did. By faith he was commended as righteous when God spoke well of his offering. And by faith Abel still speaks even though he's dead. Now if you slow down and read this carefully, this is going to start to blow your mind because it's on so many levels because first of all he's talking about a faith that predates the coming of Jesus. And so, well, what does this do with my Christian assumptions? And he's talking about things between different worlds, and then he's saying that by faith Abel still speaks even though he's dead. Well, what on earth does that mean? And what we see in Hebrews 11 is that every example has action attached to it. And so this connects us up with James, but do any of these actions save the world? No, in fact, if you look at Abel's action, well, what did he get him? He still got killed by his brother. So the Protestant Reformation says it's not the stuff that we do that saves us or saves the world. Certainly it might help your neighbor, but some of these actions might be small and they might be private. In fact, again, I like going back to Plato's Republican, and Plato makes the observation that the most righteous person is seen by the community as an evil person because it is more righteous to be truly virtuous but to be considered evil than to be truly virtuous and to be rewarded by the community. So in other words, we're not just talking about external deeds. It is something mysterious and it lives between this world. And we might think that, well, it's all about this experience of being sure, but part of what's interesting about reading even Hebrews 11 is that in some ways the author of Hebrews sees these patriarchs with the rose-colored glasses looking in hindsight. Because when you look at what actually life looks like, it looks like Mr. Incredible's complaint at the beginning of the movie where he says, I go up and I feel like the maid, I go up and I just saved something and it keeps getting unsaved. And that's the way this world works. And it's right there in that place that we begin to understand what faith is. That faith somehow lives between these worlds in this age of decay where everything is messed up and all of our efforts make things unsaved. And yet we firmly believe that somehow, not by all of my little efforts, but by what in fact God has done through Jesus Christ that this world will get finally and permanently and fully saved. Now, what about hell and what about loss? Well, I'm not going to talk about that. I'm not denying that. I'm not a universalist. But this picture that we have of there still is a lake of fire. You can read it in the book of Revelation, which is a representation of something that is probably far worse than a lake of fire. But what we're talking about here is that God does not allow this rebellious world to finally go its own way and to be lost in its rebellion. And through Jesus, the beginning of that mission, it's not even the beginning of that mission, but that mission culminates. So by faith, Abraham, when he was called to go to a place he would later receive as an inheritance, obeyed and went, even though he did not know where he was going. And part of what bugs people sometimes when I preach through Genesis is that when I preach through Genesis, I look at Abraham as he is in Genesis. But now Hebrews looks at Abraham from a different perspective. By faith he made his home in the promised land like a stranger in a foreign country. He lived in tents as did Isaac and Jacob, who were heirs with him of the same promise. Now someone might say, but they didn't receive their promise. And that's the point of Hebrews. And if you read the book of Genesis, Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, boy, they had struggles. The Lord tells Abraham, I'm going to make you a great nation. Abraham says, ha ha, this is exactly what I want. And then God makes them wait 25 years. And God tells him, even when his son is probably a teenager, go and sacrifice him. And Abraham fights the whole way. And this is why I say Abraham is, or Abraham, that faith is not just a state of emotions. It is this middle space that is immaterial, but it moves us into the realm of doing things that are consistent with belief. And the Heidelberg Catechism calls these things acts of gratitude. Abraham receives the promise of God. Abraham's actions don't in themselves secure the promise. It's been given by God. God will achieve it. But somehow faith moves Abraham to follow. And Abraham responds and fits and starts with often failing and betraying the faith. But even those betrayals, God works into the plan for him. He was looking forward to a city with foundations whose architect and builder is God. And by faith, even Sarah, Sarah who laughed, who was past childbearing age, who couldn't believe that God would do this through her, wasn't able to bear children because she considered him faithful who had made the promise. And now you might read back in Genesis and say, did she really? Did she really believe? Or did she really only believe after she began to feel that baby stirring in her womb? And so from this one man, for he as good as dead, from this one man, for he as good as dead came descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and countless as the sands on the seashore. And we think here of Jesus' comments, do not imagine that God needs flesh and blood to produce children from Abraham. We are children of Abraham by the covenant. So faith is experiential and it also always manifests itself in deeds and in gratitude. But it unsettles our comfort. And so faith takes us out of the place that we are comfortable and makes us risk things, sometimes horribly and sometimes things go terribly wrong. But that's what faith does. But it also at the same time gives dramatic, irrational comfort when the world seems to completely unsettle us. Faith does both of those things. It is experiential but it's not mere experience. And it moves us into action but it isn't the action itself. And it's never fully exhausted by anything in this age. The view of Abel after his murder by his brother and what faith gives him is again, it's one of these things that we look at and we can't exhaust it in a moment. It's something that teases our brain and forces us to recognize that we are dealing with something beyond us yet something that touches us. It binds us to Christ. I remember Dale Cooper taught Calvin's Institute when I was a student at Calvin College and I don't remember a lot from that class but I do remember him talking about faith in the Holy Spirit and how faith is what binds us to Christ. He said that over and over and over again in the class. I remember almost nothing from the class but I remember that. He said it over and over again and it's still there in my mind. Faith binds us to Christ and yet is a gift from God by the Holy Spirit. It's not something we generate but it's something we participate in and we can't take credit for it for yet we must expend ourselves through it. So it's this thing and for those of you watching YouTube, one of the things that I hear Jordan Peterson say again and again, I'm trying to figure out what belief is, what belief means. Well yeah that's really hard to figure out that the same word faith belief pistis in Greek it's the same it's the same word in Greek. Well what does it mean and this is the kind of thing it talks about and it's hard to articulate but it is the mark of a Christian. But it might not always be easily seen from the outside because you know could we see Abraham's faith when he lies to Pharaoh? Could we see Abraham's faith when he sleeps with Hagar? And this is the book of Hebrews example of faith and you know when we see it hindsight is always 20-20 but it is through and so then we look at Abraham and we say that was in a sense all of even his sin and his stumbling in the midst of the promise is what creates faith. Faith is what's created by the promise in the midst of our doubts and our stumbling and sin by the work of the Holy Spirit binding us to us binding us to God and it does not let us go. It is something that touches us and so we must participate in it but it's beyond us and it's a gift. And so it might not always be easily seen from the outside because it can look like all sorts of other things which is why Jesus says don't judge don't judge. When they came a crowd when they came to the crowd a man approached Jesus and knelt before him Lord have mercy on my son. He said he has seizures and has suffered greatly. He often falls into the fire or into the water. I brought him to your disciples but they could not heal him. Jesus says you unbelieving and perverse generation. Jesus is ticked. Jesus replied how long must I stay with you. It's like hey I'm only going to be here 33 years and I've only got three years of ministry but boy you all are on my last nerve. How long shall I put up with you bring the boy to me. These disciples just can't get it done. Jesus rebuked the demon and it came out of the boy and he was healed at that moment. When the disciples came to Jesus in private and asked hey why couldn't we do it. And he replied because you have so little faith. You're not yet living in the midst of the promise and the age of decay and all that pulls between it. He replied because you have so little faith. Truly I tell you if you have faith as small as a mustard seed you can say to this mountain move from here and it will move. Nothing will be impossible for you. Now again I remember my father making the comment he says we don't have a record of anyone doing this. That's important to remember. This is is this mere hyperbole. I don't want to dismiss it in that way. But what this is is encouragement because I think the vast majority. Here's the irony. If you're listening to this sermon and say well I have great faith. Go ahead and move a mountain because I got my doubts. If you listen to the sermon and say I hardly think I have any faith but I want to have some and I want to believe in the promise but the world is so big and fierce and all the opposition seems so seems so seems so seems like har harbly anything. Then in a sense we're with doubting Thomas and we say say Jesus I want to believe. Take that mustard seed that I have and and grow it. Grow it please. And the reason the mustard seed is what's used in this illustration is again it's a hyperbole because a mustard seed in the Bible is the tiniest of seeds but it grows into a good size bush. And so what Jesus is saying here is that oh oh oh you little faith disciples. Yeah yeah you've got hardly any of it. So on one hand no no no none of you have as much faith as you need. On the other hand if you have just the tiniest bit just just the beginnings of it you know give it give it to God and say all I got is this little give give me more and he will. Even if you're a murderer even if you're a child abuser even if you're a hypocrite even if you think that the things that you have done in your life have brought you to a hole that that nothing can get you out of and that you've you've committed all those unforgivable things that you can find Bible references for. I want to tell you that that is not true. That there is while you have breath there is no hole so deep that God can't get you out of which is why the apostle Paul who set up the murder of Christians in his religious zealotry said I am the worst of all sinners but look at what God did through him. So is it only by faith? Yeah it's only by faith because that's usually all we got but but the tiniest bit of faith he can water and grow and do amazing things through you. Amen. That's my sermon. I hope you're blessed by it.