https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TIMQogCKJtE

 Hi, this is Paul. Some of you may have noticed something new on my channel, perhaps something unwelcome. Ads. YouTube changed its policy to be able to put ads on some videos on non-monetized channels. Now, I don't want to get too bent out of shape about this. YouTube doesn't charge for storage, doesn't charge for promotion. Pretty much you put your videos up and YouTube hosts it, and in my case they host a lot of hours of video, and so I don't really begrudge them making some money off of this. They provide the platform, etc., etc. And for a long time I never monetized, partly because I hate ads, and I didn't really want people who watch my video to have to endure ads. Also, partly because I sort of watched what Jordan Peterson did and he hadn't monetized his channel, so why monetize mine? And then when YouTube made this announcement, I thought, well, we'll see what happens. And so I clicked all the buttons and it's monetized now. I'm not, don't know how I feel about it yet. Now, I don't like ads and so I personally have YouTube Premium, and it's now called YouTube Premium. It used to be Google Music. I started with Google Music because Google started with sort of this locker service where you could upload your music up into the cloud and you could play it on your device. That was how Google Music started. And then I didn't want my kids pirating music, so I got Google Music Family, which gave five accounts, so I'd give those to my kids. And the free perk of that was that you didn't have ads on YouTube either, and so I haven't seen ads on YouTube for a very long time. Well, a little while ago they changed Google Music into YouTube Music and started getting these messages on my app that I have to switch over to the YouTube Music app, which I've sort of been doing begrudgingly. Part of what goes on with Google is that they keep changing things around. This started way back with Google Notebook. I really liked Google Notebook, and then they shut the thing off. So that's sort of the way it is with Google. When you don't pay for the service, well, you get to be the product. And so now with news that you might be seeing ads on my video anyway, I thought, well, let's monetize and see what happens. So sorry about the ads. I don't know if I'll keep this up. It's sort of hard to know the way that Google's going to keep going. There was talk at the meetup about questions of, well, I'd be curious to see if you monetized your video. If any would be demonetized. I know that's been an issue on Jonathan Peugeot's channel, Benjamin Boyce's channel, both of them, their channels are monetized. So I clicked the monetize button, and so that's why you're seeing ads. And so I'm sorry. Again, one way to avoid seeing ads is get YouTube Premium. And if you have YouTube Premium, then apparently, I don't know how this works, apparently then they will send me at least a little bit of that YouTube Premium money that you pay to them each month. And so I suppose my little YouTube Premium monies have been going to Jonathan Peugeot and Benjamin Boyce and Rebel Wisdom and all of these other channels that I tend to watch. So again, my apologies for the ads. If you find this extremely distasteful, leave a comment. If you don't mind them, leave a comment. Leave a comment. Maybe there'll be an ad on this. I was sort of curious about what kinds of advertisements they would put on my videos because it doesn't really seem to be the kind of things you could monetize terribly easily. But I'm sure Google is going to profile you and profile me and has a sense of the things that you're interested in based on your viewing habits and find advertisers who wish to advertise for you. The way that advertising works apparently is that if you usually wait to five seconds and click the skip ad, then the ad just goes away and I don't know if Google gets any money for that. My sister who has a YouTube channel, very different from my own, she does home decor things. She actually, her channel is smaller than mine, but she doesn't have a job right now and her husband's getting laid off. So I'm really happy that she's monetized because she is getting a little bit of income through her YouTube channel. So we'll see what happens with me. So again, this is sort of an apology. I'm still learning the way these things are monetized or not monetized. So I just posted my rough draft for Sunday. It's funny too because I sometimes I post these rough drafts for sermons and I think this draft is so rough I shouldn't post it at all. But post it I do and partly because when I get your feedback on the sermon on Saturday, that sort of feeds into how I might adjust or not adjust the sermon on Sunday. So once again, thank you for watching my content. I really feel quite indebted to you for spending the time giving feedback, leaving a message, joining the discord server, showing up for the Friday question and answer. Some of you might have seen that we're we're streaming those now. It's you know, my channel is in many ways just a lazy man's YouTube channel because if I stream it, then I don't have to keep track of it and post it and do it another day because people are often question, well, what did you talk about in the Q&A this week? So there it is. So again, thanks for watching and sorry about the ads. Maybe I'll keep doing it. Maybe I'll come to the decision that this is bad and try to turn them off. But again, I don't know that I will be able to turn them off. I suspect that the flow of this for YouTube will be more and more ads whether or not you monetize the channel or not. So