https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vf8waDnD8Tw

 Hi, this is Paul. I have a couple of announcements. I've got some upcoming appearances, a couple of meetups, and then a conference that I'll be giving in Melbourne, Australia. So, February 26 in Bellflower, California, the good people of First CRC Bellflower have agreed to give me a room. I am a synodical deputy in the denomination, which means I go down and I have to sign off on some protocol issues at CLASSIS meetings. Those are regional assemblies. And so when the denomination has me travel for work, I usually try to, especially down to Southern California, I get my friend John Van Donk to organize a meetup. And so I'll put the links of these meetup, of the meetup website in the notes here. So if you want to come and chat with me, come to the meetup. We usually talk about all kinds of things and you can meet some other people who are interested in Jordan Peterson. And we usually have a terrific time. So the first one will be February 26 in Bellflower, California, at the First Bellflower Christian Reformed Church on 17603 Ardmore Ave, Bellflower 90706 and we'll start at 7 p.m. The second one will be John's regular meeting in Chino Hills on March 7. And he has it in the clubhouse of the community that he lives in. And there's lots of space there. It's actually a terrific space for a meetup. And that will be March 7 at 7 p.m. also. And there's another meetup. There's a meetup website for that. Again, I'll put the links for both of those in the notes. In March 20, I will be in Melbourne, Australia at the St. James Old Cathedral on Batman Street. I love that. That's cool. So I will be doing an all-day conference. Now, hopefully, I've been working with the people organizing this event to have a video conversation with Jordan Peterson and James Anderson or John Anderson, who was former Prime Minister of Australia. Jordan Peterson has had a couple of conversations with him and Jordan has agreed to it. And he said he's excited to do it. But we've just got to get the dates set to get all of that down. And so that will hopefully, if that happens, that will be a part of this event too. Jordan won't be there himself, but hopefully we'll have the video there. And I think we've got space for about 300 people for that event. So that's coming up March 30. And once they have the website set up for registration, I will do another announcement with that link. So again, if you're in Southern California, February 26 or March 7, I'd love to see you and hang out and chat about Jordan Peterson or whatever else you want to talk to or the group wants to talk about. So February 26 in Belfour at the first Belfour CRC, March 7 in Chino Hills at Lake Los Serrano East Clubhouse. And then if you're in Australia, and I know it's a big continent, but if you're in anywhere near the Melbourne area, March 30, come to the conference. It should be a very interesting conference. There'll be time for discussion and breakout groups and question and answer panels and all sorts of things like that. So put it on your calendar. Thanks a lot.