https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JucwF9pWAiA

 Hi, this is Paul. About a week ago I did a conversation with Vin Armani, which I thought was a very interesting conversation. He's a very interesting guy. I noticed that right away from the other interviews that I'd seen him do. He's lived a very interesting life. But right away he started out with a dream that he had of me, and we talked about visions. And you know, I mentioned to him, as I mentioned to others, as a pastor, I meet people who have more dreams and visions than other people. I think this is simply a fact of humanity. And what's happened in our culture, and this is in some ways a product of the Protestant Reformation and the Enlightenment, that people basically have been driven into the closet when they have these things. Again, as a pastor, I see this all the time. There are loads of strange things that people experience and they talk about to their pastor, but they won't talk about in public. They'll talk about after a relative dies, a voice or occurrences and things of this nature. And it's just all sort of been driven underground. Now, there are authors out there who will write about these things. And if you have enough status, you can sort of get away with it without people saying that you're crazy. A number of years ago, I read Barbara Ehrenreich's book on living with a wild god. It's a very interesting book about the dreams that she regularly had. She's an atheist. She's an unbeliever. She doesn't believe any of it. Psychedelics always come up in this conversation, and again, this was a completely new thing for me when I started in the Jordan Peterson space. But my thinking about psychedelics isn't that much different from my thinking about visions in general. The fact that you can add chemicals to the brain to see things and have altered states of consciousness is nothing new. Wine, all kinds of things that human beings have eaten and smoked for how long have caused this. Now, then right away, because of our frame, we jump into the question, well, are they seeing anything or is it? And to me, the better answers are not either or, but probably both and. It's remarkably hard to tell the difference. And the more we learn about brain science, the more it seems we understand that this common sort of secular knowing and seeing isn't anywhere near as straightforward as we might imagine. The enlightenment sort of flattened this out with biases, and then as cultures, either implicitly or explicitly, either passively or actively, we sort of just flattened out the culture to say, well, this is the box about things that you are allowed to bring into the public square. And again, that's not a bad thing. As a pastor of a church, you deal with this kind of stuff all the time. Another, T.H. Lerman, I didn't put any of her books on the slide here. She just came out with another book that I really have to read. She had, I forget the title of her first book, but she's an anthropologist who spent some time with the Vineyard community. And it was a very good book. Now, just this morning, I read in the Atlantic, a science-y physicist wrote this piece on miracles. And again, it begins with the story of the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the miracle of the sun that happened in 1917, October 13, 1917 in Portugal. The world is full of this, and we Westerners just sort of try to dispel it away and act like it doesn't matter. But the truth is, you know, they reference to study, 79% of Americans believe in miracles. Not all of them believe that this has any association with God or religion or anything else. It's just the world they live in. And so there are a lot of closeted beliefs. But when you withdraw the social pressure and when people feel more comfortable, they'll tell you what they think, not what they think you want to hear. And then we all sort of communally act surprised, and it seems like a rather silly game. Yesterday, I watched the whole four hours of Jack Snyder's Justice League, and I enjoyed it. The movie was very overt with respect to the gods. And and I see this as as yet another element of receding modernity, how the movie just basically puts Zeus and Thor right there, because Thor's not love nicely in public domain. So Justice League doesn't have to worry about the Marvel Cinematic Universe. And in many ways, this movie was so clearly trying to recapture some of the money that Marvel has made. But there's a song that that keeps popping up in the movie by Nick Cage, Distant Sky, and the lyrics go to go like this. They told us our gods would outlive us. They told us our dreams would outlive us. They told us our gods would outlive us, but they lied. Let us go now, my only companion set out for the distant skies. Soon the children will be rising, will be rising. This is not for our eyes. And it's so abundantly clear that these new superheroes stand in the place of the gods. And that's really not a bad thing. And it's a bad way to think about how these movies operate in our world. I remember there used to be a show on Discovery Channel or the History Channel or one of those one of those cable TV channels. It was about, you know, basically about ancient technology. And they talked about how in ancient temples, they would, you basically have magic. And you find this in the book of Exodus where the magicians are going to replicate the wonders that Moses performs to Pharaoh. And now we have these in movie theaters and our big screen TVs at home. And they're full of music and images. The god stories we tell each other. And not just ones with superheroes, but, you know, of course Lord of the Rings, Harry Potter, Star Wars, Star Trek. It's all religion. And it's all suggesting to us the way the world should be. Or the way we want the world to be. Or who our gods are. Now, of course, the Jonathan, the Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Pujo conversation has really been making the rounds. A lot of people recommended me Dr. Gavin Ashenden's commentary on the videos. And I did a little bit more research. He's quite a remarkable man. There's a Deling pod interview with him, which was quite interesting. He was part, I guess, this royal court of clergy for the queen. And he just couldn't take it anymore when, you know, at some Anglican church they decided to have a Muslim man give a speech behind the pulpit. And he just, you know, he just, I think he basically looked at the Anglican church and said, you just don't take it seriously. And so then went over to Roman Catholicism. Interesting guy. I listened to his whole commentary and my takeaway was, you know, I agree with pretty much everything that Gavin Ashenden said in the commentary, but he used all the same words that we keep using. And that evangelicals and Roman Catholics keep bringing into the forum. And a big part of, I think, what happened with Peterson was that he, you know, he was now with the recession of modernity, we need to find new ways of talking, of talking about these things. And this is what I find typical in Jordan Peterson and Tom Holland, that they're finding basically the end of modernity and all of these cloistered sort of insular language over here used in the church, that the church just keeps broadcasting to the world. Language is ineffective and the church needs to continue to figure out how to converse with this dynamically changing environment. As you know, I've been listening to the Rest is History podcast and really enjoying it. It's just a, it's just a joy to listen to. Of course, I've been a lover of history for much of my life. And these two have, these two, Dominic Sandbrook and Tom Holland have such a way of talking with each other. And I so often find that there are, there are, I find more things in the Rest of History than I found Jordan Peterson putting out lately. Jordan, Jordan tends to keep going back to the culture war stuff, which you know, that's, that's there. But to me, it's, it's less interesting than the the questions of faith and belief. And so Dominic Sandbrook and Tom Holland make a very interesting pair as they talk through these things, because Dominic usually sort of takes on the role of the modern skeptic and, and, and Tom sort of takes on the role of a modern seeker. And so I thought listening to this podcast might, might be helpful for some of you. I like the introduction because it just sort of sets off the, the way these two relate and what they're doing here. And welcome to the Rest is History. When I agreed to do this podcast with Tom Holland, the one thing I dreaded was that on a Saturday morning I'd be dragged out of bed to do a podcast about some obscure medieval saint. And lo and behold, that's precisely what we're doing in this special Rest is History podcast about the life of St Cuthbert. Now Tom, please explain to me. He's not an obscure saint. He's the patron saint of Northumbria. And I think that most people, myself included, think that he should properly be the patron saint of England. Now, I had never heard of St Cuthbert. And on my Twitter feed, my, my colleague and friend, Eric Dirksen, who's right across the Sacramento River in Davis, a daughter church of ours, on Twitter said, Happy St. Cuthbert Day on the 20th. I don't even know who this, this guy is. This is, and so many of the English references just go over my head in this podcast, which, okay, that's just because I'm an American and I don't know everything that they're talking about. But there's this, there's this renewal of interest in saints. And maybe it's just in my little world because of, you know, listening to Jonathan Pageot and spending more time with Roman Catholics. But this is all, you know, this has all been sort of pushed away by Protestantism for a very long time now. So, yeah, let's keep going. It's big news that today is his saint's day. He died. So this is St Cuthbert's day. This is St Cuthbert's day. He died 1,334 years ago. So that's at AD 687 on the 20th of March. A landmark anniversary. Landmark anniversary. And I think it's a big day. I'm sure we don't know his birthday precisely, but it's, but we do know the day of his death. And so it's interesting that the, that the day of celebration is, is the day of his death. And this entire podcast just fascinated me. Day. It's, it's one of the favorite, my favorite days of the year. And it started off as a joke that Jonathan Wilson, who we had on our most recent podcast, Talking About Football, and those who've listened to it will perhaps recognize from his accent that he's a man of the Northeast. And Cuthbert was so interesting. To me, the UK is just a little place and y'all know each other's little accents. Likewise, a man of the Northeast. And so we, we got into the habit of meeting with Jonathan and a few friends to, to celebrate St Cuthbert, to toast his memory. And it's become a kind of annual occurrence. And actually one of the reasons that I wanted to do it this year was that last year, our celebration of St Cuthbert's day was the first thing that got kiboshed by the lockdown, by the Covid lockdown. Yes. And it kind of, it actually really, it really kind of, that was the first time that I felt, oh, God, this is going to be weird. Both because I missed it, but also because Cuthbert was a saint who lived in a time of terrible plague. The accounts of his life, endlessly, it's kind of taken for granted. He'll turn up and a plague is raging. People will die of it. And he brought incredible healing powers, kind of supernatural healing powers, but he also brought kind of comfort and concern. So, all right, let's get, let's get to the nitty gritty. What century are we in and what's the story, basically? We're in the seventh century and we're in North Thames. So this is before the Kingdom of England. This is when what will become England is divided up among rival Anglo-Saxon kingdoms. Now you're going to have to, those of you who know this stuff are going to have to bear with me because I don't know any of these things. So this is the area that we're looking at. And this island, Lindisfarne, which I'm sure I'm completely butchering, is just off the East Coast. You're in the Kingdom of Northumbria. Yeah. And it's a time when Christianity has come both from Ireland and from Rome. So it's pre-Viking. It's pre-Viking. So it's a period when the old gods are kind of retreating. And in fact, in Bede's account of Cuthbert. And this is interesting. I like the way Holland put this, that the old gods are kind of retreating. And it, you know, again, it makes me think about the period that we're in now in terms of the gods. Because you can't watch these superhero movies and not think about the way that these, the different principalities and powers that are at play. You know, Superman, at one point the Flash asked Superman, what is your superpower? He says, I'm rich. And so Superman, who in earlier attestations, you know, didn't like guns, now is sort of the the manager of guns in these movies as they, you know, shoot the bad guys and so on and so forth. But there's this kind of amazing detail where some monks are sailing out across the across the mouth of the tine and the wind blows up and starts blowing them out to sea. And a bunch of lads on the shore all start laughing. As they would. Yeah, it's kind of Dark Ages viz, I guess. Yeah. And Cuthbert says to them, you know, why are you doing this? These poor guys are going to be swept to their deaths. And they say, well, we don't care because these these monks are banishing our gods and we don't know what we're meant to do anymore. And I thought that was interesting how in many ways, you know, the gods do tell us what to do and they don't just tell us what to do. They show us what to do. They show us what's important. And I thought a lot about Jonathan Peugeot and Jordan Peterson's conversation of attention. And and so when you look at, you know, these gods of of modern cinema, they draw our attention and say, this is this is where you look. This is what's important. And and so and so often subliminally, these are these are the values. And so then when you look at St. Cuthbert's life, as he's about to talk about, you know, you have this you have this reorientation of values that the saints do to the culture. That which is that which is valued as opposed to, let's say, paganism. I thought a lot during the Justice League movie, in fact, about the Medi-Divine Realm, about about Ezekiel Kaufman's book. I'm going to get down here in the picture about Kaufman's book, because when you look at the world of the Justice League, I mean, Superman is sort of, you know, Jesus and spandex in some ways. But not really. See, and this is this is where it breaks down, because when you look at the kind of hero that Jesus is, it's very different from Superman. Although, I mean, part of the problem with Superman as a character is he's he's too good. He's too perfect. That's why you sort of kill him off. And a lot of the movie is trying to get Superman back to life. So Superman can beat the bad guy. But the the the imagination of the Medi-Divine Realm, where there are all these rules and, you know, the Marvel the Marvel Cinematic Universe had the Infinity Stones. And in this movie, they have the mother boxes. Part part of this movie is just there elements of this movie that are just silly. But in terms of in terms of thinking about these issues in terms of the Medi-Divine Realm, it's very much at play. And so as I was watching the movie, I was thinking. This is the the the the religious move to our world is very much sort of a move back to paganism. And so then when you look at St. Cuthbert, you can really see again the the Christian power of you see Christianity pushing back these other gods. He kneels down and he prays and miraculously the wind changes and the monks sweat back in. But there's a glimpse there of what Cuthbert actually represents, which is a kind of a revolution, a process of revolution, the introduction of Christianity, both from Ireland and from Rome. So it's kind of mixed. But it's felt as radical. But what you can what you see in the life of Cuthbert is why Christianity works, why it's down. So who is he? Where is he born? He well, ironically, for a man who comes to be associated with with the emergent Kingdom of England, he's actually born in what is now Scotland. He's a Scot. He's not. He's a Northumbrian, because, of course, the kingdom of Northumbria reached all the way up to the Firth of Forth. OK, so he's perhaps born in the vicinity of Melrose, perhaps Dunbar, somewhere around like somewhere that he seems to have been of aristocratic background. He's he's he's described as a young boy who enjoyed his sport. So, of course, sportsmen like you will will empathize with that. Well, I guess kind of thinking, you know, that the grand sporting tradition of the Northeast, because we've had both we've had Dan Jackson. I did look up Cuthbert on YouTube and there were a couple of little videos about him, but really not much. And so I read more about him. And, of course, in Beads Ecclesiastical History. Talking about that, Jackie Milburn, Sue Cuthbert, Robbie Charlton. And Cuthbert is described as playing a ball game. So maybe probably football, maybe cricket, who knows? But he was he was he was clearly a kind of gazza resque. Yeah, I have no idea what a lot of these things are. Young man. That's not a comparison. But then but then he has a kind of a conversion and and what he sees a vision of angels descending and a great beam of light and then a figure rising up to the sky. And this figure he subsequently learns is St. Aidan, an Irish monk who has founded a monastery on an island called Lindisfarne off the North Funding Coast. Lindisfarne, that'll be very well known. And and Cuthbert decides that he is going to devote his life to Christ and he turns. I'm such a digger whenever I listen to these things. I just always want to know to know more about these places. And, you know, I can't even I can't even say them properly. But when you when you read Bead and you look at you look at these pictures and maybe after covid one way or another, I got to find a way to get over the Atlantic and and see some of these places. It doesn't it doesn't look like, you know, much as much as left of these places. But but there they are. And Zappert's priory of Melrose and we're told again by Bead that he arrives with a spear and on a horse. So that suggests that actually he's he's quite well born. So he's why has he got a spear? Is he a soldier or do people carry spears? This is a violent age. This is a violent age. It's an age of plague and it's an age of war. And Cuthbert, by abandoning his his horse, by abandoning his spear, is essentially becoming a slave of Christ. And he casts off all the privileges of his class. He lives an incredibly ascetic life. This is a man who in the middle of the night goes down into the North Sea, stands up to his neck, praying, comes back up as the chill wind is whipping off the North Sea in the early dawn. Isn't that what people in the North do on like New Year's Day and stuff? They go for dips to show their hardiness. But they go for dips, but they don't stand for hours at an end up to their neck. But there's this wonderful detail, however, that as Cuthbert is standing on the shore, sea otters come and they warm his feet and then they slip back into the sea. And this is kind of one of the wonderful details about Cuthbert. That's just a bit weird. Well, but there's a lot more that Cuthbert is a man who he sees angels. He can heal the sick. He can banish fire. He can make the wind turn and he communes with the natural world. So sea otters come and warm his feet. Eagles bring him fish when he's hungry. He can understand things from the pattern of the flying of the birds. And that is that if you want a model for, say, Gandalf or Merlin, a man who has an incredible power that is actually greater than that that he would have had if he'd remained a warrior. OK, but let me interrupt you, Tom. So where are we getting? Where are you getting all this stuff from? I mean, how do we? Is this sort of Saints lives written down by monks or is it a chronicle or what exactly is it? You know, and was it? And again, this is where it gets interesting because, of course, they're both they're both historians and you have the modern study of history. And so now Dominic sort of plays the skeptic and Tom Holland sort of plays the seeker. And OK, well, what is this? You know, we all just know that there's just a lot of there's just a lot of fables and fairy tales around monk stories. And, you know, again, the Protestant Reformation just went after this stuff to to sort of purify it, try and try to get it out of the church. It's another time or is this some fable told long afterwards? So this is another reason why I thought it would be great to do it on this podcast, because in a sense, this is where the tradition that that this podcast and other history podcasts and people who write about history and. Yeah, I like the fact this podcast has a tradition now. It does, because because essentially it begins with this because the one of the guys who writes about it is Bede and Bede writes the first great history of what you might call the English people. And Bede writes this life of Cuthbert, but he's and he specifies in his opening to it that he has researched it, that he's spoken to people who knew Cuthbert and that these are living traditions that he's writing down. It's interesting to me. I'll just get to grab that book that mirrors what Richard Bauckham does in this book, Jesus and the Eyewitnesses. Again, there's there's just such a bias and a prejudice that well these religious people, they're just making up stories, but often these religious peoples are also tremendously moral people who are have a great investment of the truth. And so when they they know that these stories are difficult to believe, and so they do pay attention to eyewitnesses and they try to track people down because they don't want to be they don't want to be telling tales. And there's another there's a there's another life as well, which is earlier, which is also clearly written by someone who knew Cuthbert quite well. And I think what's what's haunting about it is. So of course I've got to dig that up to Wikipedia. Vita sancti Cuthberti, the life of St. Cuthbert is a prose hagiography. I'm just reading from Wikipedia, so make your own judgments. From early medieval Northumbria, it's probably the earliest extant saints life from Anglo-Saxon England and his account of the life and miracles of Cuthbert who died 687. And so you can find you can find this you can find this on Wikipedia and probably also again the Internet. Is the sense of of kind of anecdotes and stories that have that they're clearly true. There's clearly some kind that there are memories that are told of Cuthbert that have been kind of retold and retold. So there's a story. So Cuthbert is closely associated with royal women who have become abbesses. So this is a period in which women have incredible sacral power as well. Generally, princesses are of the royal Northumbrian household. And there's one who has the brilliant name Alphalad. And she is the abbess of Whitby and she comes to meet with Cuthbert and Cuthbert sits down at table with her, although he barely eats anything. He's incredibly ascetic. And as they're sitting at table, we're told he suddenly has a kind of he goes has a strange fit. He sits there and everyone's kind of staring at him, snapping their fingers in front of his eyes. Nothing happens. And then he wakens up from his trance and after this, what's going on? And he says, someone I was watching someone in your abbey going up to heaven. I saw angels come and collect his soul and take it up to heaven. And Alphalad says, well, you know who? And Cuthbert says, you will tell me tomorrow when I am celebrating mass. And so Alphalad sends off a messenger, gets told that it's a shepherd who's died. And as Cuthbert is celebrating mass, he comes to the point where you remember those who've died. Alphalad bursts in, says, it's this shepherd and Cuthbert commemorates him. So what's striking about that is both the intimacy that Cuthbert has with a very, very high born Northumbrian royal, but also the fact that they are talking about a shepherd. And it's hard to overemphasize the degree to which people of high status generally are not bothered with the death of shepherds. And so you can see exactly that both the power of Cuthbert, but also why Christianity puts down roots so quickly. It has something for the elites, for those who are royal. But it also has something for those who are poor. And we're told again and again that although Cuthbert commands the respect of those who are very powerful, he also always has in his mind those who are poor, those who are suffering. And he is always concerned to make sure that he can heal them, give them food, give them shelter, whatever. So he's a very loved man, I think. Now, it's interesting, you know, watching the superhero movies and these modern gods. I was, I had to watch a little bit of a previous superhero movie, previous one of the Justice League to sort of orient myself in this. And there's this scene where, where Diana, who of course is, who is a goddess, Diana rescues these school children from bad guys who are about to blow them up for some political end. And you see this, but, you know, I, yesterday in my sermon, I was preaching about Jesus coming into Jericho. And it's remarkable where it's very believable how the big wigs of Jericho all come out to meet Jesus. And there's a blind guy. And you might think about it analogous to a homeless guy. And it's like, get this trash off the street. And Jesus says, now bring him to me, because the blind guy won't shut up. Jesus of Nazareth, son of David, have mercy on me. And he won't shut up. And so Jesus says, bring, you who are going to sweep him away, bring him over here. And so you can see the effect of Christianity on this. It's also important to take a look at the asceticism, because the asceticism is also something that sort of gets a hard time in the Protestant Reformation. And I'm going to have to spend a lot more time thinking about this and talking about this, because how can we understand asceticism in today's parlance? And you'll hear this, you know, when Jonathan Pujol will talk about, people don't really recognize just how ancient faith a guy, Jonathan Pujol, is. But when he talks about asceticism and monasteries, it's difficult post-Protestantism to translate that, because it almost feels Gnostic. But the ascetic root isn't exactly Gnostic. They imagine themselves athletes. Now, if someone says, well, I'm eating a special diet and I'm exercising rigorously and all this, in fact, the Apostle Paul makes this point in the New Testament. I'm doing all of this in order to prepare my body for the Olympics. Well, we would say, oh, of course, I understand it because there's a telos, there's a goal, and all of this stuff is pursuing that goal. Post-Protestantism, asceticism doesn't seem to have much of a goal. In fact, the Reformed in the transition of Europe from medievalism to the Reformation, the Protestants were sausage eaters. They would go ahead and they wouldn't fast on Fridays. And you see all of these transitions happening. And so what happens with asceticism, it's not really understood how this functions in the worldview. And I think as we, you know, perhaps it's time for Protestantism to rethink some of these things. I'm not saying necessarily overturn some of the earlier decisions, but the Protestant reformers who attacked this certain aspect of Catholicism attacked it for a reason. And so if we're actually going to come to some sort of, I hate to use Hegelian terms here, but some sort of synthesis with respect to this, I think we're going to have to both, we're going to have to probably be able to reappropriate the worldview in which St. Cuthbert's dramatic asceticism, and Bede talks about this too, his dramatic asceticism makes sense to that world. I think we continue to sort of understand an implicit putting away the desires of the flesh, and Protestants get that too. But I think the connection to a certain form of, this gets really tricky, a certain form of power is important. And you see this in the superhero movies too, where poor Diana, she's lived for 5,000 years, her men keep dying on her. There are other movies that deal with these same kinds of tropes. Batman always has to be alone. It's very interesting in the Justice League, all of the daddy issues that are just strewn throughout this movie. It's wildly fascinating how everyone has daddy issues. But this is something I think we're going to have to continue to think about, especially in terms of the mysticism, because if people will sacrifice, it's almost like those who want to take psychedelics do so to shortchange the work, and that way psychedelics are sort of like steroids. You want the visions of a monastic and an ascetic, but you don't need to do that now, you just pop this, take this substance, and then you'll have all the visions you want. But is that actually the way to go? Which is this though, just basically, I mean, there were established formulas for saints' lives, weren't there? So how much is this just sort of recapping the traditional formulae for saints' lives? You know, history in its early years, in its early centuries, followed set rules. People behaved in certain ways, emperors, saints, bishops, kings. Is Cuthbert different or is this just basically following the traditional tram lines? Well, Cuthbert is bred of an age where holy men are vested with an incredible sense of power. So this is also, for instance, on the other end of the four- And again, the asceticism and the power go together. Why is that? How does that fit into the worldview? You know, the ascetic in some ways tries to remove the distractions of the world so that they can bring their life into the pattern- let's use that language- into the pattern of the Spirit of God, that they will be increasingly conformed into the Spirit of God. All the Roman Empire, this is the age of Muhammad. Very different tradition, but you can see bread of the kind of same matrix, perhaps. And so you're right that there are absolutely kind of traditions, specifically within the Christian one, that Cuthbert embodies. But I think that what makes Cuthbert's reputation different is firstly what I was saying, that these lives are clearly written out of a sense of awe and love for him, and they bear the definite imprint of personal experiences, to a degree that I think is unusual in saints' lives. And the other thing is that these lives are written because Cuthbert comes to have, after his life, in death, an incredible potency. Well, let's do that after the break, maybe. Do you reckon? We've done Cuthbert alive, we'll do after the break, we'll do his death and his afterlife, which is- so St Cuthbert dies, and this is a big- this is really where the story gets juicy, right? With St Cuthbert's death. Yes. So a dead saint is a very valuable commodity. So the moment Cuthbert dies, beacons are lit, he's on a kind of a Farn Island out in the wilds of the North Sea, and his body is brought over to Lindisfarne, wrapped up, buried. And 11 years later, the monks look at the body, and it's fully preserved. Miraculous. That is miraculous. So of course I had to look this stuff up in Bede, so. This is Bede's book, I believe it's book four, chapter 30. In order to show how much glory the man of God Cuthbert lived after death, his holy life having been before his death, signalized by frequent miracles, when he had been buried 11 years, divine providence put it in the minds of the brethren to take up his bones, expecting, as usual, dead bodies to find all the signs of the body. And the rest dried up and intending to put the same into a new coffin and to lay them in the same place, but above the pavement for the honor do him. They acquainted Bishop Edbert with their design, and he consented to it, and ordered that this should be done on the anniversary of his burial. So they did and opened the grave, found all the body whole as if it were alive, and the joints pliable, more like the bones of the body. And the joints pliable, more like when asleep than a dead person. Now this is 11 years, and these people dealt with bodies and remains far more than we do. It wasn't a specialized thing, and so they all pretty much expected, you know, knew what to expect opening an 11-year-old tomb that he would be all dried out and consumed. All the vestments the body had on were only found, were not only found, but wonderful for their freshness and gloss. That 11-year-old corpse, he's not in the desert of Egypt here. The brothers seeing this with much amazement hastened to tell the bishop what they had found. He being then alone in the place remote from the church and encompassed by the sea. There he also used to spend time of Lent and was wont to continue with great devotion 40 days before the birth of our Lord, abstinence, prayer, and tears. There also his venerable predecessor Cuthbert had been some time served God in private before he went to the Isle of Farn. They brought him also part of the vestments that had covered his holy body, which presents he thankfully accepted and attentively listened to the miracles. He with wonderful affections kissed these garments as if they had been still upon his father's body and said, let the body be put into new garments in lieu of these you have brought. And so lay into the coffin you have provided, for I am certain that the place will not long remain empty having been sanctified with so many miracles of heavenly grace. And now happy is he to whom the Lord, the author of life, giver of all bliss, shall grant the privilege of lying the same. The story just keeps getting better. And the reason they do that is that everything associated with Cuthbert has been doing amazing miracles. So his shoes cures people, his comb cures people. And a boldness, presumably. I'm sure. Yeah. The body is particularly powerful. Well, and there's another video that you can find, the treasures of St. Cuthbert, that you can find on YouTube. And, you know, they show the they show his cross, they show the comb, they show all of these things. And they're all preserved at I think it's at I think it's at Durham. And over the course of the century that follows, it becomes a great object of pilgrimage because not just across England, but across the whole of northern Christian northern Europe, people are coming to Lindisfarne to pray at St. Cuthbert's because it's you know, it's the kind of equivalent of a Pfizer vaccine. It's it's that that important. And that's a hell of a journey, Tom. I mean, if you're coming from something, I mean, that's you know, this is like a massive expedition. And do you have any sense of numbers? I mean, are we talking dozens? Well, the measurement the measurement the measurement of how many people are coming is that Lindisfarne becomes spectacularly rich because every time they come, they bring an offering. And so you have this island off the North Sea exposed, distant, absolutely stuffed full of gold and treasure. And of course, in 793, this attracts the attention of various gentlemen from across the North Sea, Vikings and the Viking Age begins with the sack of Lindisfarne. And they keep coming back and coming back and coming back. They're coming back for Cuthbert's loot, basically, for the loot that's been accumulated. Yeah. Yeah. And the tourist trade. And it all gets too much in 875. So that's almost a century after the monks are, you know, fed up with this. And so they they they upload Cuthbert in his coffin and they transport it. And essentially what they seem to be doing with that is that they they take it around all the various lands that the monastery of Lindisfarne has come to be given over the course of the century. And they're taking the body as a kind of stamp. So they're they're saying, you know, here it is. And this body continues to to do incredible miracles. And what's interesting is that it seems to impress the Vikings as much as the native Northumbrians. And so in 883, there's a king. He's actually formerly a slave, a Viking slave, who becomes a king called Guthred. Oh, yeah. I've read about him in Bernard Cornwell. That's right. So Bernard Cornwell writes about it in a sceptical way. But it's evident that to everyone, Cuthbert's body is just the most remarkable, supernatural, terrifying thing that there is. And the body gets taken to York when Guthred is crowned. And Guthred gives all the land between the Tyne and the Teas to the body, to St. Cuthbert. To the body. So basically, for most of the ninth century and into the tenth century, the guy who is ruling the lands between the Tyne and the Teas is a dead body. It's the late St. Cuthbert. And any Viking who gives St. Cuthbert shit comes to a horrible end. So there is one Viking who tries to break into the shrine that's been set up at Chester-le-Street, old Roman fort. And the floor opens and the Viking gets swallowed up and goes to hell. And so after that, people are not going to give Cuthbert any grief. And so what that means is that a dead body is perhaps the most significant lord in early tenth century England. Tom, I can think of two really good parallels for that from either ends of the historical spectrum. So one, which some listeners may have already thought of, is the body of Alexander the Great. So Alexander the Great dies after all his conquests. I didn't know any of this either. There's a big tussle, isn't there, for his body. It's basically stolen by his mate Ptolemy, who takes it to Egypt. And the body of Alexander, which is sort of, you know, it's buried with all sort of honours and stuff in Egypt, in Alexandria, is the sort of badge of legitimacy, isn't it? And bodies were a kind of badge of power and legitimacy. Except I don't think that Alexander's body does miracles. No, that's right. And really, the thing with Cuthbert is that it... But he was a god. Yes, yes. Cuthbert wasn't even a god. Cuthbert was just a saint. Alexander was a god. And right there, you see Alexander was a god. Well, he's in the pagan world. He's like Batman or Superman or Achilles. He's a son of the gods. But Cuthbert is a saint. What does a saint do? The saint conforms himself to the spirit of God and God works through the saint. And the saint is a vessel through which God operates. But Cuthbert is capable of miracles and therefore that's the basis of his power. Okay. Although, interestingly, with Alexander, I mean, there's this kind of wonderful theory that his body vanishes at around the same time that a Venetian flotilla arrives in Alexandria and steals the body of St. Mark. So I always loved the idea that actually the body of St. Mark in Venice is the body of Alexander, which would be wonderful. So here's my other example. Now, the thing about St. Cuthbert you were saying was that his body was miraculously preserved intact after his death. And of course, there is a body in the world which some listeners will have seen, which is miraculously preserved of another revolutionary who is the sort of badge of legitimacy of a state. And that's Lenin. Have you been to Lenin's? Have you seen Lenin? I have. Yes, I've threaded past it. It's very strange, isn't it? To kind of queue up and go into that mausoleum, which is designed like a pyramid. You know, it's got this sort of pyramidal design. He looks like Robin Cook. Now I got to look up who Robin Cook is. I had no idea what the story of the cakes is. Everyone knows the story of King Alfred burning the cakes. I don't know the story of King Alfred burning cakes. King Alfred had been defeated in the battle yet again by the Vikings and was hiding in the wilderness and Somerset levels, the only part of Wessex not conquered by the Vikings. He was hiding in a shepherd's hut. The shepherd was out mining his flocks and his wife was baking cakes, more likely flatbreads. And she had to pop outside for another bucket of water from the stream. She had no idea who the illustrious guest was. She asked Alfred to watch the cakes, but he was so preoccupied with planning how to win back his kingdom and defeat the Vikings that he completely forgot about the cakes, which burnt. The shepherd's wife was not pleased to come back to the smell of the burning and spoiled supper. So she set about beating King Alfred with her broomstick, calling him a lazy good for nothing idiot. Rather than assert his royal status, Alfred meekly accepted the beating and apologized. It is a great story. About Alfred on Athelne that he's sitting there alone, feeling hungry, pondering how to defeat the Vikings. And he sent all his men out to go fishing because they're really running short of supplies. And his men are out there in the shallows, not getting any fish at all. And a poor man turns up, pulled over his head, asks Alfred for some food. Alfred gives him the last bit of food that he has, and the man thanks him and then wanders, goes off. And then suddenly all the men who are out fishing start hauling in great quantities of fish. And from that point on, they have no lack of food. One of the remarkable things, I was reading a bunch of these miracle stories, one of the remarkable things is how they sort of duplicate. You know, you can see Jesus, you know, we haven't caught anything all night. Throw it on the other side. Oh, but okay, Lord, because you say so. And then, of course, it's a great haul of fish. It's interesting how so many of these miracles, praying to still a storm, I was reading a miracle story about that. It's interesting how many of these miracles sort of echo the miracles of the Gospels. That man was Cuthbert. That man, it turns out, was Cuthbert. He appears to Alfred that evening in a dream and says that I will be backing you. I favor you. I'm going to back your house. And so and so it's from that point on Cuthbert becomes a patron saint of the House of Wessex as well as of the Northumbrians. And so for Athelstan, who's just a next Northumbria into his realms, you can see it's incredibly useful. So to dig into that for a second, that's a story presumably created by Wessex propagandists because they want to, you know, they want to reach out to the kind of Northumbrian public and to say, you know, we're not conquering you. We are, you know, we're your friends. We really respect your saint. Your saint has actually chosen us. That's what's going on there, surely. I think that's a hard-nosed 21st century perspective that ignores the degree to which this was real for people. So, of course, Athelstan knows full well that he needs to get the Northumbrians onside. And of course, he knows that by showing his respect to Cuthbert, he's going to get Northumbrian support. But Athelstan is a highly devout man, and he would not be doing this if he thought it was just a scam. He really believes this. I remember when I was when I was a student, I was studying the Byzantine Empire, having an argument with my tutor because I said, but we know that icons don't have powers. And he said, well, no, you can't approach this subject, you know, thinking that thinking in that way. And my question to you is, you know, we think that all this is balderdash, basically. Did people at the time absolutely completely believe that, you know, eagles have been providing Cuthbert with fish? Yes. And this is this is again where we believe in groups. We believe in groups. We think this is balderdash. Do we? Well, some do. Some don't. Who's we? Why? Why is it so important that we believe in groups? That's so vital for us as human beings. But it's been today. Yes, there was no hint of skepticism. They completely signed up to this. But because otherwise he wouldn't have the power, you know, to have a body successfully govern it. You have to people have to believe that it's powerful. And this is where again you get into you get into the worldview, because in some ways, the Justice League is a very powerful organization. The Justice League. You don't. You too have to believe me. It's a fictional story. We all understand it's a fictional story. But the Justice League is about, well, OK, you need the big baddies Steppenwolf or Darkseid or Superman or Wonder Woman. You need them to come in. But the universe is just kind of there. And the. These these saints sort of these these saint stories, you know, alter the way we we approach the universe and what we think about it again. Just in a remarkable section. Well, we think this is all Boulder Dash. And it's like, wait a minute. Who's who's we? Yeah, and I think it's it's it's what's interesting is the longer the more the emphasis comes to be on his power rather than on his charity. So this man who had spent a lot of time with with women comes to be cast as a misogynist. And when in due course, his body gets enshrined in a great shrine in Durham Cathedral, which is his final resting place, women aren't allowed to enter it. And he becomes a great patron of ultimately of English resistance to the Scots, even though Cuthbert was born within what becomes Scotland. He is seen as the patron of the English in their wars against Scottish invaders. And I think that there is one of the reasons why I do find Cuthbert a haunting figure. Is that I do I do think there is actually you know, you say it's all Boulder Dash, but there is something kind of haunting about perhaps his body because you need I said that the Cuthbert embodies a kind of living tradition that I think is unique because he almost uniquely survives the reformation because that's the great kind of break. When all the other saints are basically broken up and they get literally broken up. Yeah, bunged on rubbish tips, burnt, whatever. Thomas Cromwell's agents arrive in Durham, and they dis they get rid of the shrine, the great shrine, and they open up Cuthbert's tomb. And there they find that the body is it's there it is. It's not a skeleton. Please tell me it's not still preserved. You're not going to make that claim. It's been mummified. So, okay. And I guess it's been, you know, this is one of the most interesting moments of the podcast. If you want to pursue the skeptical line, you can say that's because he was such an asset. No, no, it's because he was he was probably so ascetic that he naturally mummified that maybe there was no kind of liquids in it or whatever. I don't know. That seems very unlikely. But but what we know is that Cromwell's agents were unsettled by this. And so they removed the body and they kind of lay it out in a kind of side chapel for for two years. And then they bury it. So they put it in a fresh tomb and they bury it. And it's it's still there. So the body of Cuthbert is still in Durham Cathedral. His relics are still there. And it's. It's. The link to that very ancient those ancient beginnings of Christianity that simply doesn't exist anywhere else. And what's your case, Tom, for ditching St. George? Because that's what you want to do, right? You want to ditch St. George and you want Cuthbert. I mean, I think you've got an uphill task persuading, you know, England's football fans that they should be cheering for St. Cuthbert. But what's your case? How are you going to sell this to the to the great George plate? Did St. George play football? I think Cuthbert did. I think I think they'd rally rally behind him. You reckon the trouble Cuthbert is the name as well. The name is slightly foppish. I think he's. I don't even know what that means. He's the but he's the opposite of foppish. He's he's the opposite of foppish. He's he's the first great saint. He's the first great English saint. I mean, he's the greatest English saint, I think. And I guess St. George isn't English. And Cuthbert is is the Saint of the North, but he's also the same that gets adopted by the kings of Wessex. So he's he's a properly English saint. His body has remains there in situ in in Northumbria. And he has a capacity to work miracles that survived even into the 20th century. So I got it said that as the Luftwaffe were approaching Newcastle getting ready to bomb it, that prayers were raised across the northeast asking for Cuthbert's intercession and great fog descended on the time. And the Luftwaffe turned around fog on the time and the Luftwaffe turned around and Newcastle was saved. So I think this is this is this is a saint who who means business. Tom, my skepticism is at an end. I am fully persuaded. I shall go out forthwith on this and Cuthbert's day and attempt to to to rouse the great British public or the great English public anyway in in adopting Cuthbert as our patron saint. So that I thought that was a terrific episode. Nassim Tlaib has his Lindy effect and Nassim Tlaib's Lindy effect is basically that old things endure. And it will be very interesting to see what happens as modernity recedes, as people go about looking for new gods and old gods emerge. And so again, I find I found this that entire I didn't know any of these stories about St. Cuthbert and I find it fascinating the way there's new interest in saints. And and I think, you know, as a Protestant to some of you out there, you know, cheering for my my movement into Catholicism or orthodoxy. But I hate to disappoint you. I'm not I'm not intending any move. But I think Protestants have to do more thinking about these stories and the way that they work on communities and people. I think Protestants have to understand why the Reformation went after some of this stuff. I think I think Protestants have a degree of lament about what was lost in the iconoclasm simply in terms of the history and art. But but also, I think to find me because again, you were not Gnostics. And and the physical layer of the world is foundational and important, but a better understanding of the way that these layers interact. I was I was quite moved by this additional story and indeed on on Cuthbert. There was in that same monastery a brother whose name was Beth Wagon, who had for a considerable time walked upon, while waited upon the guests of the house and is still living, having a testimony of all the brothers and strangers resorting thither of being a man of much piety and religion and serving the office put upon him only for the sake of heavenly reward. You know, listen, you know, reading bead and understanding. OK, this is put your mind on heavenly things. Of course, that comes right out of the Apostle Paul. What are we talking about there? And I'm not I'm not saying that skeptically. I'm asking it much more psychologically and in terms of heaven and earth. Well, this man, having a certain day, washed the mantles and garments, which he used in the hospital in the sea was returning home when on a sudden about halfway he was seized with a sudden distemper in his body in so much that he fell down and having lain some time, he could scarcely rise again. When at last he got up, he felt one half of his body from the head to the foot struck with palsy and with much difficulty got home with the help of a staff. The distemper increased by by degrees and as night approached became still more so that the day returned, he could scarcely rise and go alone. In this weak condition, a good thought came into his mind, which was to go to the church the best way he could to the tomb of the Reverend Father Cuthbert. And there on his knees to beg of the divine goodness, either to be delivered from that disease, if it would be for his good, or if the divine providence had ordained him longer to lie under the same for his punishment, that he might bear the pain with patience and composed mind. It struck me how the request wasn't as so much modern as, you know, if you don't heal me, I'll turn my back on you. No, it's, if it be your will, could you please release this? And he did accordingly in supporting his weak limbs with a staff, entered the church and prostrating himself before the body of the man of God. He with pious earnestness prayed that through his intercession, our Lord might be propitious to him. In the midst of his prayers, he fell, as it were, into a stupor, and as he was afterwards want to relate, felt a large and broad hand touch his head, where the pain lay. And by that touch, all the part of his body, which had been affected with the distemper, was delivered from weakness and restored to health down to his feet. You know, it sort of in some ways reminds me of Jordan Peterson and Tammy Peterson and her miraculous recovery. Of course, you know, there are miracle stories all over the world, but that doesn't mean that the patterns are the same or it's always the same. So, you know, my opinion with much of this is that a little bit of humidity, a little bit of humility is in order. And yeah, yeah. So I really appreciate Tom and Dominic doing that podcast, sharing that history. And it will be interesting to continue to watch how this all plays out as modernity recedes. Hope this was interesting for you. Thanks for watching.