https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A-xeZ0rQfi4

 I was 35 at the beginning of the year. I was one of the leaders in the army. And Reverend was there with me. And he always got me in the field. I was in the chapel, I stayed at the watch, and he said, Bill, why don't you get married tonight? I was going to say, Bill, why don't you get married? I can't wait to get married, man. And he said, Bill, what do you do for exercise? I said, I go jogging. Daring my own. He said, I go about 6.1. He said, can I go with you? I said, sure. We go there and we have got that to do with everybody. We go around. They dance at school for breakfast. He said, I'm going to have $5. Barb only gave me $5. And I got to get a haircut with that. I said, come on, I'll treat you to that. I seen Barb later. I said, Barb, you only gave me $5. He said, if I give you more than that, you give it away. But I learned so much from him. He was a man. He was more than a pastor to me. He was my friend. And I loved him. We did the same thing. I liked him so much. He left for the master's. I left with George at the same time. I'm back here. I'm here to say I love you, Barb. I love the family of Barb, Ruth, Paul, and all these people that I've met. Thank you. The Northside's going to show their reflections by the video that has been prepared at PowerPoint. The tiny ones. Order my steps in your word, dear Lord. Lead me, guide me, every day. Send your anointing color, I pray. Order my steps in your word. Please order my steps in your word. Order my steps in your word, dear Lord. Lead me, guide me, every day. Send your anointing color, I pray. Order my steps in your word. Please order my steps in your word. Calmly I ask thee, teach me a way. While you are working, help me be still. Though Satan is busy, God is real. Order my steps in your word. Please order my steps in your word. Write along my tongue, near my words, let it fly. Let the words of my mouth be acceptable in thy sight. Sing songs in my heart, both day and night. Order my steps in your word. Please order my steps in your word. Oh, Lord, to die with them, with thousand years, By shining hands, the stars, With countless days to seek God's grace, When then we first belong. Praise God. Hoş Majesty eh nossa. Thank you, Starr. Thank you, Starr. Thank you, Starr. We want to thank Brad's funeral home for their service and for the work that Mr. Brad, Arnie Braggs, has donated to us to make this a celebration. Mr. Braggs was here. He had to leave. One of the things that Mr. Braggs always remembers about Reverend Vanna Clay is about the funeral that he had that was in the funeral home in the fight for a guy. Only Barney knows how to tell it, tell it the right way. But every time I see him, he always reminds me of Reverend Vanna Clay and you're not having a funeral like he did. But on behalf of the Braggs funeral home, they also want to present the family with this blanket. Thank you. We want to thank everybody. We want to thank you all. Ladies, on behalf of Arnie Braggs and the staff, we would like to present Ms. Neymar Del Blancas and lovely Reverend Stanley J. Bannicott. And on behalf of Northside, we want to present the family with this base that says, in loving memory, Northside Community Christian Reformed Church, in the change of grace, we have been linked to God's servant leader who, like Jesus, never gave up on us. Praise the Lord. We will now hear from World Class Children again, singing That's Alright and playing this together. That's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that that's alright, that's alright, that's alright! I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright I stepped in the water, the water was cold I could hear my body running like my soul Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, yeah That's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, that's alright I went in the valley one day, two days, yeah I still got happy, happy last day of the year Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright That's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright You talk about me, that's the truth you need Before that you took him for the dead, now he leaves Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright That's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright You talk about me, that's the truth you need Before that you took him for the dead, now he leaves Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright That's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright Long as I know I've got a seat in the kingdom, that's alright, ooh, that's alright That's alright, that's alright, that's alright, that's alright Oh, bind us together with chords that never be broken Bind us together, oh, bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords Bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords that cannot be broken Bind us together, oh, bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords There is only one God, there is only one King, there is only one body, that is why we sing Bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords that cannot be broken Bind us together, oh, bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords You are the family of God, you are the promised divine You are God's frozen desire, you are God's glorious new heart Bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords that cannot be broken Bind us together, oh, bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords There is only one God, there is only one King, there is only one body, that is why we sing Bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords that never be broken Bind us together, oh, bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords Bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords that cannot be broken Bind us together, oh, bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords Bind us together, oh, bind us together with chords Well, God has his stock, because his son Paul van der Vlees speaks with just as much power and in his own right, he is a man of God And so, some of you thought that you only came to hear a concert, do not go Because God has something for you to hear today As God binds us together, even from Sacramento, California to Paterson, New Jersey He continues to allow his word to flow So let's hear the word of God, and the man of God for the following minute Thank you Thank you Thank you Thank you Before the presidential debates, they always try to, you know, pat down the expectations, Sheila She's not like that, Sheila said all those things, but man It's, I haven't been back to Paterson for 16 years It's really a privilege and a joy to be able to be with all of you today And I gave this, or at least a version of this, you know, right after my father passed, on March 4 I wondered how it would be, giving this today, seeing many faces there Many more miles on them since last night, I've seen them But I don't know, Bill and Sheila, you two are drinking from something, you two look the same I don't know what's coming out of it And I don't really need to introduce my father to most of you So many of you knew him for so long, and some of you knew him longer than I knew And, you know, we knew them as an intelligent man I don't know how many of you know this, but that house on North Side, that house on 7th Street has three bedrooms So mom and dad had one bedroom, and Ruth and Lori had the other bedroom And then my father needed his study because he never got any work done He tried to get work done down at the chapel, as it was called then So his study was in the third bedroom, and so was I So we shared that room, and one wall of that room was his bookshelf, and it was always full of books And then he had his typewriter, and he'd sit there, and that's where I learned to sleep through just about anything I would go to sleep, and he'd be there typing out his sermons or typing a letter or doing something And as many of you know, he was a very intelligent man And he liked to talk about the complexities of reality and paradoxes and nuances As you also know, and as was testified to today, one of the most astounding things about him was how broadly he could relate to people And going through so many of the pictures that we have of his life, we have pictures of him shaking hands with the mayor And with the governor of the state of New Jersey, and of course as many of you know, if you rode with him, I never heard the hoot though, you know it's great But he always did like stock cars, because it was cheap And then he'd go, fucks, he liked spending a lot of money on guts But if you drive through Patterson with him, and actually I meet some people sometimes who wouldn't know his name and remember one person Oh, Patterson of New Jersey, I drove around with a man and I was scared to death driving with that man Oh, that must be my father But you know, the man who could, he could shake hands with governors and the mayor would call him Just about anybody on the street knew him And going through the, oh he took so many slides of daycare, hundreds and hundreds of children went through those daycares And they all knew him, and he knew every one of them by name And now that he's gone, one of the biggest things is that we go through his pictures and we look at people and we realize, we don't know their names But he would know But it surprises people when I tell them that really the key to understanding my father was that he was at heart a very simple man One of the things I reflect on is that, I don't know how many of you know, his upbringing was in the rural parts of the United States, in the prairies during the depression And so he was proud about the work he would do on farms and the bales of hay he could lift And I can tell the lifting, the Volkswagen stories, so people know that Out in front of what used to be Burblow's hardware And in later years I reflect on the fact that this man who knew nothing of urban New Jersey or the East Coast came here and managed to do the work that he did here How could that be? He wasn't raised in a place where he would have had any experience with the African American community or a diverse community like this But he came here and he learned this And the reason he learned it was because he was a simple man Someone mentioned him cooking, he never cooked And the reason he never cooked was because he couldn't cook And again, last time I told this people were surprised too, I often called him a babe in the woods And why would he? Some many remember George Anuga And some of the vivid memories of George Anuga was opening soda bottles with his teeth And I remember going through Christopher Columbus projects with George Anuga once And George Anuga was scared to death, I remember he got out of the elevator and he just wanted to get out of there And folks would come into the elevator and they'd see George Anuga with that big smile and they'd be scared of him But my father wasn't scared of any of it Many would say, well don't you appreciate the danger you put yourself in? No Who's a babe in the woods? And in fact, as we were reflecting this week a little bit, the last words my mother said to him were On his way walking out the door to meet a friend for lunch was Do you have any money on you? Bill was not exactly right, she didn't give him much money Five dollars, included the haircut And the reason she did it was because he would give it away And I don't know how many people know this, but whenever he preached in another church and got a little honorary for preaching Mom wouldn't keep that money And so then he could do with it what he wanted to and he didn't buy toys for himself, he'd just give it away That's what he would do I remember as a boy we had a jump rope and looking back on all the days of day camp Jumping double dodge and jump rope was a big deal And I remember some boys came up one day and asked my father for a rope And so he went and he gave him the rope I said, Dad, why are you giving them that rope? He said they asked for it, they said they'd bring it back And I don't know how old I was, but I looked at him like, I have two heads And there was another time I remember, I remember in fact there was someone who needed something to eat And so in fact he invited him into our home And I remember this deal because we usually ate in the kitchen But we were sitting at the dining room table, a total stranger eating dinner with us And I was just kind of looking around I don't know how this guy met this guy, but I guess a few days later the guy broke into the house and he stole our camera And as always happens, Dad would always find the thieves afterwards Like when they stole the sense out of North Side Choco, remember that? So Dad finds the guy and he visits him in prison And if I were going to visit this guy in prison who came into my house I gave him dinner, well Dad didn't give him dinner, Mom gave him dinner She would have had a very different meeting with the guy too But when the guy comes into your house, you feed him dinner You welcome him to break bread with your family and you return the favor by breaking in and stealing my camera I would have grabbed the guy and said, you know, what are you made of? But no, Dad visits him in prison The guy feels a little guilty and so gives him the pawn ticket And so Dad doesn't go to the pawn shop and say, what are you doing buying stolen property? No, he buys his camera back, he buys it twice My aunt is here and she's also a great storyteller I inherited that from my father's mother And she tells the story of a farmhouse, was it in Iowa? The homeless? Yeah, in Iowa where they would race around the table And he was bigger and stronger and she was a little faster So they run around the table and she'd go around twice And she'd pull the chair out and off he'd fall over it And she said, she can do this to him no matter how many times the kids are She'd pull the chair out and he'd fall over it But he was breaking everything in the house, couldn't fix anything Finally, he frustrated his mother so much she said, if you do this I'm going to go out and I'm going to scream from the rooftops Stanley is a hopeless case And she did But he took no offense Psalm 32 is a beatitude and it says this Blessed is the one whose transgressions are forgiven, whose sins are covered Blessed is the one whose sin the Lord does not account against them, and whose spirit is no guile Now, guile is an old word and you find it in your King James version And the new words, it's sometimes translated duplicity or deceit And at heart what the word means is integrity He's the same through and through, no matter when, no matter where, it's always simply him And as children, I don't know how many of you went to Eastern Christian and remember D-Day You know, in the allies stormed the Normandy beach on D-Day D-Day for Eastern Christian was when they tried to retire their debt And the way they did this was to hire out all of the students as indentured servants To many of the little old ladies in the community that had a whole year of little jobs that needed doing And for $10 or $15 they could have you for the whole day to do all this face-to-face And so what happened, many of the kids got wise to this and they'd go to mom and dad And have them give them the $10 or $20 to get them off the hook and they'd go down the shore Never worked that way with dad So we were there, slaving away, and when there was a cut day All we needed to do was have them tell a small little innocent lie Never do it, never do it You see, part of the reason he was a Dave of the woods was he simply assumed often That other people were like him That they would return the rope That they wouldn't steal his camera That everyone else was going to all these little old ladies' houses and doing all their chores without him And it didn't matter how much we explained It didn't matter See, this characteristic was combined with his missionary zeal to serve And so he would attract swindlers and moochers and con artists and takers And you know, back in the day before telephone answering machines The telephone answering machine at 167 North 7th Street was Paul, Ruth, and Laurie And we would take all the calls from bread, I need bread, I need milk, I need juice Now this characteristic, in a Christ-like, cruciform sort of way Had an effect on people, it inspired people And as I look through, Ruth scanned in some of the 14,000 pictures that he left behind You know, what is evident from those pictures is that he inspired many people Folks who grew up in the South, folks who grew up in the First World Folks who lived in North Heldon, folks who grew up in Iowa and Minnesota and in the Netherlands And they would come together And somehow they believed that they could follow God's own fool Right here and right now and make a difference in this world And that they could dip their toe in And in God's upside down mission to the powerless, the poor, the marginalized, and the discriminated against That they somehow could make a difference in Patterson You know, in 2006 I had an opportunity to go to New York City And I'd been in the city since the 90s and I got there, I was shocked I thought, it's so clean! And where'd all these young white people come from? They weren't there in the A-B days And driving through Patterson today, I kind of thought, well, it kind of looks the same as it did when I left We don't have friends and sex in the city and all this flashy stuff This is just us But when I heard, where's the Habitat lady? How many Habitat houses have been built by Patterson Habitat? 260 families 260 families That is incredible Thank you Sheila read the passage from the book of Revelation And it's a strange passage because there's this, he's 144,000 And the book of Revelation says, especially if you read the old translations that are less politically correct They have not defiled themselves with women And so if you read the commentaries, everyone's scratching their heads and thinking, well how are we going to explain this? Well, it's from the Old Testament when an army that was dedicated to service Did not do what Navy sailors and things did in ports of call They were focused on their mission And here in the book of Revelation you have 144,000 that are focused on a mission And together they are an army And together that army stands against what we see all too commonly in this world And when I look at his Northside pictures and read his book and reflect on his life, he was a recruiter for this army That's what he did But this is not an army of destruction, of hatred, or of adoris This is an army of love, of mercy, of generosity and forgiveness It is an army unlike any other army you will see a nation, a nation field in this world Because it is an army without guile Dad has now gone to his own reward And before the throne he now stands But the battle and the army continue And at the hands of this army, only Satan finds loss You know, in recent years dad was declining And mom would get increasingly worried about her It was his job to be simple and innocent, guile free, and her job to worry about her And so, you know, as many of you know, he kept up his exercising bell And he was proud of the shape he was in and he had his fading spell And they took him in and they ran all these tests on him And the doctors were very impressed with what good a shape he was in And he was very pleased to report on what good a shape he was in And we were all worried about him and asking about him But no, even the night before he died I called him on the phone I said, how do you feel dad? He said, I feel great! And so that next day he walked down the street of Whitesville To go to the cafe to meet a friend And the woman asked him if he wanted coffee And this was the tip-off that we know something was wrong because he paused And never before would he pause if you asked if you wanted coffee or something to eat Yes, but he paused and then she turned around, his head was down And she had been a trained nurse so she went and felt the pulse and he was gone I thought it was going to be easier this time You know, he loved the Lord and he loved him And so he turns his head down at the Bally Cafe and he wakes up at the banquet of the land And at this banquet of the land there will not just be ham buns and a church basement There will be the kind of food that he always enjoyed at Aunt Lou's house Many memories of going to Aunt Lou's and enjoying her food But there will be food that he always enjoyed at Aunt Lou's house Many memories of going to Aunt Lou's and enjoying her food But there will be food from Thailand and food from Korea And food, you know, the Dutch, they got the meat and potatoes, they don't do so good with that But the chocolates and the desserts, they do alright with those things And I'm glad he went the way he did Because after he had fainted and between he died, you know, there were restrictions on him He wasn't supposed to drive and he couldn't go to classes and he couldn't go visiting And he couldn't go to all the Bible studies he was doing One of the things that shocked me at the Whitenessville reception was how many people in his retirement Came up to me and told me that he had changed their life And he was retired, supposedly He never retired See, he just wanted to pour his life out for others And the practicality of having a declining body just didn't face him He was simple, we'd say, Dad, you can't do this And he just couldn't comprehend Now, part of the problem of knowing someone like Dad is that sometimes people say, well, I should be like Stan I should be like Stan Vanderfleet And I'll tell people, you might think that I have these issues I grew up as Little Rev, but I'm not Stan And no one else should try to be Because Stan's gift of simplicity was God's gift to Stan That's right And what Stan did with that gift was use it to serve others And that was exactly the way it should be You know, he wasn't entirely responsible for his simplicity His stubborn, determined nature to be without guile was given to him So there isn't much point in beating yourself up about that I remember Pastor Derek Zile, who was in the Waddenville Church He worked with me in Sacramento And before he came to Pleasant Street, he said, well, what kind of a father is your father? I said, my father is the man who could give Adolf Hitler a favorable character reference It does not matter how mad you are It does not matter what you've done He could be mentally ill and he will still not hear Stan's gift to God was what he did with his gift And he used this gift to bless a cruel and suspicious world I tell the people of my church that there are two basic ways to live Either you naturally and practically live my well-being at your expense We are by birth takers And Jesus comes to us and Jesus says things like, turn the other cheek And I know as they turn the other cheek in church and folks think Well, that means that somehow everyone's going to be all amazed at your spirituality And say, isn't that amazing? I say, no, you know what happens when you turn the other cheek? You get hit again That's what happens when you turn the other cheek But Jesus says, I want you to do it anyway And so we say to Jesus, Jesus, this is impractical If you're like Stan Vanderpay running around the first floor giving away money Attracting all these takers and cheats and the mentally ill All this going on, what's going to happen? Well, they're going to take your money, they're going to take your time And you can pour 36 years of your life into a place And your son can come back 16 years later and say, it kind of looks the same But you see, Christians believe in the resurrection That's right Song 16 says this Therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices My body also will rest secure Because you will not abandon me to the realm of the dead Nor will you let your faithful ones see decay You will make known to me the path of life You will fill me with joy in your presence With eternal pleasures at your right hand The apostle Paul uses this in Acts 13 When he says God raised him from the dead So that he will never be subject to decay Jesus says that everyone who tries to save his life will lose it But those who lose it for my sake will find it See, the Christian gospel says everyone in the world is running around Living my well-being at your expense And Jesus comes and says, I want you to follow me And I want you to live your well-being at my expense And what that's going to do to you will be exactly what it did to me It will wear you down, you will get hit twice They will take your cloak, they will take your camera They will take your money, and most folks won't even say thank you But if you follow me in my life You will follow me in my death And you will follow me in my resurrection And all those raised in Christ will never again see decay You know decay is common, and I come back here and I want to apologize You weren't the first one to come up and say You must be Stan's brother No, no, I'm sorry, I'm his son You know, no, I'll get to be like Sheila and Mel See, Dad was a babe in the woods because he believed the dangerous wood would be here for only a little while And that in the end the age of decay could only take his body And that just for a brief time Because this world demands guile to survive But God's kingdom invites us to live exposed to others This world will miss Dad, as we do But he was never an army of one And this guileless army always welcomes new recruits In the end, this guileless army always wins Because the death of its soldiers fueled the resurrection It undoes the darkness and points us to a dawn of hope and of glory Amen Amen Amen Amen I'm not a soldier Most gracious God and Father, we come before you just saying thank you Lord What a simple man you are You've ever been in a tank You've worked here and touched many lives Not just touched many lives and just being able to say, oh he was a good man But the power of your spirit has changed lives that many work with you So Lord, teach us how to be people who have God People who are simple People who love you so much That the standards of this world cannot get in the way of us being like you Continue to be with the family Continue to strengthen them I thank you for the family because they gave us a gift in heaven And I thank you for bringing him home And that Lord that as you bring him home That we look for the time in which we will see him again Lord that your melodies of death Rain down not on us But they rain throughout the universe Because at the name of Jesus Christ it will be one day With every niche of death With every tumble of death that Jesus Christ has made Help us to get ready now That we may be in the know We pray in Jesus' name Amen The youth choir will sing melodies from heaven And then four will do the benediction and people then See the guiding At Northside there is a time of fellowship You are invited to be there And there are people already there who are already preparing stuff For you to participate in the pool And also a place where you can also Give your special thoughts to the baby and her family Again I just want to say thank you to all of you His sister and brother in law All of the kids and grandkids We thank God for you Because you are part of us Melodies from heaven Amen Thank you Melodies from heaven Bring down on me Bring down on me Melodies from heaven Bring down on me Bring down on me Take me in your arms and hold me close Bring down on me Bring down on me Fill me with your precious Holy Ghost Break down on me Break down on me Melodies from heaven Bring down on me Bring down on me Melodies from heaven Bring down on me Break down on me, break down on me Take me in your arms and hold me close Break down on me, break down on me Fill me with depression before we go Break down on me, break down on me Break down on me, break down on me Break down on me, break down on me Take me in your arms and hold me close Break it for the mayors to gather Break it for the mayors to gather Break it for the mayors to gather Break it for the mayors to gather Break it for the mayors to gather Responded to minute Can you help us sing? Melodies, melodies from heaven Come on and sing with me Melodies, melodies from heaven Come on and sing with me Melodies, melodies from heaven Break down my pain Break down my pain The Lord bless you and keep you The Lord lift up his eyes to you The Lord turn his face towards you The Lord smile upon you And the Lord give you his peace Amen Amen Melodies, melodies from heaven Unleash any good strength and power To help the unbounded be cast out Turn the darkness by days to see Lead me, O Lord, in peace Lead me, guide me along the way Lord, if you lead me I cannot stray One and we all, each day will be Lead me, O Lord, in peace The Lord in the hand, so bright as death Be my heaven, center and sin of rest My body all my trust Lead me, lead me, O Lord, in peace Lead me, guide me along the way Lord, if you lead me I cannot stray One and we all, each day will be Lead me, O Lord, in peace I'm lost with death, the land of sin My heart without my mind to see Lord, the Lord raise every right, serve and lead Lead me, lead me, O Lord, in peace Lead me, guide me along the way Lord, if you lead me I cannot stray One and we all, each day will be Lead me, O Lord, in peace