https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-YFCcDHpOGg

 We want to welcome you to the Special Award Service for the Reverend Dr. Stanley Mandcliffe. We are thankful that the family traveled far and wide to be here and that they consented on having a special service here at Northside. Even though you're not at Northside at the moment, that's okay. You still have a pass. So we come to worship our God and say thank you to God for the service that he has given to us for a time. And to just celebrate his life here and his life on earth as he now spends eternity with our Father in the Lord. We want to say welcome to all of you who are here. I know a number of you have traveled from a long distance, some from short. And you know it's not a thing. Because we can never say thank you enough for the service that God has placed here. Dr. Mandcliffe was good at making puns, and I'm not. So you won't hear any puns from me. But I tell you, I miss those in line. And he always knew the right words to say because of the Holy Spirit that he was speaking. So as we speak today, you may not speak as eloquent as we will speak from our hearts. And at this time we ask Reverend Alfred Still, who is the pastor of this church, who's been on immense retreat. So I want you to feel comfortable that he's not resting soon, but he's here as the man of God to bring fortune to us. Thank you very much. I still feel the need to apologize for my time. But yet I celebrate the cause of the reason we're here. Let me just officially welcome you as pastor of this church. Stan, if I can say that well, is a friend of mine. I remember one day his wife used to do prayer walks. I remember one day he used to walk and have prayer walks together. And he was, I was not in ministry early when I met him, but I'm telling you, if you want to talk about someone who's dedicated, concentrated to changing people's lives. Because he knew the Lord had been solely surrendered to him. That was Stan. He never met anyone that he believed that God could not transform their lives. That is the reason to celebrate. So I want you to feel happy today. I did not get the news of him being part of America's Glory, but I'm glad that we have a moment to be a part of this celebration. Because we will continue to celebrate the lives that have been changed because when God called us, he called us not just for the world, but in terms of people to eternity. And that glimpse of how he impacted our lives is tremendous. That's a quick story before I pray. I remember when Reverend Blakely had lost all his church was destroyed by fire. And it was Reverend Stan Benedict that had called the clergy together for the purpose of making sure that we would not leave a brother in ministry out there. Thinking that there was no hope and no helping. And he was the keynote speaker. The service was at St. Luke Baptist Church. And it was my first time hearing him preaching. And I tell you, he got up and I remember the text. He said, except the Lord build the house. A bunch of labor in vain. I said, wow, this guy getting ready to preach. And preach he did. So family, we love you. Let us bring out our Father. We thank you for the privilege to evoke your blessings, your presence. That you have loved us enough to draw us more dearly and more closely to you. We thank you, O God, that you're just such an intimate, loving Father, caring Father that we can pause in the midst of trials that allow us to triumph. And we can celebrate. So today, O God, we lift the atmosphere because you have set the time and tenor for our lives. And today we celebrate. Thank you for being such a loving, caring Father. Thank you for your place, where you place your name, your heart, your eyes on this, your house. And O God, we give you the glory. We magnify your name. We exalt you. We lift you up right now. Lord, thank you for being who you are and how you've been to us. So O God, we thank you for life, the gift of life, the labor, the laughter, the service, and this we bring in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen. Amen. And this is the time to celebrate. And so as we celebrate, we're going to have some music, we're going to have some reflections of life. We've got video. And we want you to get into it. You know, I know some of you for Sunday morning, it is a quiet time. But for some of us in the Sunday night, it is a joyful and loud time. So I want you to say amen when you need to say amen, clap when you need to clap, stand up when you need to stand up, because God is in this place. And we want to rejoice in him. At this time, we will have the Northside Youth Choir. We will come to see Time to Come Home. Come home, come home, come home. Always welcome. It only matters if your heart believes and you confess. If you commit any sin, you'll be forgiven. Call it all about children. Time to come home. If you want to be delivered. Time to come home. I've been rescued by the Savior. Time to come home. If you want to be in his favor. Time to come home. Come on home. Come on, come on home. Oh, yeah. Come on home. If you can see your way up, then you're drowning in your spirit. If you have everything you want but your spirit, can't find happiness. When you feel like you've been taken, your life changes so hopeless. And you need to come home so your life can be cleansed. Time to come home. If you want to be delivered. Time to come home. I've been rescued by the Savior. Time to come home. If you want to be in his favor. Time to come home. Oh, I don't care if you're fighting all by yourself. The demons here might give you hell. But the demons will give you a star. And behind that is everything. So salvation. Call it all about children. Time to come home. If you want to be delivered. Time to come home. I've been rescued by the Savior. Time to come home. If you want to be in his favor. Time to come home. My home. Oh, yeah. Everlasting home. My home. Your home. Everlasting home. Don't you know it's time to come home. Time to come home. Time to come home. Delivered to you. I've been rescued by the Savior. Time to come home. If you want to be in his favor. Time to come home. My home. Your home. Your home. Everlasting home. Everlasting love. Everlasting love. Everlasting love. Don't you want to be in my favor. Come on. Everlasting love. Everlasting love. Everlasting love. Everlasting love. It's time to come home. Amen. And you know it's going to be, you will always be a part of it. It's time for any son of us to come home. We can't wait for you to come home. We will now ask Reverend John Alford to come forward to read Old Testament Scripture. I love to all of the family. It's a way. I'm so glad I can be with you now. When I was asked to read the Old Testament Scripture and select it, I asked myself, what would Pastor Stan select? And so I selected Isaiah 58. Let us hear the word of the Lord. Shout it aloud. Do not hold back. Raise your voice like a trumpet. Declare to my people their rebellion and to the descendants of Jacob their sins. For day to day they seek me out. They seem eager to know my ways. As if there were a nation that does what is right and has not forsaken the commandments of its God. They ask me for just decisions and seem eager for God to come near them. Why have we fasted, they say, and you do not see it? Why have we humbled ourselves and you have not noticed? Yet on the day of your fasting, you do as you please and exploit all your workers. You're fasting in some quarreling and strife, and in striking each other with wicked fists. You cannot fast as you do today and expect your voice to be heard on high. Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is this the kind of fast I have chosen? Is it not to share your food with the hungry, but to provide the poor wanderer with shelter, when you see that they need to clothe them and not to turn away from your own flesh and blood? Then your light will break forth like the dawn, and your healing will quickly appear. Then your righteousness will go before you, and the glory of the Lord will be your rear guard. Then you will call on the Lord, and the Lord will answer. You will cry for help, and he will say, Here am I. If you do away with the oak of oppression, with the pointed finger and malicious talk, and if you spend yourselves on behalf of the hungry and satisfy the needs of the oppressed, then your light will rise in darkness, and your night become like the noonday. The Lord will guide you always. He will satisfy your needs in a sun-scorched land, and will strengthen your brain. You will be like a well-watered garden, like a spring whose waters never fail. Your people will rebuild the ancient ruins, and will raise up the age-old foundations. You will be called repairer of broken walls, restorer of streets with dread. This is the word of the Lord. Amen. And for the New Testament scripture, Paul didn't ask if he would do the same text or not, but I'm going to go back to Revelation 14, verses 1-5. And I looked, and lo, a lamb stood on the mount Zion, and with him a hundred forty and four thousand, having his father's name written in their foreheads. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of great clunders. And I heard the voice of carpers, carping with their barbers. And they sung, as it were, a new song before the throne, and before the poor beasts, and the elders, and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty-four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are they which were not defiled with women, but they are virgins. These are they which followed the way with a celebrity goat. These were redeemed from among men, being the first group unto God, and to the laborer. And then their mount was found, nobodies, for they are without fall before the throne of God. This is the word of the Lord. Amen. Paul will be preaching on those words in a few moments. At this time we will have all of our children, red and blue, being in the choir and singing and saying this part out. And so I am sure he's in the midst of this, and they will be singing today. And they will be singing two songs at this time. Let me come into this place, and the Lord is blessing me. And the second one will be the blood. Amen. The Lord is blessing me. Come into this place, O Lord. Come into this place, O Lord. Come into this place, O Lord. Come into this place, O Lord. Come into this place, O Lord. Come into this place, O Lord. We are blessing. We are blessing. We are blessing. Come into this place. Come into this building. Come into this place. Come into this building. Come into this building. We need our blessing. We need our blessing. We need our blessing. We ask God. Send your Holy Spirit into this place, O Lord. Your Holy Spirit into this building, O Lord. We need our blessing. Yes, Lord. Come into this place, O Lord. Come into this building. Come into this place, O Lord. Come into this building. Come into this place, O Lord. Come into this place, O Lord. We need our blessing. We need our blessing. Yes, Lord. Oh, my Lord. Yes, Lord. Oh, my Lord. My Lord. Yes, Lord. Yes, Lord. Oh, my Lord. My Lord. Yes, Lord. Thank you. Right now, right now. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now. We're closing up this morning, starting beyond my way. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now. We're closing up this morning, starting beyond my way. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now, right now. The Lord woke me up in the morning, taught me how to be happy. He led me out to sleep too late, but He woke me up. We're closing up this morning, starting beyond my way. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now, right now. He woke me up in the morning, taught me how to be happy. He led me out to sleep too late, but He woke me up. We're closing up this morning, starting beyond my way. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now. We're closing up this morning, starting beyond my way. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now. The Lord is blessed in me right now, right now. The blood that Jesus shed for me. Pay back on Calvary, the blood that gives me strength. From day to day it will never lose its power. Well, it soothes my doubts and calms all my fears. And it dries all my tears, oh the blood that gives me strength. From day to day it will never lose its power. Oh, it dries my heart, my tears. And I'm so glad that it blows. Oh, the blood that gives me strength. From day to day it will never lose its power. Tell you that it soothes my doubts and calms all my fears. Late in the midnight hour the blood can dry everyone, everyone of my tears. The blood, anybody know about the blood that gives me strength? From day to day it will never lose its power. Yes, it reaches. From day to day it will never lose its power. I'm so glad that it blows. To the lowest. No matter where you are, Jesus will love you. Give you strength. Not just today, but every day. From day to day it will never lose its power. Oh, it reaches. To the highest. I walk through the valley as a shadow of death. It'll go there too. Do I have one witness? Do I have one witness? Yeah. It's nothing but the blood. Yeah. From day to day. I want to encourage you. It will never lose. No matter what you do. Yeah. No matter where you go. Yeah. Jesus will always be by your side. Yeah. He'll be with you in sick trouble. Yeah. And in the seven he will be. Yeah. From day to day it will never lose its power. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Hallelujah. Let us all say hallelujah. Hallelujah. Because it is the blood of Jesus Christ. Yes. That we are able to live and move and have our peace. That we know where we will go after this place. This is only the temporary. Amen. We tell you, it's so good to hear you. Amen. We will now come to those who are sharing a few words, reflection of life and the relationship we have in advance. You have two minutes. I may give you two, but that is it. I am going to list the names and I am going to ask that they all come and sit in the front seat. And we are going to be gracious to you that when your two minutes are up, the next person is going to come up and take your spot. Alright. Alright, the people who will be doing, who will be speaking. Mr. Bill Frater. Mr. Kika Kujina. Mr. Harold Foster. Mr. Fred DeRoubin. Ms. Pauline Boone. Mr. Anthony Gordon and Kate Bambi. Did I say Robert Mary Steggit? Now we go. Is there anybody that I missed? Oh, it has to be done now. You guys can open the reference block. That's alright. And I am going to start out by asking Reverend Steggit, who is a member of the Patterson Patsy workshops, to come and speak on behalf of the workshop. Reverend Steggit, will you also please come forward? Thank you. That's what I'm talking about. I'm going to say amen. Amen. I thought since you look kind of alike, you know, I'll get away with it. I would like to welcome Pastor Steele, my fellow in the system of Brother 13. Truly it's an honor and privilege to come before you. One thing we understand is that God makes no mistake. That God does everything perfectly and in order. Truly in this order I would just personally like to say I thank God for having a relationship with Pastor Reverend Bambi Clay. My family has a history with me. My mother was a president of one of the auxiliaries at Longstock. And to see God bless Pastor Bambi Clay with such an anointing, even before the ground was there, the ground was blessed. And we had the privilege to just see a tent. Amen. And from that tent, it takes shape. And the things that came from that and the people that came from that. Pastor Bambi Clay could walk through the CCP anytime, day or night by himself. Amen. And he was just able to just embrace the people that died in the charge. So be blessed God for the man of God. Amen. And we continue to linger on with the relationships that we had. That we were able from time to time to just share in counsel. To just glean from how God has continued to work in this world. And then to see the torch pass to the present Pastor there. We came up together. Amen. We had one prayer at that time, but just being able to understand how good God is. So we just bless God, amen. And from the Patterson Pastor's Worship House, God has been able to just glean us and let us all come together to realize that we're not here by mistake. God bless you. God keep you. Amen. Thank you. First, let's give an honor to God. We're clergy, friends, and family. I know Reverend Bambi Clay is up here looking down on us. Just to hear what God's children are saying, some of the original things. I'm sure he will love to hear them. I'm sure he's going to be able to listen. Also to the private Northside chapter. I'm sure he's proud of that too, because those kids have been in the city. I compare Reverend Bambi with my friend to Abe Lincoln. He's never lost for a smile. Yet the integrity that's really impeccable. Amen. And he loved kids. I can think of some times when he used to be on the roller coaster coming down with the kids. You know when they come down and they wave their hands and speak? He'd be right with them when he's speaking. And he never said no. I can always think of some times when I used to use the church and he just always said, yes, God, okay. I can remember he used to have a little club. He had some drums going in. He got in great markings, as a matter of fact. And they sat with the kids there playing. He never said anything about, you know, I don't charge you this, I don't charge you that. It was always from his heart. And I can always say that even around the church, I know I used to come to the church sometimes and I'd see him picking up around the church. So he didn't have to worry about that. He would do that. And I know Paul uses. He's just one of my best friends. And I just want to say that it's been a blessing to me that he was a part of my life. And I know it's been a blessing to many others. And I know Paul can vouch for his two. If he needed anything, if he had it, he gave it to him. Amen. And I just want to say to the family, we were lucky to have Reverend Randy Fader, all of our lives, here in Paterson. Thank you. It's been a great time for my family. And also, days go on, the week, whatever. You see, he had all the kids by their first name. He had the kids on his shoulders. He was just a second kid, too. Thank you for the time. Brothers and sisters, I first met Stan when I was seven years old. At least that's my first memory of him. We came out here for family vacation because my mom and Barbara were like great friends. And he scared the pants off from me. He was so tall and so big. That, you know, like my own brother. But I soon learned how gentle and loving he was. My second picture of him was as a sophomore in college when I came out to Don Turner Christian School for interim to do some student aid. And what impressed me on that trip was his gentle hands that every night helped Barb in the kitchen do the dishes. It amazed me. Why was he doing the dishes? And he said, because that gives me ten minutes alone with my wife every day. It was such a witness to me. But you know, I'll also say those same hands piled myself, my friend and Ruthie, in the back of this Volkswagen Beetle and drove us to New York City. Like a maniac. The third picture I have of Stan and Barb is after they retired to Whitensville and became surrogate grandparents to my husband and our son Ryan, who teaches at the Whitensville School. He had sent me countless meals for him and played countless games with him and with us when we visited. And it was during that time that the hands of Stan and Barb became encouragers to me as I began my journey into ordained ministry, seminary and then ordained ministry. And finally, it was Stan who on February 11 of 2012, officiated at my ordination service up at Ridgewood CRC just a few miles down the road. Hands that had been cheering for me so long now got to bless me as this mantle was placed on my shoulders and my shoulders. I want to thank all of you for that. I want to thank all of you for not just Stan but by the entire family. And I'm so very grateful that his hands are now at rest in our Father's hands and that he's being held close and healed. Thank you. I was honored to be asked to be here today by Ron, but the story has to go back to a time when we were here at Verizon. Ron probably wouldn't have been here today if we hadn't broken bread together across the park. Ron sat down at our piano and I said to Joey, I never heard our piano play. He made it talk. Pastor Two, Pastor Ben, one day Mark just reminded me, I was up in a pole here in North Side as we worked for Verizon as well as Sheila and Ron for a while. And even Mrs. Corden, we used to see her downtown, her mother, when she was an operator. So that kind of dates me. But I was up in a pole one day and I guess Rem comes out for his prayer and walked in. He yelled at me and said, hey Rem, you thought maybe the Lord was coming? I was 30 feet in the air. But we had good times. And another story just reminded me, I had a pastor down south that played Lead Me Guide to the Unconquered Land. We're going to sing that later. But he said, that's not a normal song that they sing in Anglo churches. I said, well I didn't go to an Anglo church. I used to go here to Bethel and then I went for a double-header down there. So we did sing Lead Me Guide to the Unconquered Land. I still have it on the CD in the car. And sometimes it brings tears to our eyes. That's because we're thinking about the old days of when we worshiped the people of Bethel in North Side. Thank you. Thank you. I'm going to sing Live In to Rev. From the beginning to the end, you've been a great blessing for us. My dear and faithful pastor, you've given my family and life a path. Share sorrows, joys and tears. Rev, you will be greatly missed by my family and by the people of Paterson. I'm sure of it. Rev, I'm sure that you were set from heaven above with your wisdom who helped me open many doors for my three children. I look back at the day I asked you to preach for my funeral. But I had no idea you would be done for me. You and Barb have stood by me and held my hand, walked with us through the years. I'll always remember those great times with you. I'm sure you will see Miss Babel and tell her I was here on the other side one day. When I needed someone to listen to, I knew you were always there for me. I pray that God will give you and your family the strength to live with your legend and left behind. When I weathered the storms of life, you always were the one who cared. So in this circle we call life. From the beginning to the end, thank you Barb for your support as well as with my three children. I thank God every day for your energy and support and passion of life. I was blessed to have you both beside me with my three children, my dear and faithful pastor. Rev, they will take you in the family. Thank you. The MacAction. Good afternoon everyone. My memories of everything. Okay, it started with my mother. My mother was a 7th school teacher and she would pick up my children at 7th school. And times as well, maybe more than three times. Maybe she doesn't like to be late. So she said to me, I want you to find your church for you and your children. I then realized what she was saying as I brought me up, as she brought me up in the church. And I was living at Christopher Columbus so I know you know who saw me. So I saw this little white church on Jefferson Street. And I said to myself, wow, this is a walking distance from Christopher Columbus to Jefferson Street. So as I was walking this distance, I was remembering my mother's words. And I knew that I needed to go with my children. And as I listened to the sermon, or the sermon, it was a blessing. I felt as I walked in the narrow path, I saw a light at the end of a long path that brought our families together to go outside. Our children, Len, Charlize, Lisa, got their first jobs as teenagers, counselors, for the summer camp. And from where graphics they learned to work together and learn the culture. The teachings of loving one another and loving yourself. And so remembering Red, as we all called him, as seeing him in his new book, that's what we used to say, that was his little local act. And driving that bus for the summer camp, boy, you ought to laugh those kids had. Our children will always remember that here he comes, and the glorious memories that they had as the hearts of Len, Lisa, Sincere regards to the family with joy and love and never be forgotten. I will never forget you, love you. I want to center my remarks around one verse of scripture from Colossians 4-7, because there's three descriptions that Paul gives air to Titus that are my descriptions of Pastor Stanton. He's a dear brother, a faithful minister, and a fellow servant in the Lord. I think when Pastor Stanton came to Northside and Patterson, I was like 10 years old, so I was just a kid. But I came here at 78 and he became a dear brother, colleague in ministry, a friend about a mile away, and I'm so grateful for that. He was also a faithful minister. And Pastor Stanton, if I can just pick up on your comment about his preaching. And I make it wrong, but when you heard him preach, is it true that you didn't just think he was a good preacher, but you thought for a white man he was really good? I got you. I got you. I got you. I got you. I got you. Alright, alright, the truth comes out. But let me say something more about you. Pastor Stan preached the truth wherever he was. And to some of you from some of the other Christian Reformed congregations here, he preached the truth of Isaiah 58, of Isaiah 61. In the midst of all of the racial stuff of the 60s, he preached the truth and he took his part. He said don't have him back to preach anymore. He's too radical. Because he was a faithful minister preaching the truth of God. Amen. He was also a fellow servant in the Lord. Pastor Stan would do anything, as you've already heard. One of our best memories of service was together going to a conference in Chicago in 1983. And out of that, gathering together with Pastor Don Chirow, who was at our church, in six months of prayer about how we could serve the housing needs of our city. And on that ride back from Chicago in his little cult, he liked little cars, I don't know how he got in. But in his little cult, God can avert the vision of that. That is still going on. I thank God for that. He was also a fellow servant with words. And I always admired him. I got to thank him for that. That's it. Faithful minister. Thank God that you all are obedient. At this time, I would like to ask Barbara Dunn, who is the director of Patterson Habitat for Humanity, to come up to speak. I didn't have the privilege of knowing Pastor Vanderpey as well as many of you who are in this room. When I came to Habitat in 1993, he was working with us on site acquisition. So I did work with him on committees and obviously saw him at dinners and house dedications. I remember him dedicating Habitat Way, our first big project, down at the bottom of the hill. But over the years, he lived out what is a Habitat model. I might freeze here, I don't remember exact words. First John 318 that we do not love and...