https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=iJ08EChqrCM

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a very special guest today, Reverend Eric Dirksen, who's been a friend of mine for a number of years. He is a church planter and a pastor of Christ Church Davis. I'll put the link to his church in the notes below. He's also on Twitter and I'll put a link to his Twitter account in the notes below. And I wanted him on the show because he finished reading Dominion before I did, which was really interesting to me. But before we get into the Dominion stuff, I just want to first take some time and just take some time to let Eric tell his story and talk about church planting and whatever else we feel like talking about. So Eric, thanks for being willing to join me on this little contraption. My pleasure. So you grew up in Iowa. Tell me about growing up in Iowa. Did you just glad hand with presidential candidates all the time? Was that what Iowa's like? That's how it looks on TV. You know, there are a number of things I don't miss about Iowa, but I do not miss, Iowa's a lovely place, but I do not miss election season in Iowa. The bombardment of, it's just chaos there. Now it was kind of cool. I remember when I was 18, it was presidential election season and the caucuses come through. So I grew up in a town of 2500 when when big wig East Coast elites come through your little town and sit in a room with 25 people, that's kind of fun. But on the other hand, there's some there is certainly a benefit to not living in or to living in a state that is not in play. And that is not the biggest, the biggest electoral prize. And we barely see a campaign added this. Right? It's glorious in some ways. Pretty crazy. Well, let's so you grew up in a Christian home. I did. Yeah, fairly traditional conservative Christian reformed home. That's the denomination of which I'm an ordained minister currently. Yeah, I had three older sisters. I had loving parents. I went to private school, K through 12. It was small town, rural Iowa, not a farming family, but surrounded by it, of course. That's in some ways the the idyllic Christian reformed upbringing. It's so middle of the road, you know, and I didn't I didn't really realize it. I don't think I realized that until I was in my well into my 20s that, you know, it was a pretty standard middle of the road church with a standard liturgy. And that's just kind of the way that excuse me, the way that things were done. Yeah, it was, you know, sort of unremarkable in many ways. I always find myself wishing that I could go back and read closer histories of like the time period when I grew up, because you read you read a lot of previous history. Like I was born in the late 70s and I was a child of the 80s. And I don't I think growing up in Iowa can insulate you from some of the things that are going on contextually, either globally or certainly in the U.S. There was a really good line in the there was a New York Times piece a couple of months ago that was looking at Northwest Iowa and attitude that they seem to go there frequently for reasons that are unclear to me. But I mean, it's a funky little place. But there was a there was a piece in the Times or it might have been the Atlantic. I can't remember. And there was a little line in there that said something like if you have a sky that's so expansive and it's all that you see, you tend to assume that that's also all there is. And I was sort of struck by that as I had never considered it that way. I mean, usually you look at rural flyover country as insular because, you know, they're not connected to the outside world or anything. And that certainly wasn't my upbringing. And that's not true either. But I wondered about that if there was something about, you know, growing up in a small, fairly tight knit community and church, there's something lovely about being local. For darn sure. But I also don't think I had a very good sense of some of the chaos of the 80s and what was really going on in other parts of the world for better or worse. Yeah. So you you did all that growing up in this beautiful, wonderful place. You had the lovely shelter of a Christian education. And then you went off to college. Where did you go to college? Well, I started at Iowa State University and then I ended up transferring a tail between my legs back to where I grew up, to a private liberal Christian, sorry, private Christian liberal arts college, Doart College. So I finished my degree there. I was I had an inkling about, you know, what do I want to do with the rest of my life and could ministry be a part of that? But I really didn't want to be a pastor. But it seemed like Doart was the right thing to do. So I went. I got a very good reformed Hyperion education. And then I did a master's degree. Still not interested in ministry. So I was young and full of piss and vinegar enough that I'm not going to go to the denominational school because that's for idiots who are going to be pastors. So I got a master's degree in historical theology in New England and spent a couple of years out there. My wife and I were married in between there, had our first child in Massachusetts, moved to Montana. I was trying to get into graduate school, spent a year at an interdenominational chapel as the I like to say the pastor, the secretary, the janitor and any other thing. There at this little interdenominational chapel at eight thousand feet just outside of Yellowstone. I had a lovely time, very formative for us in ways that we didn't realize at the time, but was still trying to get into graduate school. It was just a one year term. So I ended up back in Iowa teaching high school for a year. And then I kind of got talked into going to seminary for a divinity degree as something that would look good on my CV. Still not thinking that ministry was in the car, just trying to avoid it for a long time. A divinity degree looks good on your... Who told you this? Yeah, he was a liar. Must have been a pastor too. Pastors are liars. Liars and thieves. To his credit, he had said something like, you know, at least you'll have the degree. Maybe you can publish while you're here and you can get a degree. Maybe you can publish while you're here and if you decide ordination down the road, then you'll have it. You'll have it. They can't take that away from you. I think they can, actually. That's my constant threat of walking down the road and my wallet, my cell phone, my car. No, don't take my theological degree away from you. You can't. Yes, yes. That laminated card they give you when you leave. That's right. So you got your theological degree and then did you hear the call? You know, while I was in seminary, I didn't hate it as much as I thought I did, or much as I thought I would. I enjoyed some of the biblical stuff. The year in Montana was formative in that. I always assumed I would just get along better with books than people who were dead and people who are alive. And that stuff still doesn't necessarily come the most natural to me as far as the pastoral care and things like that. I'm still a bit of a nerd, but I did a... So Montana was formative and then we had to do an internship during seminary and I didn't hate that either. And I actually got a kick out of it. You know, I got along with the people. I enjoyed preaching. The pastoral care was actually interesting to me. You know, I find myself sort of enjoying it. Visiting people with dementia and just listening patiently to their stories. And you'd be surprised for folks that don't know, you'd be surprised what a three month internship can show a young person looking into ministry. And, you know, the gloves come off in a hurry and you can see some things in a hurry. And I saw it and wasn't repulsed. However, there was something that wasn't repulsed. However, there was something that wasn't right. And whether you want to go into that or not, I don't know. But the same guy that talked me into going to seminary, I marched into his office at the end of those three months and I said, listen, I think that there might actually be sort of a call to ministry here. I'm feeling this sort of pressure in some way. My wife isn't saying no, it's being sort of confirmed by other people outside, which you always want to see. However, the context is what's concerning me right now. A kind of middle of the road church like the one that I grew up in while it was lovely and they baptized me and raised me and I love them. I don't know that I'm a good fit for that right now at this stage in my life. And this is 12 years ago or so. And he said, you know, I've been meaning to talk to you about this. I think I've been asked, I've been wondering if you should consider church planting. And that was not on our radar screen at all. It was nothing that my wife and I had considered. Independently of him, they swear they didn't gang up on me. Another professor at the same seminary called me into his office about two weeks later or so and said, hey, Eric, I want you to think about church planting in the CRC. I was just sort of shocked by this. So long story short, I always assumed we'd go back to New England. We sort of loved it out there. Both my wife and I grew up in Northwest Iowa and in very similar communities. But something about New England resonated. We really got a kick out of being around a diverse group of people and a diversity of ideas. I sort of gluttonous for punishment. I liked our internship was a similar sort of cultural context where there's lots of different ideas and people. And I kind of liked the secularism of the city. So I always assumed we'd go back to New England. I reached out to two people on the advice of this person, different person at seminary. I said, I want to go back to New England. I want to look at church plants there. And he said, that's fine. You should also call this guy out in California. There are some Christian Reformed church plants in the greater Sacramento area. And I went back that day and walked in our little house in Michigan. And I said to my wife, there's this guy who wants to call me in Sacramento. But, you know, it's California. Who's interested in California? And in her infinite wisdom, she said, I'm not sure we're in a position to close any doors right now. Let's take a peek. So that was the beginning of the end. We flew out here for like a four day whirlwind tour and got along well with all the potential colleagues. And I was interested in the things going on here. But there was just something that we didn't. There was still something that didn't seem right and didn't feel right to us anyway. And we're not like gut, you know, kind of people so much. My wife is more than I. But in the course of that four days, the good Paul VanderKlay and a few others had said, hey, you should think about this town called Davis. You seem like you might be Davis kind of people. And as I've been telling that story for a decade, I still don't know if you said it with a sneer. We always just dangle Davis in front of church planters are like, ooh, college town. It's urbane. All the bicycles. It ticked all our boxes. We drove through and it's got trees and, you know, there's a park in the middle of town and people were eating ice cream and the weather was lovely. And the college town brought in all sorts of things that seemed interesting. So that became the itch that we needed to scratch. And then we say, by the way, if you actually want to live in Davis, you're probably going to have to raise a lot of money. Yeah. Yeah. And oh, by the way, all those romantic, idealistic notions that you have of secular progressives and inviting them to church. Here's how that's really got to look. That wasn't part of the initial interview either. No, that's that's that's a whole other thing. Well, let's talk a little bit about liturgy, because one of the one of the interesting things you brought with you were some were some pretty specific ideas about liturgy and having grown up in a very Christian reformed community. I imagine your Christian Reformed Church in the 80s were just kind of following the standard Christian reform call and response liturgy back and forth, back and forth. And, you know, Christian Reformed Church, for those who don't know it, in the 1950s sort of standardized their liturgy and said all Christian Reformed churches should do this. So so all across. That's right. All across North America, including in Little Patterson, New Jersey, we're all singing out of the Blue Salter hymnal. You know, we we we confess our sins. We hear the Ten Commandments. There'd be the long prayer. We'd have the sermon. And then once every one or three months, we'd have the Lord's Supper very solemnly. You know, preparatory form the week before. Preparatory. Make sure you're examining your conscience. That's right. Make sure that we we we through confession arrive clean at the Lord's table and and you know, all of this stuff. That's that was, you know, 1950s, 1960s, 1970s. And then in the 70s in Patterson, my father started to play with things a little bit. Everybody started to play with things in the 70s. Yeah, all kinds of things. All kinds of things. So but but they I imagine they weren't quite so adventurous in most of Iowa, save perhaps the radicals at Dork College. But you came out here and you had all kinds of notions about liturgy. Where did that come from, Eric? I don't know. I actually I don't know that came with me, actually. I as I sort of reflect back on that the first 18 months in in Davis, in, you know, sort of a secular progressive college town, were really formative. I think we came out here with a very Midwestern, evangelical approach or thought that a church plant would need to be a certain thing in order to, you know, be palatable or attractive. And and that looked very much like it did for everybody else in 2008 when we moved here, you know, kind of the hip. I knew I wasn't hip, so I was behind the eight ball there. But, you know, I think I still had that in mind. At the same time, we were meeting people in Davis and doing as much networking as we could and having conversations with people. And and when I what I expected to find when we moved to Davis was hostility. What I found was apathy. You know, it was, oh, that's cute. You're a minister. That's good for you. That's sweet. Don't you know, don't bother me with it. But I'm sure that's helpful to some people. So, you know, good on you. That that's not what I expected to find. I also had some really formative conversations with people. So, you know, going through those transitions, we're all a mixed bag of, you know, experiences. And so part of my story is my father-in-law passed away after a year battling cancer in February. My third child was born with some pretty difficult complications in March, graduated seminary in May and moved across the country to start a new job in July. And you don't know how those, you know, those transitions affect you in the moment. But I think my wife and I would certainly look back and say we were casting about for something solid already then. And so we encountered a number of things when we came out here. We encountered the folks at City Church, San Francisco were doing liturgy and worship in ways that were fairly new to me. I had read I was reading things, reading everything I could get my hands on because I felt really illiquid. So what the questions that I thought people were going to have in California were not the questions that they had. They were actually deeper and more profound and more, more, more sort of basic level than hey, what about this hot button issue? It was sort of like trying to find out what's underneath that question. So I was reading things like, you know, I read a lot of the NT Wright, I read a lot of Leslie Newbiken when I first got here. And then I started reading some stuff on worship, too. So there were things that appealed to us and liturgy started really appealing to us as something solid. Weekly communion really started appealing to us. And then I was also reading a few things. I read a book by Jamie Smith, Desiring the Kingdom. And my first read, I made all sorts of notes that were somewhat skeptical because he was describing the liturgy that that you and I grew up with. But he did it winsomely. And I found myself almost bitter. Like, hey, why didn't anybody tell me? You know, I got hints of this before, but why didn't anybody explain the movements of liturgy in a way that was compelling like this? So Jamie's book was profoundly influential along with the stuff of Leslie Newbiken and things like that. So I want to give credit where credit's due. I don't think we came to Davis with a lot of liturgical ideas. I think they came to us as sort of a confluence of a number of events. And I had a really formative conversation with a guy in here in town that's not a Christian, doesn't go to church, but he described. So we were having coffee one day. He described his he goes to church twice a year with his in-laws and with the parents, both of whom are religious. And I'm going to get the details a little bit wrong. But the gist of it is his in-laws are Catholic and his parents became sort of fundamentalist evangelicals or let's just say mega church evangelicals. And they attended like a really big church not too far from here. Rock show lights, you know, hot dog cannon, lasers, the whole deal. And and he was describing that they alternate. They go to Christmas and Easter service with the parents, you know, to kind of appease them. And this is a guy that he was wearing an ACDC shirt when we met. And he was maybe just a couple of years older than me. So I asked him, like, I'm kind of curious, which of those two services do you resonate the most with or or if not resonate with either, if you decided, hey, I'm going to go to church this week, which one of those two would you go to? And he works in the music industry. He's wearing an ACDC shirt. And he said, he thought about for a second, he goes, I'd go to mass. And I was like, tell me more about that. And he said, if I want a rock show, even as good as the production value is at the mega church, my parents go to, I'll go to a rock show. If I want church, I'll go to church. And that was that was, you know, I didn't I didn't know it at the time, but profoundly influential, I think. And it's like, you know what? My wife and I had this conversation about 18 months in here where it was this like this moment, the kind of epiphany sort of thing where like we came up with a family mantra, which was effort. And we actually spoke the word. And it was let's just plant a church that we want to attend and that we want to participate in. And you can't worry about what's attractive or even palatable. Let's plant a church that we need and that we think other people need. And so that was sort of the confluence of events of of why liturgy became so important to us and things like weekly communion and the kinds of songs that we sang and encouraged others to sing and the prayers that we use and so forth. Well, and then there was we could probably talk a little bit about Phil and Sarah a little bit because they were pretty big coming in. And I should probably I should probably have Phil do a conversation with him on this thing, too. That would be fun. Good luck. Good luck getting him. But I would highly encourage it. He's the quintessential wandering evangelical. That's how he described himself when I first met him. Yeah, hugely influential in life, both myself personally, my family and in our church. Within six months of starting our church, we were desperately casting about for worship leadership and stumbled upon this incredibly talented husband and wife team. And she was a classically trained pianist with a PhD in music composition. And he was a theologically educated wandering sort of ex evangelical with an anxious inter-Catholic who had a folk music kind of background. They they did things music like they had their pulse on good, new sort of retuned hymns that were being written. And they did things musically that I didn't know could be done and were just delightful. And then Philip, especially, was hugely influential, sort of expanding my and our church's current practices to involve even more of the great tradition, as he likes to say. So you've been you've been doing this how many years now here in Davis? We've been here. It'll be 12 this summer and the church will celebrate its 10th anniversary, Lord willing, on the first Sunday of Advent this year, late November. So I always have a certain amount of evil satisfaction. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. So I always have a certain amount of evil satisfaction teasing church planters that you're not a church planter anymore. You're just a you're just a pastor because church planter. I know some of the people listen just don't know what a church planter is. Church planter is someone who founds a new church, a new local congregation. And and church planters, in my experience, because I know so many of them here in Sacramento, they always know it's it's kind of a in terms of amongst pastors that they're kind of like the Rangers or the special forces. I mean, there's a certain there's a certain sexiness about being a church planter that there isn't about being a regular pastor. You're sort of a badass when it comes to, you know, church because you could start one, whereas many of the rest of us sort of inherit the work of other peoples and and try to keep it going. But now, you know, you've been doing this for 10 years now and you've got three thousand at worship every Sunday and articles coming out in Christianity today or, you know, that's written by the best ghostwriters out there. But you do you do you do thanks to some really wonderful, generous Christian people. You do worship in a facility that that your congregation owns or at least owns the debt on. We own it outright, Paul. You own it outright now. We paid cash for this thing. Yes, we do. All right. All right. So you you worship in a facility that you own. And and in many ways, you're a small when I say small, I don't mean that in a pejorative sense. Your church probably isn't much of any larger than mine. You're a small church pastor in Davis, California, right across the street from the public high school. What's what's that like? Well, I mean, it's certainly different. In some ways, it's very different. In some ways, it's very much the same from the early years. It's the same in that I think we're still trying hard and we need to try harder, I think, because some some wise old pastor once said to me, Eric, never underestimate the gravitational pull of a congregation inward. And I think that's just true of all people. It's certainly true of Christians. And I think it's certainly true of we're now landed. So you can focus your attention on some of the externals like, hey, let's redo the facility that we now own and things like that. But I think we're we still are trying hard to remember in stillness language from Fred Harrell at City Church, remembering what it's like not to believe. And we still want to work at being hospitable. And I don't think you can be comprehensible necessarily because because I believe that the Christian faith in some ways isn't comprehensible, but you can work at being accessible. And so we're we still aim for that. We expect people every week that are new to Christianity or haven't been in a long time. So in some ways, it's still very much the same. In other ways, it's very different in that, you know, as you well know, after a certain number of years, you get to know people very well and they get to know you. And there's beauty in that you get to go places pastorally that you don't get to. But that's also challenges there that you you kind of have to in some ways, I think, push through different levels of relationships when you all know each other. You know, you not all know each other. But in other ways, you know, Davis being such a transient community, I don't think we'll ever feel the same as the church that I grew up in because our turnover rate is too high. So it's never going to be like that. It's never going to be like that. It's never going to be like that. It'll always have a little bit of a church plant feel to it just because the newness is such that you'd experience in in a city, you know, ten times the size. But I mean, it's a yes and no. So how has being a small church pastor changed you? Church planting generically and now being a small church pastor humbles you. It keeps you humble. I think all I think all pastors in particular and church planters specifically have pretty big egos and you wouldn't you wouldn't dare start a church if you didn't. And some of it's necessary, but some of that needs to get, you know, stripped away. And that's happening little by little, I suppose. It's humbling. It'll keep you humble, you know, in a place like this. I think we do a pretty damn good job here, to tell you the truth. I think this has been a great little church and we've had just a glut of, you know, just a glut of talent to play with. Philip and Sarah were wonderful. We, you know, we should know the best. They moved back to the Midwest this past year, but we've had superb music that we didn't deserve for our size. I think our liturgy is pretty thoughtful and carefully done. Preaching could always use some help, I suppose. For the most part, I think it's a darn good little church, really. And I would be here. I would be a member at my own congregation. I really would. And there's loving people and, you know, all the things. But that doesn't mean that when we throw open the doors on Sunday morning that they come pouring in. It's still Northern California. People are still busy. And the most common sentiment I think I experience for people who don't regularly attend church is if I went to church, Eric, it'd be yours. Well, that means a lot. There's a great reinforcement if you ever got one, right? But at the same time, you know, talking about being a small church pastor and being here for a decade, being here this long also opens up a lot of opportunities for the community to just be a pastor to the community. You know, as you know, to do funerals, these sort of holy moments, to do funerals for people that don't go to church, people that don't have a connection to it. And there's also, you know, I got more than a handful of stories of things like that that you don't get in your first couple of years and you don't get as a church planter. You get, you know, a little bit later on. And that's the good stuff, too. I think when I was a young church planter, you kind of piss on a little bit the idea that the church is there and Mary Berry and baptized and you're going to save the world and you're going to, you know, in a very Hyperion fashion remake it and redeem it and you're going to reclaim all of it, dog on it, one inch at a time. And the longer I do this, I'm like, man, the Mary Berry and baptize ain't nothing. That's a big deal. Those things. And they're imbued with meaning. So some of that gets, that's part of the ego, I think, going way too. Just get yourself out of the way. Faithfully preach and administer the sacraments is my job. Now, if someone were to follow you on Twitter, you've got a rather unusual Twitter stream because instead of, you know, fun gifs about dogs and wild animals or outrage or love over Donald Trump or Democratic candidates, you tweet a lot of dead people. That's my nerd coming through. And talk a little bit about why your Twitter stream looks like it does and how that's connected to your practice of sermon preparation. That's a good question. A vast majority of my Twitter feed is I'm just tweeting sermon prep or things that I'm reading that I find interesting. So I tend to read a lot of older dead people. And I think it's, I have found the patristics, for example, in particular, to be more helpful preaching fodder than most, you know, most biblical commentaries written in the past 50 years. Most of them, you know, most of the commentaries come from this academic bent where they're going to go on for 15 pages about a particular thing that nobody in my congregation cares about. And so they're useful for the paper that I needed to write in seminary, but they're not useful for the people that are sitting in the pew. And not that I want to take a, you know, utilitarian approach to preaching or anything like that, but these older sources and commentaries on Christian, on scripture, just have this, they have this way of looking at scripture and the narrative of redemptive history that I just find so compelling. It's more poetry than anything else. And so I just like the way that they read scripture. So I read a lot of that. You know, I read ancient sources, ancient commentary, and then, you know, the occasional thing that I find interesting or intriguing. It'll have the, I'll have the random personal thought on my Twitter feed. But those usually go awry and I delete more of those or don't push send. I'm like, wait a second. What am I doing here? Really? Nobody cares. Nobody cares. Oh, you should have a second Twitter. That would be fun. So why, why do you think it is that, you know, you would imagine that, well, even biblical scholars over the last 50 years have families and jobs and they live in a context of, you know, they live in a context nearer to us. And when you're, you know, looking at Augustine or Christostom or someone like that, why would those people be more relevant to the life of people in Davis, California than someone living, you know, much closer to our time, do you think? There's a whole host of reasons why contemporary commentaries take the shape that they do. Most of it comes out of the academy. And, you know, the academy isn't necessarily for the church, for better or worse. And I think the, the patristics have a very, first and foremost, a sacramental approach to scripture. And so they're, they're finding the sacraments everywhere, which was really helpful to me early on. They're finding depth and meaning everywhere. It's not, hey, what does, you know, what does this particular thing have, you know, mean in this thing? I'm having a hard time describing contemporary commentaries, but they're not interested in, you know, parsing out individual Greek and Hebrew words as interesting as that may be as they are actually communicating what's going on in the scripture story. And for me, the contemporary commentaries had a very narrow focus and it was always so tight inside that they were, you know, specializing in ways that you do in the academy. Whereas many ancient sources, not all, okay, it's not, you know, it's not monolithic, but many ancient sources have such a broad and beautiful view that I just find it so compelling. And that's what I think people need more. I think, I think all of us, myself included, we need more poetry and we need more beauty and we need more meaning. And there are certainly people that would come to Christchurch and be frustrated with my preaching that, hey, why didn't you give me, you know, six tips for a healthier relationship this week? I'd be like, you can find that at the local bookstore. I don't think what you can find there quite as much as the beauty of the gospel. You can't find the narrative cohesion of a God who seeks after you. And that's what I think it turns out that's what you need. And that's what I need. And so anybody that's been at Christchurch for more than, I don't know, six to eight weeks and is paying attention, they're like, you only ever preach one sermon. Wow, sounds repetitive. That's the idea. Well, let's, you know, I lured you into this, into this video trap because I noticed that I had, you know, via my video stuff, I've, I've followed Justin Briarley's work, his unbelievable program. I'd followed that program for years. A couple of years ago when Jordan Peterson came on, oh, let's talk a little Jordan Peterson before we get into Tom Holland. You've had some interesting bumpings in with the name Jordan Peterson here and there. Tell me some stories. Yeah, the first was the Philip, my former associate here, our pastor of worship arts. Philip always seemed to have, still does, I'm sure, always seemed to have his pulse on things before I did. So he was well aware of, you know, the Jordan Peterson phenomenon when it first happened. And so he was the first one, I think, that exposed me to it. You would probably be number two. I've had interesting run ins similar to many other people, a lot of young men, people finding it. I think I had the most compelling story that I had fairly recently is we have addiction recovery groups that use our facilities almost every night of the week. A couple of months ago I was walking by, I'm pretty sure I was in a clerical collar actually now that I think about it. I was doing something else, I was going to the sanctuary to get something or something. It was one of those days and so truth be told, there were two guys outside smoking and we had just put in a cigarette butt thing for them. They were using a... They called it ashtray for those of us who are old enough to remember smoking when smoking was common and respectable in our culture. Not at all common here in Davis either. But we put in one of those, like a big outdoor thing, the way every Christian Reformed Church used to have outside their front door for 50 years. And the guy was like, hey, thanks so much for this. This was really nice of you. I'm like, yeah, no problem. You need to use a coffee can. And then I stopped and I was having one of those days and I said, actually, you mind if I bum a smoke? And there were two guys there and one immediately hauls out the cigarettes and goes to the other guy, looks at me and goes, is that allowed? And I went, yeah, sure, why not? So I just had a cigarette with these two guys for a while. And as often happens, as you know, in this line of work, and certainly when you're wearing a clerical collar, that becomes a license to talk for a lot of people. Maybe not a lot, but it's on. And so one of these guys starts opening up. I mean, he's about ready to go into an addiction recovery meeting and he starts saying about how it started the same way it often does. And he goes, you know, I don't go to church much, much at all. Used to have went with my family and they're not around anymore. And there's immediate pain in his face, you know, talking about the family that's not there. And he goes, I'm still interested in the ideas. I'm still, you know, I still find it interesting. I should probably get back to church and I'm just, you know, enjoying my cigarette and letting him talk. And he goes, actually, I started engaging in a little bit of Bible again. I'm like, oh, yeah, tell me more about that. And he goes, well, I started watching these videos online and the moment he says it, I'm like, oh crap, I know where this is going. And he says, yeah, have you heard of this guy? And I just caught him off and I said, Jordan Peterson. And he goes, oh, seriously? Oh, shit, really? You know who that is? I'm like, yeah, I'm familiar. And I'm not that familiar. So I don't want to pretend that for your hordes of listeners that are like deep into Jordan Peterson. I've watched a few things and I read his book, but I'm by no means, you know, deep in it. This guy was though. And he said, he actually got a tear in his eye. He said, honestly, that man saved my life. He helped pull me out of a pit of this cycle of addiction and relapse. And he said, I've made mistakes in my life and I messed up my family and there are some things that I can't get back. But that has grounded me in a whole host of ways. And as you know, as a pastor, when you hear that, that's not nothing either. And this guy found something that, you know, anchored him. And that's probably the most sort of affecting encounter that I've had with the Jordan Peterson phenomenon. A few folks, you know, in my church again, mostly younger men, not all, but some have no idea. But yeah, that's the one that kind of sticks out to me that made the most, the biggest impression on me. And then I gave him your name. If you're interested in Jordan Peterson and potentially Christianity, there's a YouTube channel for you. I know a fella. Yeah. So I had heard, a couple of years ago, I had seen on Justin Brierley's, so Justin Brierley started doing a video thing. I had always been, I always loved his podcast, but they're from a radio show. And the most frustrating thing about that radio show was it's usually sort of about an hour and he has all these commercial breaks in it, which is radio, and it's like eight or 10 minutes and another commercial break drives me nuts. But then he starts doing these videos and Jordan Peterson was early on in the videos. And then, you know, like you, I had a long time reader and fan of the work of NT Wright. And then I had seen NT Wright was on with this guy, Tom Holland. Years ago, I had read Rubicon and it was a... Did you really? Yeah, yeah. Years ago. I picked it up because I'm a Dutchman and I just started Audible and Audible had like two for one books or something special like that. And so it was like free or real cheap, so I grabbed it. And so then NT Wright was on Unbelievable with Tom Holland. And they started talking about, you know, the Apostle Paul and I started listening to Tom Holland talk about Christianity. And I'd expected stuff out of NT Wright, of course, but, you know, watching NT Wright and Tom Holland talk about this, it was like, wow. And of course, by that point, I was always on the lookout for video fodder for my own content. And so Tom Holland caught my attention. And then I had heard that, well, he had found these things because he was writing a book. And then I wanted to, well, I'm going to have to read that book. So how did you hear about Dominion and Tom Holland? How did you get acquainted with this? I was trying to recall that this morning, actually, I'm pretty sure I just saw the title on like one of the newsletters, one of the email newsletters that I'm on. I would guess it was Micah Maddox does Proofrock News. It's an excellent daily email. And I'm pretty sure it was just like in his forthcoming section at the bottom, he'll just kind of note a book or something like that. And I remember I had no experience with Tom Holland and didn't know the name, hadn't read anything before. But I read the title and then I read the subtitle. I'm like, oh, that's a premise that I would be interested in. And then like any self-respecting adult with an online presence myself, I immediately went to Twitter and found his Twitter feed, which was very dear to my heart very quickly because he's primarily tweeting ancient dead historians. So, you know, the nerd in me is like, hey, that's cool. And then, you know, occasionally witty remarks about UK politics and then, of course, his exploits as an elite cricketeer. And so I thought this is fun. And I try to keep a fairly tightly curated Twitter following. So I started following him. And then I'm impulsive when it comes to books. So I immediately went online to order it. But I noticed that this was in mid-fall and the UK version came out before the US version. And I love the UK cover. And I saw the US cover. I'm like, I don't like it as much. But I'm also just enough of an idiot, I guess, where I emailed Hearts and Minds Books in Pennsylvania, Brian Border. And I'm like, hey, can you get me the UK version of Tom Holland's new book? And his response was twofold. He was like, first, I can, but it'll cost you. And then second, and Brian's really well read, you know, he does a blog about, you know, books that he likes and stuff like that. What's the name of Brian? Hearts and Minds Books, Brian Border. If you are interested, if you order Christian books or lots of different books, really, and you don't want to give your money to Jeff Bezos, then the folks at Hearts and Minds are usually fairly competitive and they will they ship it beautifully. I'm always I always appreciate the care that they take in shipping a book. And so he's like, I can get it for you, but it's going to cost you. And the second thing he said was, hey, where'd you hear about this? This is this is a unique sort of thing. And I'm kind of intrigued and like, I don't even know. I think, you know, I just kind of stumbled on it. So he shipped it to me. And when I opened it, I don't know how quick you want to go. But I was like the preface had me immediately. He's an engaging writer. And so within within the first 30 minutes, I was like a kid that had just received the latest Harry Potter installment. And I was for the next six days or so, give or take, sneaking away, hiding in my house, a pretty small home here in California. But I was hiding in various corners to read. My wife would walk in and go, really? Again? I'm like, yes, I will be present with my teenage children if they're around. But if they're not here, I'm going to read this because I'm finding it compelling. But I devoured it. Yeah. I I I was taken with it very quickly. I assumed that I would. And then he said he's an engaging writer. Had you read anything of his before? Not a thing. OK, not a thing. So I stumbled on the title, thought it sounded interesting. I ordered it immediately and then started reading a few things about Tom Holland and about the book. He was he was already doing some promotional stuff because it was out in the UK. And then I was like, oh, I'm looking forward to this. No, it initially just looked like one thing that I would add to the stack. But very quickly, it became the thing that I was ignoring the stack for. And reading this instead, the stack is the stack is a very stack. Choosing is a very limbic thing. I feel like this now. Um. As a small church pastor, church planter in California, do you think the book is relevant to your ministry? Yeah, yeah. Why? I I started recommending it. I wasn't even done yet. And I started recommending it to a certain kind of person. I mean, I think anybody can enjoy it really. But similar, I suppose it's not it's probably no surprise that a couple of the guys in my congregation that have followed Jordan Peterson, some as fans and some as more of a critique. I mentioned to them first, not necessarily intentionally. I'm like, oh, Jordan Peterson, that wasn't how it went. It was just sort of those sorts of spheres of interest may intersect. Your question was, is it relevant? Yeah. Yeah, I think so. I think tremendously so, actually, because it it it calls into question people's frame of reference. And I tend to 10 years here and this is not a knock on my community. I think it's just human nature. We're lazy thinkers and we just assume that things are and often don't question the way things are and how we got there. And certainly in Northern California, more than most places, I think my experience has been that there's a there's a bent towards an a historical view of everything. So we're very much part of the tyranny of the now. And and I think most people are, too. You know, they they're just trying to get to their Tuesday. So the history of ideas might be interesting book fodder. But how does it relate to me? Well, I think it relates a whole lot in the sense that people are carrying with them a bunch of presuppositions that they don't necessarily know, both Christian and non. And so I think a book like this is useful in that it calls into question your entire frame of reference and it can shed light on things that you hadn't considered before. So even though I've got quibbles here and there, I find it very interesting in that kind of thing. I mean, the same way that the classic paradigm shift thing is this country had a paradigm shift in 9 11. And so all of us see an airplane flying low. I mean, in the Sacramento airport is such that planes often bank over Davis and then come in and sometimes they come in fairly low. It doesn't matter. I've been here for 11, almost 12 years. Every time I see a plane banking low, I look at it now. And I think just for a moment, you know, just just for a second that, you know, paradigm shifting to call into a 90s phrase, I guess that, you know, reframing of our entire existence is brought to mind. And I think this book is in some ways trying to do the same thing that you can't look at things like love and mercy and revolution or reform the same way once you put it through his frame. And it's got tremendous benefit for that. As far as like being an actual pastor, the preface was almost harmonic. Yeah, yeah. I was immediately taken. I mean, we do this for a living for crying out loud. And, you know, my church does a Good Friday Tenebrae service every year. And we reflect deeply in Lent on the crucifixion. But I was very taken with with the preface. I don't find, you know, the Mel Gibson. I can't remember the name of the movie now. Yeah, yeah, the Mel Gibson crucifixion stuff. Yeah, I actually I don't find that very affecting. I don't find I don't find grotesque and gruesome displays or portrayals in a realistic fashion. I don't find that very compelling. I find it often more emotionally manipulative. But the strangeness of it in its historical context was really compelling. And again, stuff that I've probably preached on before, but he just wrote it in such a way that I'm like, man, you can just stand up and read this on Good Friday and call it a day. It was that was very taken. And then another mark of a good book for me is all throughout chapter one. I'm always making notes in books that I read, but it's the rare book that makes me put it down so that I can go to my bookshelves and reference other things that it's making me think of. Like, I just needed it immediately because it's drawing together so many different threads. And I was reading chapter one of the bookshelves. Chapter one, I think. Yeah, that would be Aristotle. And I immediately thought of speaking of NT Wright, his After You Believe and Paul's relationship to Aristotelian ethics. And I was like, oh, my gosh, I got to remind myself of this. And so I'm paging through things. Then I also want to put it away because chapter one is engaging. That's when I think his book as a whole and his thesis became even more sympathetic because it's drawing on a lot of things. Anything surprise you about the book? Surprise me. On sort of a visceral level, I was surprised at its pace. And that's not at all what you're looking for, but I was surprised at how quick of a read it was. And I don't mean that it's candy. I just mean that he's just really gifted and he's a compelling writer in terms of pacing and things like that. So I found that surprising. It's enjoyable. You don't expect a book like this to be an enjoyable read. It could. It could. It's in a strange way. You know, it's sort of like history. In some ways, it's sort of like history meets Tom Clancy. Yeah. You know, just the way he... I'm reading Persian Fire right now, actually. And I got a few on the stack now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He made his way to the stack pretty, pretty quickly. But I'm reading Persian Fire right now. And, you know, Herodotus has been around a while. But it's just as I, you know, now having paying closer attention to him, closer attention to him as an author, because just like I had exactly the same impression with the preface, I was reading that preface and as a preacher thinking, oh, I got to learn from this guy. I mean, that's that's in many ways why I started paying a lot of attention to Jordan Peterson, because if you see if you see power like that, it's like, oh, I better pay attention here. I got to learn from this guy. This is this is going to be educational for for me in terms of my craft. Yes. And so, yeah, that preface and in the audio book, in fact, he reads the preface himself. Most of the book is read by a professional book reader in the audible book. But the preface and the end of the book, he reads himself and that makes sense. And it's powerful. And like you, of course, just because of the church calendar, you know, you year, we yearly preach on the crucifixion and the resurrection. And we tell the story and all of that. And the way that he was able to. The way he was able to reframe the crucifixion and in it, you know, sort of bring fresh eyes or refreshing my eyes towards it was was deeply helpful. And I would imagine that come lent, there's going to be a lot of pastors plucking this book up and reading through that first that for that preface and grabbing tidbits that it's going to make its way into a bunch of sermons. I hope so. I mean, it reminded me as the entire preface reminded me, there was a line by Neil Planting about the absurdity that we wear that, you know, the cross has become so prolific and for lack of a better word, that's the wrong word. But it's everywhere. Right. It's become such a cultural symbol that we don't even think about it. We put it on jewelry now and Planting his line was like something along the lines of if that's akin to to wearing a necklace with an electric chair as, you know, the dangly gold bit on the center, that kind of a reframe. So it's always been around like like any preacher worth their salt should be pointing that out every year. But the way that he did it was just really compelling. I had the same I had the same reaction to it. I've you know, as I've you know, my videos, my especially my monologues, which I call them, which are the videos that I'm commenting on videos I find interesting and so on and so forth. The longer I've been the longer that it's been since reading the book, the more and more important I think the book is. I think I think the book actually makes a good companion to the Jordan Peterson phenomenon in terms of reintroducing the the foundations that we had in apathy forgotten. You know, I love your line. You know, you expected to find hostility in Davis, but but found apathy. Yeah. And I think that's that's deeply true. And what I think part of the genius of the book has been is that he was able especially and I think one of the best chapters of the book is love, the second to last chapter where he he weaves the Beatles through through the story, you know, of, you know, second half of the 20th century. And we find that Jesus has so colonized the world in such an anonymous, unassuming way that we find him in many ways on both sides of these culture wars that secularists or progressives or conservatives or culture warriors on both sides sort of, you know, try to claim him. And here you find, you know, they're they're they're all footnoting Jesus and not incorrectly that that he so fundamentally reshaped that not just the Western world, but the entire world increasingly wherever wherever to a degree what we call civilization, post-colonial civilization has touched. Jesus has reset the table in ways that no one that hardly anyone saw. And, you know, so my, you know, my reading, Tom Holland in this is is is in all fairness, not just the book where, you know, which has it, but also a variety of YouTube videos where he's been interviewed about the book. Yeah. And one or two myself. Yeah. So, and that, you know, especially doing ministry in Northern California and perhaps especially in a place like Davis, you know, we here in sometimes purple Sacramento, you know, jive the People's Republic of Davis because it's it can be just that much more so than other places. It's a university town, you know, finding that it almost, you know, the. I think since the 80s and the more a majority of the time in which, you know, you can barely remember it because you're that much younger than I am. One side of the culture war sort of tried to lay exclusive claim on Jesus in the way that perhaps Nicodemus had aspirations towards when he sneaks up to Jesus at night in John, chapter three. And Jesus makes it very clear to a confused and probably annoyed and alarmed Nicodemus that you don't lay claim to Jesus, just like my 20 pound dog doesn't lay claim to the Amazon truck. And. Good luck with that. Yes. Yeah. And, and I think in the book, he found a way to, he found a way to, I don't have the right word to illustrate this again and again and again through the ancient world, through Christendom, and then the modern world, the modern Western world, at least. And I, you know, one of the things that I'm learning and making all of these videos and doing all of these talking to people that I don't always know why they're listening is, you know, it takes time for something like this, for the significance of something like this to sink in. Yeah, that's right. And, and so, you know, and, and, you know, as talking to a fellow book lover, sometimes you read a book and think, wow, that's incredible. This will change my life. And six months later, nope, didn't. Right. Right. And sometimes you read a book and it's like, huh, huh. And you put it down, but then you pick it up again and it comes back and it comes back and it's, it's over time. You know, revelation in a sense is acknowledged over time. Whereas we in our culture imagine that revelation is sort of a glandular in a moment thing. Right. When, oh, not so much. Right. So it's very seasonally appropriate of you, Paul, and being the season of epiphany, not as a one time moment of revelation, but as the ongoing process of. I finished the book and thought I didn't think to myself, oh, this is going to change my life. I finished it and thought, yeah, I'm going to read that again. Uh, I will return to this not immediately because, you know, not like, well, that was the greatest novel ever. And I want to read it immediately. But like, no, I'll be returning to this if not in Lent, then then again. And I think what makes when you get to the end and. He bookends, you know, the preface with sort of his own story, that it's one of those, you know, it's like an M. Night Shyamalan movie where he reveals essentially that he had an awakening essentially. Right. And, or, or the, or the beginnings of one, if you will. And that's dear to any pastoral heart, but it also reframes the book. Um, so that makes me want to read it again. Like, oh, here's the guy that's working through some stuff. You know, here's a guy that, uh, like all of us is on the journey and, um, is reckoning with his past a bit. And, you know, wonders, uh, what, what stirs in him at those church bells and, and what I assume is his church of England upbringing and the Cranmer prayers and, and, and all that. Um, I, I was delightfully, as just a sidebar, he did a conversation with, I can't remember that guy's name. Um, is it his brother? Oh, did he do a conversation with his brother? Um, because his brother's also, also writes history, but his brother writes more World War II stuff. I think it's his brother that he did a conversation with and they, they had, they slipped into this, um, is his brother even more political online? You're probably thinking about the Delling pod. That's the one. Yes. Thank you. Yeah. So that's not his brother, but, but, but he's talking to someone who was quite political online. Yes. There we go. That's the one I was thinking of. They slipped into this moment of, uh, uh, lamenting like contemporary prayers in the church of England. And I just laughed and it also warmed my heart. They were like, ah, this is ridiculous. You know, it was, it reminded me of so many people that I've met in Davis of like, um, yeah, I've got an opinion on that and that sucks if I go to church. This is what I want to see. If I go, that's right. But I would seem pathetic to their plight. I'm like, yeah, anyway, I digress. I'm, I'm curious about, I thought the book faltered a little bit at the end. Um, I was still intrigued, but I thought he was pressing his claim. Um, excuse me. Uh, I was. You want to answer that? You want me to pause? I can pause. No, I don't. Okay. I'm sure hit pause. I'm sorry. No, that that's true. Almost. I would say 49 out of 50 calls to the church line are garbage, garbage, garbage. Not a real human being or sometimes I made one cry once, but I got a call back from her supervisor. You call yourself a pastor. Oh, wow. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. Call yourself a pastor. Oh, wow. Yikes. I never get hung up on more than when it's an actual person. And I tell them that we're a church, not, you know, looking for a new roof. Let me talk to the person. It's so funny. Let me talk to the person in charge of, and it's like, yeah, like, hmm, my ecclesiology says that's actually not me. There are no elders here, so you're going to have to speak to me. So, so you thought you thought the, um, I thought it faltered a little bit at the end. And, um, and actually one of my major quibbles, I think with the book is the premise underneath for Mr. Holland is, and he said as much as I recall, the premise underneath is that a theology and belief has shaped the West, right? Uh, for good or ill. I think he literally said that on Twitter a couple of days ago, as I recall. And, um, while I'm obviously sympathetic to that claim, I don't think, and this is surprising to me, given that he's a church of England, um, raised in the church of England. I don't think he, only till about six or seven, apparently. Oh, really? Oh, okay. Yeah. Still, um, I don't think he reckons enough with the, uh, and I'm going to sound, you know, like the liturgical Homer here, but I don't think he reckons enough with the, um, the Christian framing of, you know, the Latin phrase, that the law of prayer is a lot of belief. Um, I found myself wondering throughout, like, yes, belief is a driver, but belief divorced from practice is, um, you know, barely possible. And so I think that rears, that shows itself more in the latter chapters because he's still trying to press the claim. So while yes, of course, um, I'm sympathetic to the idea that, uh, we still are haunted by, you know, in the West, we're still haunted by Christendom and we still carry some of that with us. Um, I'm sympathetic to his claim that the red thread of Christianity still find its way through a lot of, of culture in the West, however you want to define it, but, but I don't think he reckons with the idea that it, that thread is fraying and, um, and has frayed significantly over however long you want to say precisely because, um, belief gets divorced from practice. Um, so even though we might have, we might have these lingering effects of belief, if you strip away the practice, they go away a lot quicker. So I don't think that he's re that he's fully reckoned with the idea that belief and practice go hand in hand and, and in such a way that your beliefs are driving your practice just as much as your practice is sorry, the other way around, I don't think he's reckoned with your practices, drive your belief as much as your belief drives your practice. I would love to see him engage with that thought. I will, if I get a chance to talk to him, I got it down. I haven't thought that I've, and that's, you know, that's, that's part of the whole, you know, the question of, you know, that's, that's part of the whole question of, you know, this, in the modern, in the modern period, Christianity or the church in the modern period, the church looking longingly at the imagined certitude of, you know, of growing science and technology decided it was going to play, you know, once it, once it got dethroned as the queen of the disciplines decided that, that she would catch up by, you know, being as propositional as anyone else. And that, of course, has taken us on a, you know, quite a, quite a 100 year trip in terms of, well, this is, you know, this is what it means to be a Christian and all of these, you know, subscribe to all of these beliefs. And then, of course, in a sense, the, we can't, we can't, we can't, we can't seem to ever just make small adjustments. We've always got to, you know, swing big one way or the other. Right. And so then, no, it's not propositions. It's it's practice, practice, practice. And then all then, you know, practice, you know, practice and orthopraxy. And, you know, then we're always trying to do all the adjustments and the and the coordinations. But no. And I think that's I think that's a fair I think that's a fair observation of the book. You know, that the you know, what strikes me so often is that, you know, we are such strangers to ourselves. And despite all of our attempts to. All of our attempts to understand, explain and in the hopes of somehow controlling ourselves, it's we're really bad at it. And so to to recognize. You know, to me, the startling thing of it is the illumination of the power of Jesus to have changed the world. In a way, I mean, and in a very modernistic, evangelical way. The idea was through the name and the symbols of Jesus, these are the drivers by which Jesus changes the story. And the book, in a sense, is a testament to. Even when the. Even when no one is recognizing Jesus in the mix. In the mix. It's fundamentally reshaped, you know, his his thesis that that he talks about in the deli pod interview, how, you know, the Brits, the Brits certainly the British missionaries certainly would have loved to have made India Christian. And, you know, obviously failed. But. You know, through this, through these other ways, deeply changed the way. Nearly everyone in the world sees themselves with respect to just just completely reframe the world. And that happens, that happens so sneakily. And then once you see that frame and you start having conversations, you begin to realize, you know, oh, my goodness, it's it's all over the place. All of these people trying to, you know, be, you know, transcend and put Christianity behind them. You just you just you just can't seem to do it without him. And it's just such a. Haunted. You are. Yes. Well, not even haunted. It's it's like, you know, we have a water problem, so we're going to add water. And and so Jesus just, you know, it's just become so all in all again and again. It's it's just such an alarming. It's just an alarming realization. So. I'll have to, you know, there's he he expressed some interest on Twitter and in doing an interview with me. And so I emailed the publicist and we'll see if we'll see if any of that comes to be. But yeah, right on. But it's his his story is like in in his own process and awakening and what Jesus has sort of come to signify and maybe mean for him. There's the historical side and there's the premise of the book, the pastor in me. No, I take it. I take a different approach to this now than when I first started. When I first started and somebody comes to me and they say, I want to explore Christianity or, you know, I've been gone for a while. I'm really interested in getting them the right book. You know, I want to find the right material for them that's going to speak to them, whether it's NT Wright or whether it's an old CS Lewis book or the New Beginner, something like that. These days and so like, you know, if Tom Holland were were were asking for material, like, what do I do next? I'd be like, go to church, man. Take take six months and just embed yourself in some local parish in London. That's what I tell people here. And it sounds self-serving coming from a pastor. But you both need material, but you also need like the practices. And so you need the ability to try these prayers on and hear the creed being said and watch people take communion every week and imagine to yourself, does this fit my frame of reference? And could it also alter and shape my frame of reference, which is what the book is, I think, is one step towards. What what you know, the pastoral move for me at the end of this book is sort of in a preaching kind of component is if there's a warning here, it's good luck domesticating the spirit of God, as it were. You know, Jesus will continue to confound and confuse you. And when you think he's on the side of your, you know, cause to live, good luck with that, too. He is an equal opportunity offender. Well, and that's that's exactly, you know, the, you know, many of us Christians imagine we can corral him and wield him and then others outside living in the shadow of Christendom. Imagine they can wall him out and avoid him. And it's like, you know, and again, to me, it's I've been in my adult Sunday school class where, you know, we go slowly through the Bible. John three, where, you know, this this leader of Israel, you know, Jesus is like, well, you're a you're a teacher of Israel and you don't know these things. You know, Jesus is completely unwieldable. And then in John four, when he meets the Samaritan woman at the well, you know, what's this man asking me for water here? And, you know, that, you know, she's almost like a cocktail waitress who's going to be, you know, you know, smart mouth with him. And, you know, he told me everything I ever did. And I imagine the Samaritan village hearing that thanks to her. Tell me more. I'm going to try it out. I'm going to try it out to the world to see this guy. And you found him compelling somehow. Yes. And so. Yeah, I I'm I think, you know, and that to me has, you know, the we'll see what happens with the book and what happens with Tom Holland. But, you know, the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the the you know, the alarming. The alarming phenomena that sort of happened in the three ish year run of Jordan Peterson on the public stage was similar in that and that, you know, somehow in the midst of all of these crazy conversations with with the Bible and Jung and Nietzsche and Dostoevsky and Solzhenitsyn that, you know, people are like, I kind of want to go to church and they start going to church. And evangelicals have always imagined that if we can only if we can only somehow colonize people's lips and colonize their frontal lobes, then we'll have them. And in, you know, in many ways, the dramatic impotence of that movement lately and scorn with which it's been received in many sectors, suddenly we find that, you know, as. Suddenly we find, you know, as Lewis prompts, you know, people are going to have to be very, very careful about their reading if they're going to avoid this man, because he has found his way in places that you imagine, you know, no son of God should be found. So. But where where and here again at the end of the book, what what my my pressing question continues to be, I think we find ourselves in many corners of the West, again, depending on your understanding, we find ourselves in the unique situation in various unique situations now, precisely because there's been this divorce of Christian practice. And I don't think he intends this, but you could you could sort of be lulled to sleep a little bit in the final five or six chapters as he's recounting that, hey, you know, it's there almost seems to be a sympathy to the idea of the love of the Beatles, which, you know, as a common grace for formed Hyperion, I'm like, in some ways, I'm like, yeah, but you can be a little bit lulled to sleep, I think, by his thesis that this will just sort of continue on in perpetuity. And I don't know that that's true, given, you know, that I don't know. I wonder if it's a last gasp or at what point? How long does this continue when it's divorced from the institution of the of the church itself and the processes therein? That would be another question. And you can't answer that, of course. But, you know, he raises that directly in in the the Delling pod. I mean, they they are anxious about it in the Delling pod interview. And in fact, that sentiment, I just did the video I released today, which has a very interesting conversation between Coleman Hughes and John McWhorter. You know, Coleman, Coleman Hughes, looking around as a contemporary college student talking to a professor at at Columbia says, you know, Dr. King had. He doesn't really. But basically, Dr. King had religion. And for you and me atheists, you know, we seem to lack something in terms of the power to to create a movement. And, you know, I do think of the fact that when you bump into you, you bump a smoke from a guy who's going to the the recovery meeting, he can say, yeah, you know, I used to I used to go to church when I was a kid. What happens is you and I well know here in California that that's by no means something that we can presume that people have had, especially as the you know, as people get younger, increasingly, we bump into people who have never darkened the door of a church in their life and have had, you know, however misguided or weak the Christian formation they received had been, there was something there. So then your question as to to what degree can the culture carry the virus when it's so lost touch with the host? At what point do the mutations betray, you know, the root the root stream? So these are hard questions. Yeah, yeah, for sure. And the guy that that is in recovery. I mean, that's an that's an argument to me of like, look what he need. He needs the rituals and practices of the nearly nightly meeting and watching the things that they're I mean, those folks are good Lord. I mean, those are the bravest people that I've encountered and the way that they care for one another. There are certainly things to teach regardless of your religious affiliation. But but what's important there is that combination of belief and practice. I think that's what addiction recovery groups have figured out. Yeah, that the the nightly meeting, the coming together, the saying the same words over and over again. That also grounds that guy in and I'm sure he would recognize it as such. So, of course, as pastors, what we're trying to communicate is, yeah, that's what the church is here for. Well, Eric, I've I've I've pestered you for a while now. I don't know if there's anything you'd like to say or or ask or do or. Not necessarily, I suppose. How do you I mean, your context is really different than mine. Yeah. And your your church is different than mine. I would throw back the same question that you asked me. How how is dominion important? Not just for, you know, your YouTube presence, but how do you think it's important for your community in Sacramento? Or what is important? I know that book or anything we've talked about, I think is, you know, there's a. It's something that is was was brought out by Chris Arnade, wrote a book entitled Dignity. Oh, sure. Yeah, I follow him on Twitter as well. The book is it's on my stack. You should. It's a it's a fast. It's a fast thing. You know, my context of. African American neighborhood, Hispanic, Hispanic community, Asians, homeless, group homes, mentally ill. Far less secular than in some ways. Yeah. Then then your community. And so you bump into a guy in a recovery group. Well, you know, gosh, who isn't in who isn't or should or hasn't been at some point in recovery, you know, as I look around and the you know, this is this is why the you know, for me, the conversation between, say, John McWhorter and Coleman Hughes is interesting. And then if you throw Glenn Lowry into the mix, because Glenn Lowry often talks to John McWhorter because the I mean, the the black community is is such a different is these these things run so differently. You know, once someone in the black community, you know, you know, riffing on Twitter a little bit, you know, when my father first came to Patterson, he wore that collar and then and then took it off. You know, when people in the black community find out that I'm a pastor, then, you know, they they they change their language in a different way. Right. Right. Then then many had a different class. And so when, for example, when I when I met my, you know, one of the first non when when one of my my first friends that I met outside the church when I moved to Sacramento. African-American man, very well educated, you know, very successful in his line of work. You know, he sort of he grew up in the black community and now sort of lives between the worlds. You know, first things out of his mouth was, you know, oh, you're a pastor, a pastor's or kingdom builders. They build their own kingdoms. And that kind of. Honest cynicism is not what you find necessarily on the street, because people who are living so much on the edge have a healthy. Their their selves are not anywhere near as buffered as as the affluent and the secularity that affluence affords. Yes, though. So in that way, in terms of the church and the zip code that my church is in. But again, my church is so strange because we've got folks living that way. And then we've also got people who are usually with white Dutch CRC roots or maybe driving in there. You know, my church is just such an estuary of so many different cultures that it's it's it's just such a mix. So in your comments, I just reminded of the word that we kind of started this with, which was I used apathy here and I think you use the word lethargy, which I think is is both true and that that so many people need to just be myself included, that the the gravitational pull to either narcissism or the tyranny of the now or whatever it is that we often need to be shaken out of our our lethargy. And I find that to be true just sort of across the board with whoever I'm often whoever I'm dealing with. And the the mutual friend who was a Davis resident, I won't name his name just for sake of the family, but who we you know, who we just buried not too many months ago. I mean, for him, as such a as such a dynamic man, I mean, that for him was a constant thing. He said, you know, people, you know, he was such an active person. And part of his frustration with people is that they don't do anything, right? No, just talk, talk, talk, talk, talk and do something. And and so in that sense, you know, Peterson was was very much very much present, even though he didn't, you know, at that point, it's like he didn't pay much attention to was very interested in what was happening around me. But but we we. Affluence, affluence and security breeds a certain amount of lethargy. And and then we sit in our we sit in our comfy chairs and pontificate. And, you know, how on earth I sit in this fairly comfy chair and pontificate for hours on YouTube. Certainly not one who can throw stones at that. But no, it's I saw, you know, I saw Tom Holland's book and, you know, listening to a lot of just sort of watching him and what's going on and and thinking. No, Peterson. Don't want to take anything away from Peterson or Holland in terms of them as agents and in terms of their actions and their work as as moving things. But there are also there are also telltales. And, you know, you and I both sailed with Ron a little bit and figure out how sailing works. There are also telltales about the culture that. Yeah, that's right. And there are many there are many others who who in the culture and we see again them coming out of coming out of England, of course, because England in many ways is in a far different fringe than we are even here in California. Right. Right. I had a conversation a number of years ago, actually, and I was I shouldn't have been surprised, but I was stunned to learn of very American evangelical movements within the Church of England. I was talking to a guy from London and I was telling him that I some people in my community had visited a church in in London and loved it or maybe was Oxford or something. And he kind of raised his eyebrow like this and like, go on. Just as you know, as a brief side note, he's like, well, you know, that's a that's a church that in in an effort to slow stem the tide of decline has sort of adopted an American evangelicalism approach to worship. And yes, they're in a historic building, but much of their service doesn't look anything like what would normally be prescribed by the Church of England. And so I find all of that fascinating and what it means when we you know what I just find those questions fascinating, which which Holland's book is at its heart, a question of in the ongoing movement of time, what as part of the past and tradition ought to be held on to and what continues to need reforming in a reformed world or reformed theological frame. I'm fascinated by those those comments and those questions. And that's I think that's kind of at the heart of this project is what has endured and what ought to and what are we in danger of losing? These are questions I'm deeply interested in. Yeah. So I've got more more. He's the stack continues to grow. I'm realizing now that I was disparaging commentaries as you sit behind a wall of them. Yeah, I like them. I like them. But they don't you know, they don't fall. And it's funny because Julian, one of the guys who's in this little YouTube community, you know, he said to me sometimes, I mean, how much of those commentaries get in your sermons? And it's like, well, first of all, I'd be surprised because I actually, you know, I was, you know, we're both working on this Sunday sermon, I assume. I was working on it this morning and, you know, actually doing it. From the lectionary, I assume, Paul. Yes, I'm in the lectionary through through through Easter, Eric. Then I'll wander off again. Small wonders never cease. So, yeah, yeah, we're we're strange. We're strange creatures. Well, well, thank you, Eric, for giving me the time and being willing to to come on the channel and do this little recording and just just stay on. I'll stop recording and we can chat before we hang up. Right on.