https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=O54rJWz3Y9Y

 and home But it's related a buddy sent me an article recently from some sub stacked all probably I'll put in the comments this is done or something, but it's It's something like why you are probably an NPC and it breaks down like seven sub category categories and NPCs or something it's like the You know these two of them are like the what I would call the exclusivist on the right side of history So like this one over here and this one over here, you know The conservative or the liberal like I'm at the NPC over here, and I have my group think no I'm the NPC over here and I've made my group think or there's the middler NPC which is like the truth is in the middle and They had there's one line from it I really resonated with where it's just like if if you find yourself in groups of people or frequently around people where everybody thinks Like you you're probably an NPC Well, we all start out NPCs, I mean so for Reiki says that it is a Goppe that creates people out of you know, these little biological beings that we birth and the only way you create a person is you first create a non-player character and as the baby Grows increasingly the baby becomes a player Rather than I mean it all goes back to grim gris's channel. There is no agency until there is and and this is you know Karen was as you know long been sort of chewing at the bone of knowing, you know loving to know it's the same thing I mean we a gap a Agape grows us into greater levels of knowing and that gets into Drew Johnson Made mentioned in terms of ritual but the point of the video that I released this morning is that Ritual the agent is always related to the arena and so ritual is also about growing in agency because Peugeot talks about how Ritual is is sort of a it's it's labor-saving its energy-saving It's it also sort of releases us for more agency. So once the path to the river is Is trodden now we can have a conversation while we're walking on the path instead of blazing it and And that's you know technology is this this double-edged sword because Technology on one hand affords this kind of leveling up of agency But it also distorts and disrupts and and we're quite ignorant of that until we You know, we don't even really know what a car is. Yeah as Peterson so nicely put back in the day. So Well, sometimes that distortion is good, right? Yeah Well, what do you think go ahead? What do you think? Being in it how how is being an NPC related to subtle bodies and powers and principalities Well, we we they have us for it means we become their physical bodies and They have us for a long time but so when Jesus as as the book of Colossians says when Jesus basically Takes control of and owns these principalities and powers Then you know Jesus sort of has us in a similar way but this gets back to see us Lewis's quip about the in screw tape letters about our father below and You know the dreaded enemy because the father below only wants NPCs that he can continue to feed off of whereas What God does is he wants to see us grow up as sons and and you know that with children on One hand you want your you you teach your children to obey and you do all of that But you do that you you sort of you sort of educate them into being your NPC But then then they begin to grow out of it because what you realize is that you're also an NPC in certain levels And they are they are in some ways also liberating you as as they liberate themselves as they grow and grow an agency and the beautiful thing about having adult children now for me is that You know while I certainly don't agree with everything that they think or or stand for at the same time they have agencies that I don't have and So then as a family as a collective we have certain powers that we wouldn't have without the children As a body. Yeah, do you do you what do you think about this? I often think of this as a Modus trolling here. I out. I just outed him. Sorry. I did name them secret account So I often think about this yeah, well it's not on this thing though I have a think of this is like, you know, oh that you need. Yeah I wish you wanted solid food, but you still need milk. How much what how is that related to NPC versus free? Well, I have an example About kind of about this. So when my wife and I were first going church shopping you know looking for a place to That we would call our church You know, we we would go there. I didn't you know, the churches were going to were liturgical You know in the way that kind of classically liturgical and you know, I don't know anything that's going on here. I'm like Why am I standing? Why am I sitting? You know, what are these hymns? and and so in that way, I guess I I'm an NPC when I come in and Then but what I really like about that that MPs that particular mode Is it starts to give me a formation that I could start to kind of take, you know participate in and then Then the reason why I'm doing it is because for some reason I'm trusting these people Like part of it is that they've been there for you know, a lot of these people Literally, you know were baptized there as children and now they're 80 years old and their children have been married there and they'll actually have their funeral there and so like there's a Particular kind of trust that goes into I'm gonna trust these people they seem to be pretty good people They have a really strong community It's and so like that particular kind of NPC thing is really helpful And I'm sure you know some of that can get wonky, you know Like I'm listening to this other book right now about cults and stuff and well, that's you know Yeah, so that's my sorry Let me throw this in so one of the things that I love and I feel like I can talk about this and illustrate it And relate it better than I could a year ago, but So part of one of Palani's big ideas also is focal subsidiary integration Which is basically ritual knowing in a sense So like the example that I've always used before is riding a bike or any any sort of procedural you could you use the baking of the cake Procedural you could you use the baking illustration or like following a recipe or something? there's there's a degree to which learning a bike is you have to focus on these patterns and these things in a in a Particular way and repeat them over and over and over learning to play guitar Dribble a basketball and you have to focus on it You have to do the fundamentals over and over and over and over and over until the focal things Become sit necessarily integrated and this is how you build neural pathways actually in your head you focus on things in your prefrontal cortex to the degree that you integrate them into your Subconscious and then you can do them without thinking so that you can actually drive a car So that you can actually ride a bike But my point this is the problem with modernist assumptions of name language and to talk about things intellectually Especially in an identitarian way as you think about all the stuff that you're talking about with your prefrontal cortex is stuff that you've fully Integrated into yourself, which is the difference between mamanistic and Eucharistic knowing That's right, and that's and so that's in a sense when we're driving a car We're NPCing on purpose Yeah to a degree to a degree which is exactly what you just described and We end PC on purpose while we're driving a car so that we can in a sense. It's a multitask cheat We sort of create these other little We sort of create these other little bots within us So I'm going to now have a bot to drive the car so I can talk to my friend Luke as we drive up to Thunder Bay Yeah, yeah And and so that's that's really a tremendous power and so I mean an NPC is sort of a troll it's sort of a put-down word for people because we know we need we're know we need to be more than that and as Chad said with respect to worship you go into a church and you watch the liturgy and No matter if it's a high church or a low church all churches have liturgy Because all churches have practices that are repeated low churches are tend to be a little bit more simple a Little bit more modern in terms of their sort of at the surface a very old church like the Orthodox I mean, it's just well. They don't have explicit ritual Right, right, but they but all the ritual is implicit, but when you go to church and you start again it's like a child you take on that first draft because You you have to try and do it one way And if you actually learn from someone who has done it you already have a leg up and So then you know in it and that's why culture that's why culture can be cumulative and that's why we even have this conceptualization, which is extremely popular right now of progress because Hopefully you will learn from your parents your children will learn from you your grandchildren If your children are wise enough to continue the legacy your grandchildren will go on and so it will it will keep going And so ritual and you know, that's why in Peugeot, you know with his illustration, you know with the wolves going back to Peterson I mean, that's a great illustration and and we actually see in that sense Progress potentially progress through history. But part of what we're dealing now is all of the technological disruption I was I almost was gonna make a probably after I finished chatting with you guys make a video for tomorrow on Louise Perry's conversation with on unheard from about a year ago with Ayla that's this woman that's been only fans and she's been a prostitute and all of these things and she she Ostensibly does all this research now on on things and she's been a Benjamin voice channel she's been on a lot of corner adjacent channels, but You know that so they're having this argument about for this conversation about well, what's best for society? What are our norms really we should be talking about? What are our what are our ideals? Because and and then because ideals are far more flexible necessarily than laws laws tend to be binary and I think this gets into your intuitions Luke about About creeds as iconic rather than Because because when I when I listen to you talk and sort of chafe on the confessionalism thing I really hear the difference between ideals and rules Now rules have a certain power that ideals don't have especially for the young because the young tend to need more rules But as we grow an agency ideals Become more important because we recognize as Vicky nicely talked about an awakening from the meeting crisis Rules have the strength and weakness of rules are the same thing. It's that they're binary. They're open and closed And a lot of oh, sorry. Go ahead. Jet a lot of that my ideals that I've discovered That I should be living by we're actually from breaking rules and having and Noticing like well that I was pretty pretty much a bad idea to break that rule I I should probably adopt some ideals and that's been my experience and So it's a part. It's a participation thing again and and also through gaining a different perspective and all those different things and Then like one more quick thing that the modern problem that you're talking about As it relates like this bicycle thing that he was talking about Makes me think of when we've ever seen that video where they take the bicycle and they switch this the turning on it And so when you when you turn the handlebars left the bike goes right and we turn it so the weird thing is is it'll take you about six months to learn how to ride that bike and Then after you learn how to ride that bike you can no longer ride the other bike Yeah, and so like that's the modern problem like this is so we we got everything kind of flipped around So we have to relearn how to do things So I was I was so I bought this new electric car and I'm doing one-pedal driving and I'm learning now to You know I'm becoming a better driver I start breaking before I used to because you sort of let up off the gas and then the car begins to slow and Then you don't have to ask use break break pads because I don't want to pay for further brake pads because brake pads Kind of a waste you pay to go and then you pay to stop but then I went into my wife's gasoline car and Intuitively I'm driving that as if it has one pedal breaking and I let up off the gas and the car keeps going Because it's and it's it's a it's a weakened analogy to exactly what you say Chad and that I have all these years Driving one certain way and now in an electric car. I'm learning to drive another way But then when I switch back to a gasoline car the brain has to sort of So that I can you know continue to NPC my driving. This is a really scary thing that happened to me Let me I'm sorry. I'll stop talking of this but the other day I was at At work in the morning with a bunch of the guys were looking at some a magazine With the with these pictures of this tile job, and I'm standing there I want to look get a closer look at the picture and I go on the magazine and I put my fingers on it to zoom in And I was like what? And like you know I think it is funny, but it's like what are we doing? Okay, well technology. I mean technology changes your habits and your patterns You know you get used to using Google Maps or some sort of map thing and then like I was saying the other day with My daughter and make I drew a little map for her to get to some local place in the neighborhood So she could dog sit and it was like Chinese to her she had no idea what she was looking at or People have no idea how to orient to the stars like you you think somebody could sail across the ocean navigating Why the stars anymore well the medium is the message? Which is why McLuhan's on my Mount Rushmore of the meeting crisis which I don't think You know I don't think people really got four slots on rush. I know I know I have some backups I'm pretty sure McLuhan's up there. I Don't know who Pallani Sheldrake Man, I mean there's and then there's like interchangeable. There's backups that do all the same things but um Yeah, so a lot of this is just law and spirit. I mean isn't this st. Paul Yeah, well It is law and spirit does have that same a similar dynamic Because spirit I mean often when we talk about the spirit of the law We are talking about an ideal Because it's a there's an ideal is sort of a telos It's a fixed destination and you can get there in different ways Law is like a road Here that you here are the boundaries you stay on the road the road the law that this road will get you to the destination a Spirit is more you know You're gonna have to go over here go over there go over there and and the truth is we are spirits and so just like Chad said he did a lot of learning by breaking laws and I Was watching my wife and I are watching this latest Taylor shared in peace lioness on And it's really quite good and so a little bit of spoiler One of the themes in the show is the marriage tension between the main main character Zoe Saldana and then her husband and they're both high-status people and They're sort of ignoring their oldest teenage daughter who's playing around with sex and And her father said to her there's you know, there's two things that will completely Disrail your life trajectory one is cars and the other is sex and so like the parents laid down these firm rules To her and she broke them because she was in a car accident and then in the hospital they discovered that at 14 She's pregnant. So and so and and now it was it was Grim just drive and so it was very it was very good in that the the parents Kind of had them to take on the wisdom to say This is something we can't be angry about right now because she sort of level jumped and okay now You've been pregnant now. You've been in a car accident Spirit is a much more costly path than law We have a number of new entries into here Oh Sorry, sorry to step on your live stream Grizz No, I wasn't ready today. Anyway, but ah You guys need savings throws and you called for more ritual when you shoot This to yours audience So shouldn't that happen immediately You go your yours is one of I was gonna make a comment that yours is one of the most ritualized channels We have in this flotilla Well, first now pray for us an hour of our need Graham Well, the thing is there's a lot of mind control going on, especially with your horrible misuse of the NPC terminology so I Like to have a savings throw against the mind control by choosing either survival social wisdom or Heart as your participatory buy-in and if it's over 10 You take half damage under 10 full damage for from the mind control, but at least some of us here want what's best for you Survival social wisdom or heart choose Oh Indigo out-the-box survivalist prime 17 socialist number nine Lovers of wisdom you made it. That's a ten hard folks. You got only your four chambers. You're gonna need some bonuses I'll give you a plus five dear saves if you chat in pastor Paul's or grail country's hive mind chat during this stream Are we streaming on on grail country to is this three channels at one streaming well, I usually do it on my channel in grail country because I do it on grail country because That's the only way that I can really participate there outside of commenting because I can never coordinate times to talk with anyone You do it because nobody watches your channel well and that And that and because I don't want I don't know if my channel got big see This is where this comes in the NPC thing If I get a lot of followers, I'd be like you're all sick of fans and you don't know me and I don't want anything to do With us anymore and I'd burn it down We're all in this pyro theology. We got to build the church so we can burn it. Don't worry I will but they won't so so we are on Grizz we are on mine. We are on grail country. We're not in Grizz's channel No, sir. I'm not straight. I don't take away from you when you're streaming unless Unless I didn't realize you were going to I don't run my channel against yours No, but you can hit that little button up there, right? That's all I did Luke started then I hit that little button and then you can stream it to your channel, too I'd rather they join us here is the thing or a grail country All right Joseph, how are you? I'm okay. Um I did not finish your your latest one on ritual not a member. So I only saw it this morning but um, I Don't know I Definitely had some thoughts. I say that I caught up on some of your stuff. I hadn't been I didn't have that energy honestly to follow past a couple weeks the holidays and everything but um Yeah, I did do a little bit of ketchup and I have to say so I don't know I Don't know I found a couple of things one was I Know you did kind of the beginning of that ritual chat tied into the Israel Gaza thing But I don't really know that it works so well because neither of us are really fully westernized certainly not Christian countries and how it plays out is very Different even though yes, there's a layer especially I think in the first 40 years of Zionism of kind of Western European like really strong Western European influence Those all it was was never through Christianity, right? It was already kind of funky coming in there So I don't know. I mean and they've been fighting for ever right? I mean we've been fighting literally for 75 years since the since 1948 and even before that actually was just the 100th anniversary of the of the hypha massacres so like To say that this is a sign of like the fall of modernity or something declining or seeding This has been going on since before World War two that I don't really know that I buy that narrative exactly I think the way it's being received in the West Certainly kind of is showing kind of faults in the liberal kind of post or post-liberal order type issues And but I don't necessarily think that the complex self comes from that And it's not fully it's really Complicated because how much? Yes, I can I get can I get your comment on a current event while I have access to you yeah I understand that there is a red heifer that has been born and there's some significance Would you please comment for me? Well, you should watch this amazing TV show from about 10 years ago now called dick They won no, you just said that because I was being one right well, no It's actually a one season show about These evangelicals in Texas who find a red heifer bring it to Israel It's tied into it's like crazy kind of Dan Brown style archaeology mystery Conspiracy thing where they are like these guys are trying to I don't know Collect like the 12 stones from the priests breastplate and like it's it's a crazy you'd really enjoy the show You should be able to still find it online it's one season But it's of all about what happens if they find a red heifer and kind of this Dan Brown esque version Look every couple years we hear reports that there's a red heifer and almost always it's I mean we've been almost always For you it's like prophecy then times they're always saying it's going off and then it turns out to not Exactly, so you pay no mind to such things I If I hear about it, it's there's a little like tag in my brain and almost always I just can throw that away After like Thank you for letting me derail you and I'll go check out that dick. Yes I love dick is that the name of the TV show? That's called dig. It was like one of these early Dig oh wow I misheard you and that made No, no, no archaeology digs I Thought you understood because you said you thought that was a big Okay, I'm really restraining myself right now by the way. Yes Good job Go type in Google. I love I'm holding holding back the consciousness Congress. Okay, can we go back to the ritual thing though? Okay After you all look up this thing quickly, okay Which is not porn but there's a dig and there's a variety of shows named dig but I found the correct one So I get this thing back on the rails by running the train brain Also before you go I'm it's nice to meet you Took himself out BBK. I don't think I've ever met you before I'm Jason by the way I've been floating around to discord for a long time now, but I've met all these other you kind of met him throughout me He's part of me. He's Colonized my mind to some degree Trying anyway if you ever need to talk about it to be a Ecclesiastes with someone Jason's your guy. I Don't know if that's true Jason's like a brilliant intuitive Protestant evangelical charismatic wizard showman. This is the whole reason I stream just so just so you guys could talk great about me Keep going, please He said you should hey actually I want to pitch that I want PBK to talk to Jason on forgiveness Let's do it Um Actually, I joined cuz Cal told me to get on and then he bailed so yeah, but I would like to talk to Cal I think that would be interesting. Well, those are two. Yeah, those would be two good ones Sorry, Jason. What do you want to say? I Didn't I just just saying hi because I just kind of hopped on here then I've met everybody else and talked to Chad yourself and you but I've never actually met What's your name? Well, I had my own channel for a little bit but it died this last year because you've probably seen my comments It was just called almond tree. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah So here's it kind of around but yeah, I haven't done anything in a while. I've been on Jacob's channel This trying to Bible studies with them, but I've just missed so many of them because of I've been working two jobs. So He goes deep into the Bible he basically just reads George MacDonald in the Bible over and over and over and over Which are good choices But so to relate to this with ritual and forgiveness Lee Joseph unless do you have something else you want to say? I would go back to the ritual conversation. I Exactly where you guys were but I mean I don't know the last thing that Paul said before he we all interrupted a jump done About So thing was the relationship between Law and ritual and spirit of the law and there's also like this whole Like like the the affordances are like of all these things together, right because I don't I was thinking about this a Little bit when I was listening to your thing earlier today Paul Because a lot of what I find Jewish Ritual to do is essentially it brings and this is kind of to Johnson's point it brings together the law and the participation in a way that they actually Afford each other and are fully in contact with each other and What I kind of find lacking sometimes I think in the spirit of the law conversations And is you know, look I'm coming at spirit of law from a whole different place like we can acknowledge that But to me spirit of the law is very can be And I think I see this Because it's more abstract and it's like trying to like find some like deeper essential whatever form It kind of does what statistics does right? It becomes like everything gets reduced to like the mean or like the the single like attempt at finding a pattern Where you but then you ignore like all of the things that make it fitted to its actual embedded situation that the there's not just so you said the law is like a path but like part of a path is like being able to walk on the path and if you just Describes like give someone a map. It's not the path and this is the whole point right those conversations But there's also Something that's this is not just a propositional problem I think this is just as much of procedural things when ritual becomes Like oh the point the rituals are true itself for the point of the ritual you sometimes see this Actually with symbolic thinking a lot. I see this in Cabela I see that sometimes in some of the Eastern Orthodox stuff I've been exposed to at this point where like it even the procedural can kind of become this kind of very reduced Abstracted form and This is right where we this is the whole like that meme where you get like The thing that represents the thing is no longer the thing and keeps getting more abstract until it becomes Beauregard strawberries Exactly, which I learned from vocal which almond tree kind of looks like and I'm getting I'm getting because of the way the discussion Is going I'm getting this clip from I think it was an episode with him and Lindsay and boys. Yes, but boys goes into the recycle tree And I think that we're hitting the two points of that and not the third of like from ideation or from material to ideation to law and then Backed in the material where thing and it's a spiral that way Potentially I saw that but it's been a it's been a while if we're going like from ideation into law, right? Right. Well what we're losing on the way, I'm not sure So then we have to hit back to what actually is once we get lost in the way of just the law And I'm sure I'm not sure I'm going that way because to me the law isn't the abstract bit To me, right like so I mean this could be a Christian Jewish difference type thing, too Because the law well one we don't write like this is confusing because We're talking about Lala are you talking about Torah which is translated as law but does not actually mean Right and that's part of well at the social destruction layer. We're generally talking about I'd say we're talking about the Legislatives secular be like aside from religion laws more than than what but like Your I would say that the hope of your law is that it runs true Through all three cycles and you treat it as it does as if it does Yes Yeah, I think that's better. But thanks Anyway, well it has to be true. I mean the law the idea the whatever it has to be true on every level or else it becomes Divorced it's no longer symbolic. It's no longer religion. It's no longer actually uniting these things like Peter Rollins in a recent episode spoke of Money and he said this is where like if you if you get to the place where you Pursue a lot of money but it's almost to the point where like say like a millionaire dies in an empty apartment on a mattress because he's so scared to abstract the money because it just becomes about the act it becomes about the Accumulation of wealth and so he said he said technically that becomes a religion because you're actually concerned with an abstract Divorce separate thing you don't actually care about the money which is just meant to buy you things You're actually not even a materialist. You're actually a religious Abstracted person, but you've any either way you've divorced those things And the whole thing is like those two those two things always have to be united which has always been my critique of Confessionalism and why a creed isn't because it's really like if you go on the OCA website says the symbol of the faith It's these ideas cannot be abstracted from their Embodied reality or else the law becomes the not law which is why st Paul says in first Timothy one of my favorite verses the law is just if you use it lawfully at birth Yes, yes exactly Well, I just it's you know part of the blessing of the corner has been that You know when I when I talked to Yosef or or Jacob And the sense I get of How they handle the law and what that means to them is I get it I get a very different sense than I Think Christians have been deeply influenced obviously by Paul of Tarsus in terms of What he does with the law in Romans and in the New Testament and even? Christians who? Made this is where it gets into ritual and multiple generations Christians who can't necessarily articulate or even sort of Develop a theory of law based on Paul still have this this stance towards it Inherited especially in Protestantism through Luther who who really you know shakes things up and then Calvin sort of pulls it back a bit with the third use of the law and but then when I I listened to when I listened to You know the Jews sort of work through this it's like wow This is I I'm not always sure we're talking about the same thing even if we're using the same word Have you read I know I've asked you this but it's been a while Maybe you've read it since maybe you haven't maybe I should send it to you. Um, Christina Hayes. What's divine about divine law? No, I haven't read it okay an ex one honestly, it's better than her biblical series even I think it's her best work um She goes through the Ten like the tenach conception of law or at least first temple period let's say and earlier conception of law Um somewhat ingenious, but mostly just jewish or whatever you want to call it. Is there like whatever? um She then goes through like and there's a couple schools within that she kind of tries to pick apart But for the most part it's pretty convergent that she goes through like a dozen different like greek schools of thought on How law works natural law divine law, etc. Positivist law and then She does her bennett law and then she does pauline conceptions and and so she separates these four layers and kind of And paul really and she I think she makes a very good argument for this that paul's conception of law is very rooted in Essentially a mixture of two or three of the greek schools um and much less jewish and this ties into um The paul within judaism version that boy aren't argues that he's a hellenistic jew. He's not a pharisaic jew um And that his understanding of law and how he uses it at least to talk to his audiences is totally greek And like what the implications of that are um for the kind of the divergence between the two um So yeah, no really worthwhile I might have a really dumb question. How are we using law right now? Like because to me my mind would think I would think of just like almost go back to genesis one You you eat this you'll die Like I wouldn't know how else to conceive of law Because isn't that the first law? Well, is it did they die? Oh Well, that's yeah, that's that's the whole thing because I mean because I would think the law could be any law you make I mean, it's not You guys ran back to genesis and you're doing fancy things there, but You're gonna have to spell it out for us the rest of us if you want us to keep up Well, jason has following He usually goes good places Well, the reason I was wondering because I mean you can Because every country has different laws every religious group has different laws every identity has different laws But if you're just going back so you can kind of make up any law you want to I mean, i'm not saying it's arbitrary but like god could any genesis one But he said you eat this fruit you'll die which seems like if I want to like if i'm just Anybody reading the bible it'd be like like it seems like people don't complain about that enough It's like why would god say this like that seems like such a strange thing to say like don't eat of this fruit It's the knowledge of good and evil so I get all the symbolic stuff incorporated in it But that is law right? It's that's making law is knowing good So you're going to establish laws that this is this is this is evil And and god is god is the judge and he gives gives that and so that just seems like the first law so then Uh, I I don't know how to how to use that term law. Sorry. Go ahead We have three people wanting to respond or four we haven't heard from in quite some time. Let's let him go Well, I just I was thinking about this because I think it's along the same lines. Uh, jason it's like What happens when an npc gets a hold of the laws? He's really practicing a prejudice rather than a principle And and what I mean by that is so my understanding of prejudice is um Having an opinion about something one that's not rooted in actual fact or experience And like that's kind of goes to luke's confessional. Um, uh issue there. I mean we just like we That's so like the npc that they're like Uh ends up operating like like let's say eve eve was kind of an npc Right, and then and then she's like, well, is that true? And then so she acts and and and makes the sacrifice Uh, or this terrible move and now she has experience with it. So now she now she has an experience now We are like taking this story and Using, uh using it to form all sorts of different laws Um, I don't know if that's making damn sense, but it's making sense to me You made a disturbing amount of heresy like enough to make me uncomfortable with the way you're speaking of the mother of all creation Or or at least mother of us theoretically but I gotta swing back by the thing the tree thing that jason brought up like surely die Well, here's Where the hebrew gets complicated feels like we're not dead yet But that does everybody die but god doesn't seem to be here and so It's like we're separated from him. Maybe we are in death Right now. Um Still dying still surely dying from the apple Amen, I don't know. This is all heavy. I'm out. Love you guys. Oh wait card for him Oh Go figure so One of the things I want to throw in yosef and see how you think about this I was thinking about this recently too is that we have a very I mean particularly in my experience in the west and there's a big difference between Roman Catholic latin christianity and eastern christianity is law is characterized as very judicial legal I Mean that's part of the whole cartesian split. It's like this abstract idea thing that's separate from all of the symbolic Instantiation of what that reality is and so like when you break a law I would say in an orthodox Mindset like eat of this tree and you will surely die that law isn't It's not an abstract Morality thing in and of itself It's saying if you do this thing This is the this is the consequence of what will flow out of that into your life but I think the interesting thing about christianity jason is that There's almost a way within christianity that I would say is you have to Voluntarily enter into the consequence of adam and eve a la christ In order to have the fullness of knowledge and the fulfillment of creation That's the whole trampling down death by death and so death the curse becomes the gateway to life And that's how christ has reconciled all things to himself in his death in your death So I think um I do make two so one there is there are some similarities there. Um, there's there's a general Let's say biblical principle with the rabbis kind of make it explicit that um, the the cure is always in the disease So that is kind of what you just said at the end thing Which is also part of what influences kind of how I approach technology in the holy eye discussion um, so I think another part of this though is um I well I do I I would take some of that kind of natural law view of the initial Command of don't eat from the street or you'll die And here's the problem is it's a herew there's a bit of a hewagrammatical Constrict issue here because all the other laws where it says if you do this you'll die or um, it's um an active grammar and here it's Passive so I actually don't think that this is a great paradigm of all Law because here it does seem to be more natural whereas the other ones actually seem to be more positivist, you know So like something that actively has to be brought about by god or somebody or um I think so and I think this is an important differentiation because there's a very good argument. Um So what christian hazel get into is the big debate over natural law first um Other versions of the law and the greeks for the most part are very influenced by natural law Um much more so than Judaism is there really isn't so much Evidence of natural law kind of in the first temple earlier periods and how to read these texts. Um But what you see in their bidding period is they actually start making paul and the rabbis both kind of grapple along different lines in this area obviously paul and romans and other places the rabbi is Kind of the the best way to see this is in the noah high law discussion In the in the Babylonian Talmud where they essentially Say that um Natural law is essentially noah high law, um and adamic law or whatever, but it's not synaitic mosaic Whatever law. Um, that's positivist law. Um is kind of where they draw the difference. Um, but they're they're not the Babylonian Talmud is kind of Um, it's obviously very authoritative for us. Um, emanates though does not read it that way He actually reads it as none of this is natural law and he pushes back even harder against the natural law framework um so In the sense of if you do this you'll die like if you touch a hot pan you'll get burned, right? Like that's all we're talking about here if you eat this fruit Then you know, it's like poisonous or it will bring death into your life But one of the ways it's like very easy to see this is adam isn't not commanded About not taking of the tree of life it has no effect it seems or no temptation or no meaning for him Earlier and it's only after Um this moment where the tree of life actually seems to have value to man that he has to be removed from the garden Such that you won't take from it. Um and there's an interesting point here because to what luke was saying If you take our reading of the tree of life, especially how it's then used later in psalms The torah and the tree of life are seen as equivalents um and There's kind of no one could read this as like without Man being cast out of the garden the torah never has to actually be given to man Like it's still the blueprint of creation. It still is this whole logos thing Um that is the wisdom and the thing that structures reality or whatever, but it's not doesn't have to ever be given To man and man has never has to take it um without Have like once like before before eating or not eating. That's the wrong thing before the whole thing with with the fruit um To what chad was saying I definitely would push back. I think I mean grimm called it straight out heresy I don't know if I'd do that but um I just To me, there's so many layers to the sin. It's not really just the eating Um, I think the first the the big issue. I think I talked about last time right is that she like takes it's like Eve There's three different expressions that she sees the fruit is good. It looks good to eat Um, she has like she says she um, one of the words is to like is like is very propositional It's like her um, she cognized that it was good And then there's another one where she sees as good as perceptual and the third one is um, she imagines the taste of it um And so she has these like three kind of different layers of things That all kind of she seemed to already have knowledge or be mixing the knowledge of good and evil whatever it is She's already seems to be there. She already seems to have some sort of So this is what like I people say oh, this is where they get free will or this is where they like add Emotional reasoning on top of moral reasoning, whatever it is Those arguments kind of fall flat to me because I see this whole thing happening where she's already doing things before she even eats of the fruit and it's almost more in the The entire embodied act Of using all of her senses and kind of what she thinks the spirit of the law is What she thinks like all that gets processed here and it fails, right? Um, she thinks the spirit of the law has something clearly right? She thinks you can't touch it and like why she thinks that's a whole discussion But that's not part of the command initially So maybe that's really adam's understanding the spirit of the law or how to protect the law better procedurally um And then I think that right there's a that's one part of the sin There's this whole then there's the actual eating the disobeying part But then there's this this whole the aftermath which which actually has a whole bunch of other layers, right? The hiding the attempting to kind of lie to god the not taking responsibility, right? There's like all of these layers. Um, so I was reading something like we read genesis this past sat with as the as the yearly cycle um And so it's like very fresh on my mind. So I happen to be reading a bunch of stuff on this and a very very short piece This book I happened to pick up last year and I haven't finished yet, but i'm just going by the the cycle of the readings. So He said something that um, I never Like dawned on me exactly and not at least directly which was It's right after adam is given the command or warning or whatever you want to call this law Of not eating this literally the verse after that god says man needs um A what do you want to call it? Um an oppositional processing partner Um, and oh, sorry. It's not good for man to be alone He needs an up he needs an opposition an opponent processing partner to use our phrases And like was the purpose of eve initially to help him keep that command Um, was it was she was that and it was she kind of the make or break kind of? um lever here right where she could kind of push history into the two directions, um And it kind of gives her much more of a role and focuses on her. I think in an interesting way. Um, there's also this like Crazy midrash i've heard um Where Adam chose to eat the fruit so that you would not be alone Yeah, i've heard that too um, which is like Yeah Jason does that mean that I wish myself a curse for the sake of my brethren? Yeah, it sounds similar. Yeah Yep You know in in my adult sunday school class Which you know, i'm we're going to be doing estuary in january at the in that time slot and i'm thinking about ways that I can Keep that class going. I don't probably can't do it in real space, but I could probably do it online Um, which would be very interesting. I'm trying to think about how exactly I want to do that but In my adult sunday school class i've been working sort of and it sounds analogous So I put the sample for christine haze's book in kindle It's nice because you can just kind of click the sample and I can start reading it and if I Really get into it then I can buy it but The the immediate and mediated law It's sort of number one and number two and you see this contrast in a sense with romans one with paul where the um the greeks, you know It just says the greeks the greeks don't have the torah and so they all they are working from is you know They're working from their ignorance. They're just watching cause and effect Um, they know some things of god But it's all cause and effect and they're a mess And then he wrestles with the the story of israel and they were given the law But they're rebellious and so they wrestle with their heart and um And so and so then of course romans three Um, everyone's a mess You know whether and so but the the law number one and law number two I sort of contrast that with my god number one and god number two I don't do that in my sunday school class because they don't hear the god number one gun and number two stuff But the god number one is sort of the the the immediate it's um, it's consequence. I in my sunday school class I use the hot stove Um the child the child will learn not to touch the stove when the child burns their hand Um, the mediated law has the mother that comes and says don't touch the stove Okay, um so and and so i'm really interested in what christine haste has to say because of course Law what happens with words generally speaking as they go through time is they become so much more differentiated And like when you say law we that word law carries so much freight with us now and and part of the difference is of course that for the mosaic code this was This was in many ways analogous for us to the civil law that we have let's say in the united states of america and A great example of this is adultery Uh, if you commit adultery with your neighbor's wife in the united states of america Um, you're not going to go to court or be put in jail For committing adultery the mosaic code, of course was a legal code And and so this word law Is is so much is so differentiated and we have this separation In the united states of church and state so there you have canon law, of course Father eric is spending his time becoming a canon lawyer for the roman catholic church But how we live with that reality in the united states is like wow The roman catholic church can decide whatever the heck they want about whatever the heck they want That's a that's an entirely different sphere in a sense an entirely different arena than This legal code that we share in the united states and of course What you find in? What you find let's say i've been fascinated and you know, hopefully because he can jump in here I've been just absolutely fascinated by Israel today in that Oh gosh, you know when he's talking about bacon What does the modern state of israel do with bacon? and now It's I think for a lot of americans. This just blows our mind I with the video I was gonna do right now was this a little bit of work on louise perry talking to This this sex worker who's who's um About you know, well what should what should our What should our cultural norms be with respect to sex? Well, obviously you can read in the book of leviticus there are laws regarding sex America has laws regarding sex the catholic church has laws the orthodox church has laws the christian forum church has laws most people sort of live the only law they're living under tends to be The law of the nation state within which they reside And then whatever moral code but again, you see this idea of law as just Multiplying and okay, which law are we talking about? but I think So when I first was listening to peugeot, um, and I I discovered him after probably everyone else like the main speakers in tlc because he had the least appeal to me, um, and If you've ever seen stuff on my channel, like it's also not very active almost everything I do is essentially a response to him because he just gets under my skin Um, and part of it is yeah, no kidding. Um, and part of it is wow I want to see you talk to peugeot now. I would love to talk. I mean, I don't think that ever happened but He does I mean And part of it is because we one we operate in different symbolic worlds Um as you know, he's gonna claim his is fully biblical, but i'm telling you we operate very different There's khezi who's a much bigger fan fan of the peugeot brothers and I um and but the other thing is like For us and this is gets to a loop of saying like the law the spirit of the law and the law can't really be divorced Because otherwise the law becomes anti-law like but to put that into like real concrete terms like for us This is all like our symbolic world is not a symbolic world It's like it's a fully immersive thing and it has the law layer and the symbolic layer and everything But every it's all of it all that's everything everywhere all at once right? It's that um And there is no there's nothing beyond it. There's no way to carve carve off a separate sphere um, there's no Um now we can talk about judaism's had to grapple with the modern world and in some ways, you know modern orthodoxy Especially but also all the movements and judaism has done this to different degrees, but um But part of it is like I was talking to this guy on jacob's server and he's a he's from orthodox convert and We were talking about carrying on the sabbath and we said and he said something along the lines of oh, well, you know, it's not practical like for me to like live in walking distance of the church like um, I I converted and I I know I I I'd have to and like I don't live near a church. I drive to the church is however many miles away and I said that's but that's like the difference for us Like when you sign up when you convert, I mean we don't look for converts But when you do convert like and this is controversial because of the economic kind of implications But like we generally um in the u.s at least um Because of the distances we require converts to live in Jewish communities where they could walk to a synagogue if they're going to convert orthodox Um because like part of the religion is more important than the economics. It's amazing. Um, but Well, the the economics are part of it's they're they're all part of each other they're fully intertwined that if you know, and this this has led to issues this is like the shoes with People complain that you it's really hard to not be of a certain socioeconomic class and be Jewish in the u.s because if you're too Like can you be too poor to actively be able to participate like that's a really big issue And like how then of course, okay So we have charities and philanthropy and all those things to try to but like is there kind of a baseline problem with um Kind of because like how the materialism does play in even when it is knocked down multiple pegs It still has to be fully vetted and entwined with everything else um so And then he was pointing out. Well, yeah, but like I mean so he said something that I'm sure you won't necessarily agree with it was just funny the way he put it which was um but He essentially said in my and i'm gonna use my words, but christianity is kind of playing playing judaism on easy mode um because Because if you're going to try to get converts you can't have really high bars to participation At some level and if you have really high bars to participation and you require someone to fully immerse themselves and to fully assimilate into a culture um and to give up their past really and like in a much more complete way and move their house and Whatever it is. I mean That's going to be really hard for a lot of people you're not going to get the converts and I think right so there's this This extra thing and we can talk about like there's different versions of christianity some that are much more demanding And then others and we can have that hope I get that um but at some level as long as the symbolic world or the religious world or spiritual world is Cutoffable and you can say well, this is one sphere. This is the other sphere um Which essentially everyone does after the medieval period? um Then like, you know How does how how can that actually be recognized? Um, here's some fighting words. Joseph. Yeah fighting words Oh Yeah There was someone that was counter guys He's been reading the whole Talmud and the mission of Torah and stuff we can talk about because You know, it takes me seven and a half years to read through the whole Talmud so he can uh Feel free feel free and that's not that's just the discussions. That's not even the propositional part There's some stuff. Jesus said that comes to mind with all that, you know, like leave everything follow me Let the dead bury their own dead the rich young ruler Anyhow, Jason, Chazzy paul. What's up something? What's up? Gotta hear from Chazzy Yeah I'm here. Just uh, just joining the show. Um Uh, how's life in this world right now? I'm sure these things change day to day. Um, they do change day to day. Um Again, i'm like a chronic optimist. So like I i'm um I sent actually I sent it to uh, uh, yosef Someone else this article that just uh this interview that went on with this ultra-orthodox uh, uh representative and Uh, he was saying how uh since the war he's been getting calls non-stop from the ultra-orthodox Asking to uh enlist into the army and simply the army saying like that's nice that you want to do it like during wartime right now We don't have time to you know Uh, and and and we're thank god strong enough for it's not like pick up your pitchfork fork but you know the idea for me is that Unfortunately, israel is thrusted back in its um Biblical pattern where we have to be reminded um, unfortunately That uh, you know, we we if we're divided inside that's you know That's not where the enemy is And I think the leadership has failed but the people of israel have have uh galvanized and have reached new heights where I i'm proud again to see my people like Everyone from every level of society really all working over time all uh, uh donating uh, uh, uh Donating donating blood just a tremendous amount of of of of uh of charity going around and It's beautiful and we need to remind ourselves and look in the mirror and remind ourselves that we as a people know how to act This way know how to act this way collectively um and uh, so I remain optimistic So we were talking about ritual law and we're talking about how I think You know what we what we mean by this word law is different and and yosef brought off christine haze's book which i'm definitely going to check out because you know phlebas sort of comes up with the um You know what what was sort of wrote catechized in the christian reform church And you know, I think part of obviously part of catechesis is often especially of children is a simplification Um, and then obviously as you grow and you meet and you learn it's like it gets complexified but again part of what's fascinated me is is the attempt in in the state of israel to intersect these various levels of laws, especially because it's My and please correct me if i'm wrong the modern state of israel seems to be a pluralistic society Which is also a democracy and so in so many ways it's got It's got pieces in so many different conflicting layers of our contemporary world in a very Concentrated form within a pressure cooker. I mean and and to me that's so So When I look at when I read paul, let's say when paul talks about the role of israel through history that seems to be part of that the role of israel through history through the eyes of paul has always been a a A microcosm of all of humanity in an intensified form All of the issues of broader humanity not all of them in terms of The numerically but they're they're sort of concentrated into one story Into one people and what's amazing about the times today is that's still happening So that kind of folks well what you just said Uh reminded me of genesis again, uh, because you were saying the whole The whole identity of humanity gets concentrated into the story of israel and that's what I brought it up to I think yosef and hesi before and I'm not sure if they agreed but I was saying and I don't know if I was Articulating it right either but I was saying that it seems to me like Israel the people who worship the god of israel are the people who worship the right god because israel was given the name to Jacob when he wrestled with god in man Together and it's that tension of wrestling with god and the image of god in man and i've Personally my in my experience if I push those things To their furthest limits like even when I was talking to this muslim group uh, which the video is not up anymore luke I think watched at one point but I was asking them like well what happens if you want to one this with god like how do you even resolve this? If you if you actually believe your own scriptures that the image of god is in man And if you just keep pushing that and you keep pushing this idea of theosis you have to result in something in forgiveness And they said the same thing. There's an idea where they get to the top of the mountain And there's this one final leap you have to make before you can Become one with god and that's to forgive everybody you've Along the way that you've encountered and so I don't know that in that relating to genesis too because I mean the genesis thing just It that just happens to every that the story you take that tree of good and evil and uh And maybe this is just a different way of me seeing it, but it's just that's just That fruit of playing judge and playing god and saying I know good and evil is just at some point I feel like everybody does that in their life And there's a way that's referenced. I think in isaiah 14 When it's referring to lucifer because it's exalting yourself above Above the heaven above even the world that god gave you because he gave you You could even look at the heavens as father the earth as mother and when you exalt yourself above that and start saying this is damned because because you can look at earth and be like hey We should get rid of this or that and there's almost a way to just like like letting things be As god created them and existing with them and then uh Then uh I don't know. I go back and forth with this though because there's also a way like where There are I think it's in psalms And then revelation where it says I saw thrones and they sat on them um, and so god wants to make us gods He wants to make us judges He wants to make us lawgivers But the only way to do that is to be sitting on a throne of mercy and that's the only and I know that word's Not the right word. I think we're gonna sorry. That's the way it's translated in my bible I don't know if it's the throne of hesed. I'm not sure what it is. Uh, but That's the only way I know how to how to deal with law or truth is to have it And I think jordan peterson says the same thing. It's just he'll say Truth nestled within love. That's the only way I know how to deal with any truth Any truth is it has to be like on a of Of love or something like that? um Otherwise it just ends up burning and consuming and devouring and then you just end up Uh consuming yourself because you can't escape your own truth That resolves guilt Right sam well that's something so cal to pitch again the conversation with cal and jason and pvk on forgiveness is Cal has said to me, but he's been thinking a lot about judgment, uh recently and The the verse in the new testament talks about What's happening? Um the verse in the new testament that talks about the unforgivable sin And I can't remember who it is. There's someone cal heard it somewhere in some podcasts But but the guy did a riff on the unforgivable sin being unforgiveness That's what it is. That's the one That's the one sin that won't allow you to be reconciled with your enemy with everyone else is unforgiveness It traps you in hell It makes you the opposite of the divine Yeah, because there's so many other places in the gospels where christ will say this I mean he'll say it more specifically He'll say if you don't forgive then your father won't forgive you. So I don't know straight up. Yeah Yeah, pretty straightforward And even in the psalms, what does it say psalm 18? I think it says, uh Which I don't God is merciful with those who show mercy or something or he shows mercy to those who have mercy or something like that. There's this Yeah, and to me that's what pa like that even paul is being at in rome's 11, you know Which that's honestly what honestly it's reading the scriptures is what caused me to become more of a universalist It was roman's 11 along with ezekiel 16 That just I I can't escape them and some certain words of christ, but I mean Like I because I just can't really escape the thought now of uh That god would have mercy on all through the mercy shown us Because I don't think we can escape our own hypocrisy And then when you can't do that, you cannot find a place where you would not have mercy on someone else Well 123 universalism Um, you can but I mean like that's that's what I mean implicit in Um implicit in that is that there are those who don't show mercy and therefore mercy is not shown them I mean, it's yeah, it's right there but Here's the thing. I don't know that you can do that and and be Gosh, I don't know the right. I shouldn't I shouldn't say not christian But if if you're really taking the words Trap those don't repubate non universalists The reason I say this is because christ like he christ Well, the words of christ were that he did not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance and so if you are the chief of all sinners if you actually Do yourself is that the chief of all sinners and those others deserve to burn? Exactly, then I still have a hell of a habit happening Then put them down there and burn them then then you got one more stepping stone on your way to heaven But if you're at the bottom if you truly are the chief of all sinners if you are the lowest Then you always find it uh forgiveness for someone but I think I think if you don't I really think that's going to haunt you Because like what it whatever whatever one is he has been named already and it is known that he is adam He is man. So I don't think you can escape this universal history and I think that's going to just Like I I don't know how it wouldn't it would haunt me at least I think very much. This is where like the jesus Coming for the worst of sinners and st. Paul saying I wish I were a curse for the sake of my brethren Like unless you take that as a hollow platitude Like did he mean it? I think that's very christian. That's a very christian thing. It's a very jesusy thing that st. Paul said He meant it. He said I will go to hell For my for my brothers for the people who don't see this and for you want to send him there Including someone in our little corner that loves to deride him Yeah He might be paul in a past life one time I've been really moved going through 10 and 11, especially with all the events going on in israel right now. Um, yeah that uh That's a weird synchronicity For me at least and and and And I you know I Did I bring it here um It's a it's just such it's just an amazing thing to me. It's a to me. It's a sign Israel remains. I mean the fact that The fact that israel and the jews or whatever nomenclature we wish to use Still in some ways sit at in such a central part of human history today It's just a even for an ahmil like myself It's it's a fascinating thing. And again, I I find this I find this story working out in israel right now You know, I I think yosef in terms of what I was what I was thinking of the um The the fact that the the tensions within israel now between the religiously observant and the secularists are I mean that that is in some ways where The difference over the last over in my lifetime where things have come Religion is is religion viewed from a secular perspective Is once again such a live option. I was watching molly worthens conversation unseen and unseen this morning with justin briarly and again, just watching people come to faith that Shouldn't come to faith Um, you know that she has all the academics. She has all the smart She was raised in a secular household why on earth should should she become a southern baptist in north carolina? And you know you look at even just someone like jacob in his story. Um And and then to and then to see the modern state of israel wrestling with these issues today it just blows me away I think it uh I think That israel really needs to I'm gonna i'll go back to that tension you're talking about. I I think that that tension is is really the core the core of it and the I don't know If the religious are really as religious as they claim they are and the secular as a secular as they claim claim they are And I think they're all using uh We're using We're using the wrong I think the wrong Jargon today and I think the meaning crisis is an offshoot of that as well where there's like a requirement to go back and reread and read and reexamine Um, and you know ultimately John ravikis, you know his religion that's not a religion and he's working, you know that thing out but I have a religion that's a religion and uh, and um again, I I To me it's it's haunting because I I I do think when I I think of this Maybe I mentioned this in the past when we last spoke about how uh, this this this talmud portion that talks about how God comes to jerebam and tells them that come with me into the garden garden of eden and we'll walk together holding hands with the son of david and this is supposed to be with the representatives of both Masaib and yosef and Masaib and david and He asks who's in the who's in front? And he says son of david, so he says i'm not interested And I think we're still the secular Israel that that jacob has a very hard time with zionism as he calls it um, I think that is still jerebam holding on and um I think they're scared like you just said about this balance of you know does does religious Israel mean like people are people are now all keeping the 613 and there's like a high court that's going into people's houses and Making sure I don't I don't envision it that way I don't think and I think there's enough sources to also say that that's that's not what that's not what we have envisioned for us um but I think the israeli people also want it they want it in a different language They want to feel that it's not coerced. They want to they want to pick it They want to choose it and I think it also requires and it's painful it requires also the religious jews to Remove an exoskeleton from them and emerge new and it's a different version of secularism and it's a different version of judaism and Um, and you could say that you know, these were failed attempts or they were honest attempts whether it's reform or conservative but It wasn't because you know, the geometry is off. There wasn't enough people. It wasn't in the country that there's many different versions of this but I think when moments like this happen Again we have to we have to look inward so when I look at the response of the israeli response was not to crumble From inside again. I'm putting aside the leadership If the people all rose up to the plate that that to me is It's that's why the babylonians are gone and the greeks are gone and the romans are gone Because it's everlasting and I and We have yet to To while I don't think the light onto the nations is that we you know invented like the the Cherry tomato or the disk on key. That's not Great, but that's not our story What about falafel? and Who invented falafel though? They need some credit for that idea It is pretty good and fairly healthy but um Yeah, I think all of us. I mean when I talk religious folk we need to see We always have to be checking our orientation and I think uh What happens in israel to me is a wake-up call again as as individuals and as a nation we have to orient properly And to be fair like given how Um Given how the israeli ravenet especially has kind of played out in israel um especially in the past 30 40 years, but even for the whole time right has been Whether secular israelis can really can really trust it to have chesie's vision You know like I I wouldn't Um, I don't think that I mean overall I do not think that's the average kind of understanding and framing that I get from you know my interactions with the ravenet which is much much less obviously someone lives there, but um But you know, do we do we like what? Again, this is this is part of the whole art thing that When miss tayah comes one of the big parts is that the sinhedrin gets restored because it has to actually be a body of 70 leaders that people um can respect enough and trust enough um to kind of work together and have a joint kind of work out a joint religious vision and We the the current israeli ravenet is not a sinhedrin. It's not even close to a sinhedrin Um And like people laugh when you when you when you talk about like, okay Who would be the 70 guys on this thing? Like yes, there was an attempt in 2000 early 2000s at creating a sinhedrin. Napoleon tried to create a sinhedrin It's a great weird bit of jewish history, but um but like How would you pick these 70 guys and are there any are there any that really would have enough consensus? um and Occasionally there's someone maybe you can think of one guy or two guys. I mean so like That happens and when they tried to reconstitute it 20 years ago They tried to come up with a list. Um, and it was I mean And even though they found for the most part really good people like they could not then get people to actually listen to follow Them at all. So it didn't even matter even when they did try to get these types of guys. Um And there's this weird trade-off there between the types of people that are um open and kind and and and whatever, uh Compassionate gracious enough and the type of people who actually like Are able to inspire people and hold like power are not necessarily the same traits. And I mean Right, that's complicated. Um Imagine if you had to find 70 jesus's Right 70 people to kind of not fight the romans and be messiahs, but all work together. Um I don't know how to like to Give you a better metaphor than kind of listening to your conversations on this before but that's kind of what we're trying to aim at here yosef, I I would say though and I think maybe this will connect a little more with what paul was Specifically talking about like on the ground with regards to policy. I forwarded to yosef uh this list of from the rabbinate with regards to uh the war that's going on right now and They had to write out or spell out basically as plebeus was saying they had to spell out that okay now that we're in wartimes A soldier that is in combat, you know doesn't have to observe General terms right now does not have to observe the shabbat and he shouldn't and like he should be taking his car and driving Using his phone all to save lives. That's amazing Now there are people there's there's military support, you know, that's not on the ground fighting right now They should try to observe the shabbat But if for some reason something comes up they should immediately drop that and they don't have to observe the shabbat anymore And there's a whole list of things showing how like anyone that is religious now needs to tweak his life. However Seemingly they were they were they were using in some cases the more let's say lenient uh Interpretation so that the students should have the most Um this to me Is it gone yeah, uh this to me is The rabbinhood if you're looking from a micro perspective, it's a fail If you're looking from a macro perspective obviously it's it's miraculous because we never like who thought we would have something like that again um When i'm looking from the macro perspective and i'm looking at these things like this happening like this war This is again an opportunity for the man and the hour to meet And I think that's the kind of leadership that ultimately comes like when when we have this this great sage of yohanan ben zakai When the temple is getting destroyed. He's not making a quorum together. He decides he goes to the romans and tells me give me I want the wisest of men and I want I want to move the whole center of jewish thought Into this other town called yavne And that and that changes judaism forever, but that's a move he decides no one voted on that And I I think that seeing them send out this list to me was and yosef said like it's sort of like i'm happy they're sending it out, but it's should be sort of like obvious that like, you know, this is what they should be doing and These are Global wake-up calls whether it's covet whether it's a meaning crisis whether it's something like this that has to happen And let the leadership know you are not connecting to the people and You could see that on the ground level all these soldiers All these soldiers and this is interesting because there there is a general very high highly decorated general that has basically been completely sidelined Because he mentioned Uh hero israel. He said the shema basically in a preparation for a battle If you look at the israeli soldiers now in every video, they're all singing and dancing Using biblical terms singing praising god. We're going in Uh, there's news anchors saying that the uh, you know god's armies are coming This is a secular country and they're all using very very biblical and religious terms um so I don't know. It's uh it's it's moments like this that That uh really I think shaped certain people um, you know the six day war made my grandfather decide that tell his congregation like Can't you hear mother rachel calling and like i'm moving i'm leaving and my family's moving that's happening. So I think I don't know. This might even be more More influential than than like the six day war or like it's just it's it's it's it's It's so shocking to the core where where again like it's it's in biblical scale So I think here you could even see a response from the rabbinate which is trying to in real time bring in How the torah would deal with this war? Um, and that's very that's really built into the system Maybe how what should israel do? Like with the war yeah Um I guess what they have what they have done They've been pushing off this this deadline of when they're going to attack giving more and more time for the refugees to move They've been still sending letters saying move move move move move leave go go go Um, I presume that the leaders of hamas have also gotten these letters and might have acted accordingly Yeah leaders of hamas today have told them to ignore the letters go back to your homes This way will be harder for the army to find us. So, you know, it's it's obviously It's it's nuts Um, what do I think we do? We need to go in there and we need to obviously completely eliminate the threat That's what the that's what the country needs to do Otherwise, it won't survive both because those people will still come back and second of all because we live in the middle east and if uh, if you smell weakness then our enemies will attack and Peace deals are as valid. You know that could change like this um on the other side though and unfortunately, I understand the sentiment in israel that we're sort of not interested and no one wants to talk about this and everyone's like Thirsty for like some sort of uh, you know, uh retribution um There's no conversation like It's sad because I know it's too much to ask from them right now, but like They ultimately they are our cousins and they are they're they're like they're not going anywhere So there has to be some sort of conversation which how this looks after and um I think you can never completely eliminate a threat That I feel like that was one of america's mistakes, too Uh, you know you like pageant we'll talk about you can never completely get rid of the fringe You know it gets exponentially harder the closer you get to getting completely rid of something to get rid of the last little bit And I worry that That israel is going to get in a situation where it has no clear I don't know termination condition on its objective And Okay, we want retribution. How much is how much counts as satisfactory? Okay, how much of a diminishment of hamas counts as the elimination of the threat? Okay, how much violence? Would that take and then how much hatred does that engender in the next generation of palestinians? And in which case how much start have you even really produced? And I mean, I i'm not saying israel shouldn't do anything There's I think there's a clear consensus of unity and we need to do something in israel than there's been in a long time but That can also be very dangerous Absolutely, it's definitely been one of the harder parts here. I mean, I don't israel obviously it's much The the level of kind of trauma and pain that israel is going through right now is Is you know, we have a shadow of that here? um, but it's It's hard because yeah, because like things like retribution or vengeance is like the very and they're using very biblical language Given that you know, they definitely are but sometimes it's going into territory where like I'm I'm very uncomfortable. Um, and like it's and like where's You know some some of the calls from from religious leaders too Not to I mean but also from secular leaders using sometimes religious language Um, or just secular leaders using the secular language, um has been And look, it's really hard. Like how do you talk to people? I mean, right you're In the middle of a war in the middle of this isn't right. So multiple people put it out. This is not ptsd These are people currently undergoing the trauma And trauma does a lot of things. I mean, right the way it narrows your perspective and like, you know You become very focused in some ways. It's good but it also makes you blind to certain things and Regulating emotions kind of goes out the window and like how do you you can't have a rational conversation about like what are those limits? That sam's bringing up so easily um, especially kind of at a Scale like where there's mass formation and like all this type of you know Thinking going on at this at this level And like how do you have? You know, I mean these and in part this is in theory why religion doing religion day in and day out as a habit and training your mind and training your Whatever the way you think the way you feel Helps when you encounter these situations for me like this This is where this is where all that kind of you know, whenever the rubber hits the road This is where you want to have all those skills trained in just like you're a fighter pilot Just like you're any of these any of the soldiers, right? Like you want to have the skills in you so as soon as you're like really in trouble you that's how you react to things but um but sometimes one that gets overwritten to some degree or another and two like I You know is I don't know if has he is this are people You just said like you're not really seeing so much of this conversation. Like where are the It's great. They're united But like if everyone's united in like some sort of mob rage, you know, that's not good um And like you can always just turn off the water tap wait a week or two and just roll the tanks to the mediterranean sea and well, that's I mean no one but no one's calling for that. So then what is it short of that? That is no you have a lot of israelis calling for like No, I would say that no one in israel wants the death of innocent palestinians having said that they're all like listen at this point you know like England had dresden people had hiroshima like no one wants that this is called war and like It's also it's also happening at the backdrop of like we said never again What if israel had his army during the holocaust would people be like no like this is you know, nazi acts what they did It's it's horror. It's it really is Horrifying what they did now they're saying like obviously we can't be proportionate right like no one's saying they want us to go Find babies slit their heads kill wet like burn house. No one wants us to do that, but that would be proportionate. So and i'm asking also yosef like As a religious person right using your religious lens What do you think god is expecting from you or from us in response to this and and the question is at some point you have to realize like like There is a conversation we're supposed to be having we're supposed to be wrestling abraham is wrestling right and And Abraham is privy to the conversation that god is having with the three angels, right who both know shaman Abraham is still there and he happens to be seeing this conversation or hearing this conversation. God is having with angels He wasn't even invited. That's the trinity. It's not three angels, but right right. I'm so sorry Those jews, um I don't know if it's Like is are we supposed to Rate like, you know, is it is it turning the other cheek? Is that the response right over here? Is there some sort of Mass turning the other cheek that needs to be happening over here or is there a recognition that that We are living in a certain world and this certain world has rules and there's and there's combines and there's people around and people do die or and and It's hard for us to to justify and act like that obviously, um But but there can't I and I thinking about amalek and again has nothing to do the palestinian peoples Okay 30 to 60 percent of them are from jewish descent and they're my cousins and I hope to be standing with them at the temple having Said that amalek forever We think like, you know, this is just an idea. It's just in our hearts You know since the nazis it's hard for us. No it pops its head up again That kind of evil exists where they'll just murder and kill everything and the world needs to have a response to that and I think As jewish people with this at our doorstep We specifically need to have a response to that and now more than ever when I pray I pray for One of the one of the prayers prayers are to give that god gives us grantless wisdom So granting wisdom to all the leadership so I can't Look We're not a pathophysic religion the way that let's say parts of anabaptist christianity are or even let's say early christianity is like Sam has been discussing a little bit. Um the server lately um and one I mean we I want it so We have the death penalty in jewish law, right? I mean let's go back to for your shirley diavel and maybe not the guardian Let's pick any of the other capital case punish, right? Where we have extremely high standards for that to happen to the point where you know You say it happened every seven seven years or 70 years But capital cases were rarely ruled guilty and worthy of capital punishment, right? And what happens when a capital punishment has to happen the senhedrin has to fast And they have to spend the day in prayer during that day because it is it's very serious things take a life and um, and i'm not saying I'm not seeing a cheapening of life on the israeli side for the most part. I mean um I'm not I don't think that's where they're going and I know For all of the things that have happened the idf's Ethical code for its soldiers is unbelievably rigorous Um compared to other militaries and I do have some faith in that though I don't think everyone's going to perfectly abide by it like because humans are humans but um um And like I think and it's great and a lot of these like we have rules of war we have jewish rules of war Like not just secular israeli rules of war but jewish rules of war um and I think right there's There's a certain i'm not saying you know, you don't fight and you defend so we have self-defense We have all these we have all these principles. We've been thinking and working through these principles for a long time Sure, we haven't wrestled with them in the real world. Um As much as some other Civilizations, um because lots of rules against us fighting for various reasons. Um But we actually but that's sometimes we ignore that we actually do have quite a bit on this stuff in real world applications. I mean Medieval spanish jews had weapons then there's rules about them. Um, there's rules about sieges Maimonides has an entire chapter about the siege warfare, right? um And it's not just rules because here's where right? This is where I said it was obvious And why I was like kind of disappointed by the the thing about like the Sabbath thing it just gets to the beginning of my conversation with linden paul and the kind of the um The The letter in the spirit of the law have are always for us fully need to be fully combined Um, and if you have people if you have religious people who don't know that that's obvious That the rabbi newt has to tell them that these are the rules Then to me that's highlighting the disconnect between the worlds and not like oh it's amazing that you know All these things are happening and they can do this in the inowens path, right? um And that there's there's been a failure And yes, I mean absolutely like a huge failure in jewish education in religious circles and in non-religious circles, right? um and Yeah, I mean I was I described it the other day Is that this My primary feeling this week has not been disappointment or anger with god I'm much more disappointed with humans and especially with us um I mean us um So i'm using us here as not necessarily I mean Hamas I expect it from I get it, but like that this these types of things Um, and I think that this is Highlight how I failed my community has failed how religious issues have failed how judaism has failed but also Yeah, how the west I mean the western world has failed liberalism has failed Um to some extent humanity as a whole has failed. Um Right, it's all these concentric circles Um, and then there's all I mean and we can point and say but it's not this isn't about passing blame because as I said I started Um, so in klesi when you ask, you know, what should I be doing in this moment? um That's that is the question of the hour. Um Like because that is exactly and part of that is because i'm here and i'm not there if I was there I'd probably be fighting or whatever whatever it is. I mean, yeah, even even soldiers are frightened This is what this is the command they were given and I take no offense from anselman over here in the comments It's all it's all it's all it's all good, but I asked someone like him, right? Like i'm jordan peterson's the concentration cop guard. Okay, um, at least we're both wearing suits. We're very stylish. Um I I I ask someone like that, right and i'm also asking you like Yeah, they're they're innocent. We shouldn't kill them, but there's a missile coming out of the kitchen So what am I doing about that kitchen though? What am I doing about that kitchen? And if I give you a general number of uh, you're right is your after 5 000 deaths they should stop So wait, so baby number 4 800 9. It's okay to kill him but baby like And It's coming to my house the missile's coming to I have to stop it and i'll go even more extreme. You know what? We're not going to go into gaza Okay, and this also goes to you sam. I'm not going to go into gaza Instead i'm going to give you the temple mount. It's yours Okay, i'm removing my army back. It's one state i'm getting rid of all the all the The laws that you don't like you know what? Hallelujah the day's over here. Okay, at what point are you like now that happens and we see there isn't peace And they try to now doing there's more intense pogroms When am I at what point can I shoot back? And then like is it in my house and if I shoot him but you you're a bullet when he killed the murderer It also killed this kid like what at what point am I not allowed to be like? Stop right no one wanted us. They try to get rid of us. Here's your land. Take your land We said here's a deal. They said no, here's a deal. They said no and Again, it's sad that you need to preface this because like but apparently and i'm not blaming handsome man Like yet. I still sound to him like the bad man And I want peace have a have a palestinian prime minister. It's all good Okay, I don't have a problem with that. It's It's But it is it sounds like a trope but like if we lay down our guns we would be dead and if they lay down Their guns there would be peace that those just are the facts and and if that's the case you're safe Then like and what do you want to do if you and if you said like if I was israel then I would be fighting Then like okay, so that's that's what you want to do And and you want to be fighting because you're like i'm defending myself Do I do I I Know one no one wants death and you hear like reporters talking about it Like is it proportion not proportion has been taking too long. You turned off the water What do these things even mean? We're still killing people right? There's there's murders going on but that's that's That's only because think of where we could all be if we're spending the time instead of making what we just did right now We just showed the world our new lasers that cost nothing for us to use to shoot the rockets out of the sky It's literally science fiction. No more iron dome We're using these lasers Like why but I want to cure cancer I don't want to shoot transformer lasers into the sky um, but the opportunity is is Is not being given to us and I think I don't know to me the fact that biden is doing this you could say it's election and things like that I believe this is what's the this that biden's doing This intense intense support I believe this is the christian joe biden coming forward. I think like there is a stance over here of like You know he he he's used this many times how at 14 He sends everyone and he takes every one of his children to dachau in germany to see about the holocaust and his father told Him that like if he ever sees evil, so this is your moment joe It's in front of you right now. We all say never again It's nice for us to read this like, you know on the little black thing once a year the holocaust museum Here are the pictures you see it happening like and I and from the interviews I i've seen him. He wasn't babbling I I saw someone being like I have to stop this um I don't know what so yosef given that I know that was emotional but like what so what should we do? Yosef you have the power sam you have the power. What do we do? I think I think It's easy to say from america and I bet that you're right if I were an israeli Jew living in israel and I saw videos of babies being beheaded And maybe I even knew or had first or secondary connections to people I'd be like it's time to fight and I think almost any human has that instinct within them and for good and understandable reasons I think a lot of what We're talking about is there is this weird mixture of religion and secularity in israel? And that is coming into question about how to deal with violence And I think all humans also understand like it's weird to say this anselman. Don't misinterpret me not that that stopped you in the past but um There's something sacred about war and violence In a dark way, but I think we all understand like, you know, like the the sanhedrin fasting before they have to execute someone um and you know the way that we give like some super honor and veneration to veterans and um the sort of I don't know that there we own we understand that there needs to be something religious about war In order for it to not just be entirely evil and awful And it seems to me like israel is searching for a way to try and understand that amongst itself now like on a purely strategic level i'd say Don't go into gaza do the drones assassinations spies sniper Rocket stuff, but don't send in troops. It's a bait. It's a trap Iran wants you to do it And this isn't the last trick iran has up its sleeves if you get bogged down in gaza then hezbollah is next stuff from syria is next and This is round one Be careful how you respond I'm gonna sound like a warhawk but like At some point I need to meet iran and at some point I need to meet like These are the bad actors, you know, we're looking at the map change again and whether it's going to be like We talked about in the news like you know, china's a problem and china's a problem But like, you know, there are world powers and and and the game is afoot so like You know the destroyers are there. This is my song controversial. I don't think they're destroyed at least not the first destroyer It's not there. Um Because of what just happened. It's there because there's other political interests already in play There's the saudi deal going on there's these things are and I don't want to say that america is necessarily looking for a war But like it's very difficult to see like how they're going to necessarily keep themselves out of this one if this goes down We sent two aircraft carriers to the eastern mediterranean I don't think we even did that like I think there was multiple times during the iraq war where we had one Aircraft carrier in the persian gulf or something one aircraft carrier is a resounding Support of a resounding Gesture of support two aircraft carriers is this is we're ready And what are we what what are we ready for though? And i'll leave in a minute Like the world just got to witness that if Uh certain groups get get their opportunity They will try to completely massacre us that like it wasn't like what so You know, it's time to put your money where your mouth is right? And this is what it looks like and he says Don't and it's very clear Iran and hamas they could all decide tomorrow Right, like because they're chanting in gaza also death to america This is like a war that goes back a long time and this is uh, um Um Says god tested abraham and and and we ask why wasn't Isaac being tested because he's he's the one going up right there's different versions about this his age My monity says ultimately though like you know Forget my mind there's interpretations that come and say that he Wasn't being tested because the way he viewed life Right ultimately i'm going to mention this in the purki ava class Everything is god so the the best thing I could give back to me, you know, the sacrifice is a substitute really You could just have me back, right? So He's looking at it as sort of in this logical way and the test is for abraham ultimately to hear god's voice and say I'm not interested in this If you are dealing with people that If their view of life and their view of religion or at least the their interpretation of this religion, okay is Manifest itself this way and I always use as example if the reaction is going to be if I draw your prophet You're going to kill people Like that. I can't play you can't play with the other kids And like and again the invitation is not only should you play in my sandbox. You are the son of abraham Okay, just You have to at some point drop your sword And if the if that is still the action at some point and and like you were saying paul like it all You know in a certain way israel is living it then we this is this this is that fight again us against This evil and it represents itself in hezbollah and represents itself in iran and in north korea So like there's a lot of big talk about we're going to hit back and we're going to slam back And we're not we don't want to do an iraq war and like sam is saying we want to attach it to something holy but um but on that note Gentlemen, there's please do this. Jerry Well, I was gonna oh you gotta head out I gotta head out Bye kizzy top of the hour too, so um, but thank you kizzy Thanks for going sherry yeah, no worries I i'm running around doing stuff, but i'm listening at the same time Bringing some feminine energy here Well, it's it's you know part of what's going on now is I also watch It's been fascinating watching the participation even anselman because you know, we've all had we've all watched anselman for the last You know four or five years you get a you sort of get a picture of him I've never he's never come on to a live stream never seen him in person But we have a map of him based on You know when I say something I kind of know where anselman's going to be because we've done enough things And then when this breaks out, you know very um You know very sympathetic towards palestine. And so then it's like, oh Well, that's interesting that kind of anselman often is surprising. Yes. He's often surprising. He he has his own genuine self Made morality that is hard to predict But the but the The way we participate in these things now, obviously for hesi. I mean When it's when it's your zip if we zip code in america, you know When it's when it's the town that you're living in when it's your house when it's your kids, you know, that's very direct but watching people who Aren't you know like these these university demonstrations in the united states watching people it's like It's like So so what's your dog in this fight and then other people noting that oh the You know sort of the progressive sexuality coalition is is aligned up with fundamentalist islam. Oh Well, that's fascinating. It's a fascinating alliance my My mom and dad and sister were in istanbul a couple days ago and there was a giant protest or Demonstration or rally i'm not quite sure which of those is the right word in support of hamas um and not not palestine hamas and That my parents and my sister had to stay inside in their hotel the whole day because they don't uh, want to risk anything and The I I don't know how much that was up cycles correcting your language. I The fascinating things we have going on in our quarter And I don't know how much that was to do with sort of internal turkish politics versus geopolitics and stuff but I don't know. This is It's a strange It's a there there. It's not just a couple million people in a strip of land the size of like a u.s county This is way bigger and more complicated than that and there are way more people than I would expect that are willing to Look the other way or halfway defend or fully full-throatedly defend What was happening? And it also fascinates me because I grew up in northern new jersey significant jewish population um, I grew up mostly an african-american community, but I You know never really bumped into hardly any anti-semitism And then just watching You know the the rise the the resurrection of anti-semitism in today's world and to me anti-semitism was always just sort of a What all of the Disembodied boogeyman. Yeah, I mean all I mean I I had just A may all of the jews that I knew in northern new jersey. They were they were model citizens They were they were the best people around they really were and um and and the the the The jewish religious centers were doing wonderful things in the community and it's like These are the hated people now if you talk to jacob and he goes off on you You might get a sense of yeah, you know if you're that low and agreeable-ness you're gonna make some enemies but um But that wasn't you know, and I remember there was a there was a guy named leon chase who would he was an old jewish carpenter He would come into the lumber yard where I worked And everybody knew that he still had the um, somebody's got something going on everybody knew that He still had his tattoo From the from the german, you know, I was a you know, then a young college student and talking to leon about You know hiding in the sawdust concentration camp and and then now to see this This this just this energy come out and and I I would imagine I mean christians Christians if we had that much hatred part of us we just begin to ask the question like well What did what did we do to make people hate us so much? um, and i'm sure Folks are wrestling with that but and I look at the situation and it's like A good option. I don't see any good options You have to you have to what do you do I have no idea I have no I never really went away I mean It's obviously different but when you're identifiably an orthodox jew, um in the west I mean whether here london france, I mean i've i've encountered and i've only encountered mostly speech like hate speech Um personally, but um, but i've had friends who've had more. I mean physical altercation like much more serious stuff um And I mean that's I mean I we had someone who came to speak at one of our synagogues Uh, I don't know maybe 10 years ago who's grew up in egypt and the bestseller in egypt, um Even today, but certainly the past 20 25 years has been mine kampf the best-selling book in egypt um And like so in some ways energy doesn't really go away. I mean it kind of in some ways, I think christians are Obviously, you don't have to directly confront it as much and it's not me in your face and you're whatever um And even me like I you know generally move through mostly bubbles of things. Um, so The little times i've had to encounter directly have been fairly mild um But yeah, I mean I don't Um, and it really depends it depends on what part you know, they were we lived in london for a year and um There my my wife was doing masters and there was like, um active recruitment to terrorist muslim terrorist organizations on her campus That the campus kept trying to them um and like um No, she's somewhat I mean, she's not quite as identically orthodox to me because she covers her hair But she doesn't have a kupa or tt um And like on in east london lots of people cover their hair, um, but it is a different style covering Um, but like she didn't really encounter issues, but they were definitely neighborhoods. I wouldn't go into um And like it was it was always kind of there. Um and I think they're right. They're just certain I mean, it's a little worried but privileged in order like that we to ignore this type of stuff um And and it just really does um build and kind of fester in some corners I mean if you've ever seen if you've never seen the gauzen version of sesame street um, it is Extremely disturbing stuff. Um where like ak-47s make a lot of often appearances Um the gauzen version of sesame street. Yeah Can I find it on youtube? These days you used to be able to find it on youtube, I don't know if you still can Um, there's a new pbk series coming on You could see like yeah these like crazy like demonstrations of seven-year-olds like dressed as mujahideen, um in like full gear with like fake weapons and like um Yeah And then like what do you how and then this gets to fezio's point because he asked me hard questions. I don't have it What do you do how do you respond? Um Like what do you do with those kids, I mean like Well, how how do you heal like that type of and and part of it's from real place like there's it's not just like brainwashing indoctrination right part of it is Gaza is an awful place to live. It has been for a long time, especially since israel pulled out and hamas took over um where a lot of the internal infrastructure has basically been neglected there's a lot of there's huge issues both how israel kind of ran around like this gaza from the outside but also how hamas ran from the inside and like there's a massive amount of trauma and pain and Awfulness that these kids have been through and like yeah, I mean part of it and not just these kids But their parents and young parents. I mean gaza There's mostly people under 25, right? I mean, it's a huge I mean the demographic numbers there are like some of the most skewed in the world, but um, there's a lot of And a lot of orphans and a lot of people or at least lost one parent or sibling or whatever I mean to either to israeli violence or to alestinian violence. Um, and like it's How this is this is part I mean and in some ways, I mean, it's a weird parallel, um Maybe handsome like I can't actually see his comments right now, but um Like there is he stormed off in protest. Maybe there is there is a weird Parallel where like it's kind of the question of how do you deal with like people who've been through this much trauma and like heal this? um Similar to what we were asking at the end of the holocaust like how do you deal with all this trauma? um And it's I mean whether it comes from a place where like yeah Because if I don't do this then they're going to kill me I mean that doesn't necessarily And some level justifies it another level really doesn't and like what and you know, that's that's why because these questions were so great hard to answer because um Yeah, at what point does this become just kind of pragmatic strategy as sam was pointing out Of like self-defense and like protecting your family. Um um Or even protecting other people. I mean how many of the people who are I mean now a lot of these stories are coming out of the israelis who are killed or not just israelis jews and arabs who? went into Um, the border communities that were being attacked to actually try to help and got killed Yeah I think i'm gonna just make the last comment that i'm leaving. Sorry anybody who's watching in my channel and wants to continue to watch You can go to grail country. It's being streamed. They've got the thing, you know I think instructive is also the What happens at the end of the second world war with the japanese population because they were subject to intense propaganda by their regime Um to hate americans and part of and then we nuked them. I mean the united states nuked japan That's important to remember And and then after the war No, i'll say twice twice Now of course japan surrendered which because you don't really have A nation state that you're dealing with or can't you can't sort of I mean you could attack iran and bring iran to surrender and have regime change You can't really do that and that's probably asymmetry But in japan you could have the emperor who is the embodiment of some sort of god Declare and all the people are in submission. Although I think I I even heard that some of the generals tried to stop them from doing that But well and and then part of the big I mean right in 1941 fdr says, you know We're gonna demand nothing less than unconditional surrender And that became a big problem towards the end of the war because The question was will we allow japan to keep the imperial family and in the end they decided yes They would and then that then became a piece of sort of turning the japanese population around but then again The kind of enmity between the united states and japan has a very different history than what you're dealing with here. So My prayers my prayers are with you my prayers are certainly with the palestinian people And and we want you know, we definitely want peace in that land and hopefully There can be a way to get there. So so thank you all love love chatting great to see all of you and I've got things to do. So take care Yeah, I wanted to jump in here really quick guys. Um, so I just I have a little perspective to bring not from military or international conflict or anything as significant by any means as what's going on But just in terms of the messiness of it um and the necessity for The necessity for the perspective both of those who are there and also those of us who are like kind of like sitting back As myself in peaceful upstate new york where the worst thing I have to deal with is like A big gust of wind cutting my my power for a little bit. Um, I was a Correction officer at a juvenile detention facility for a little while before I did that I had one perspective on People who would get locked up in a juvenile detention facility I had a perspective of what it would be like to be a co and and so on And so I begin working there I have to go through all this different training on how to respond to crises how to deal with Um, you know if you have to restrain somebody if there's a riot going on all this type of stuff if someone is suicidal What do you do? You go through this whole long training process. It's weeks and weeks long Then you get on the floor and of course uh the first Coworker you run into tells you hey, you remember that stuff you learned in training you can like forget about all of it because it's Doesn't apply like it's doesn't work And so you're like, all right if you're someone like me who is like if I when i'm taught something I kind of just take it as like, okay. Yeah like this This is a new environment to me. These are the rules. This must be the way I have to operate and then I try and just like go from that and um You learn very quickly working at a juvenile detention facility that in one sense The co-worker is correct in saying the rule like forget about your training because this isn't what it was like when you were in training So a kid jumped one kid jumps on your back another kid's trying to punch you in the face another kid spitting at you Another kid's telling you to suck there Such and such and all this stuff is going on and your emotions start rising up and you just want to like react like badly and So But What what you find is that those people who say to throw out the rules, right? Turns out they kind of actually use the training in those moments, right? So it's it's not like it's a it's not like it's a crystal clear Representation of what was learned in training when when someone's responding to a crisis where one kid's trying to stab another kid And you're trying to keep them from killing each other Um, it's not like the restraint that you do on them is perfect, but you are following the basic guidelines of like don't Exert more force than is necessary to resolve the situation, right? So there's this there's this kind of tension between the ideal of how a situation should be responded to based off of an assumed uh status quo of the environment right, and then there's the reality of what the what the environment's really like and the reality of What the participants are really like within that environment, right? So the agents and the arena I guess right so There's an idea of what the arena is supposed to be there's an idea of how the agents are supposed to interact and then Neither of those fit the ideal at all, right? And the overwhelming consensus among let's say Soldiers co's on the floor in a facility like that is very anti training anti the the outsider right, so It's like okay if you're not on the like working with me on the floor you have no right telling me how I should do my job and so they so Analogous to this situation here. They would look at something like us talking but not being on the ground in israel or in In palestine or wherever right in gaza um and say Hmm, that's kind of nice what you guys are saying either in either direction, but What does it matter right? but uh I think there's There's a there's there's a utility in us who are in more privileged Arenas right to To While stuff like this is happening it brings us it brings to our hearts and minds like the ideals right of like There's there's got to be these ideals of like that. There's got to be a right way to approach the situation and so conversations like this Between us but even between people who are perhaps more have more uh agency with regard to impacting the arena There's people who need to be in these situations who can talk and there's people in these situations Who are going to land on one end of the spectrum land on the other end of the spectrum? And they're going to be opposing each other right so i'm going to be i'm completely pacifist and i'm going to be like Oh, no, we need to just like You know, it's sad that there's going to be casualties, but we just need to just eliminate. We just need to do you know Hiroshima level just response and there now the situation's over. We don't have to worry about it anymore. It's done, right? um But I just wanted to I just wanted to say all that just to bring in a perspective that um There's There's utility in speaking about and defining and read and and reacquainting oneself with the ideals um And the the that process however, right can't uh That process is that that process crosses its jurisdiction like goes beyond its its purpose when it stalls On the floor, right? So for instance if i'm in the middle of restraining some kid because he's about to stab another kid And I and i'm about to do it. I'm doing it slight. I'm doing it wrong, right? I'm going to cause Perhaps harm to this other kid. I'm not meaning to cause harm, but i'm just i'm grabbing him I'm taking down however I can so he doesn't kill this other kid, right? Or hurt this other kid, whatever And all of a sudden the trainer pops in and stands in between me. He's like, whoa You're about to do that wrong and now the other kid gets stabbed to death, right? And it's like that's not just some contrived example, right? Like that kind of stuff could and In other ways has actually happened, right? So i've known a female co who got assaulted and raped because Other staff saw that she was doing things wrong. So they brought her aside to mentor her and train her in the moment But they get attacked because now it's distracted other workers and there was this whole it was a whole big mess Giant mess people got injured So I know i'm yeah, i'm not necessarily addressing anybody in particular in this group. Just anybody who's watching who is kind of like a Keyboard warrior in in either sense, right? of like oh these people need to stop talking about their ideals and All these people need to stop like overreacting in the moment like there's there is utility and necessity for both perspectives and uh, yeah, I just wanted to throw that because this whole thing has just been like triggering me and uh in some of my memories of Far less traumatic things than what people are going through in the middle east right now That's great, thank you I probably gotta head out in a guys in a minute. Um, there was something I was gonna say, but I don't um I don't know how relevant it is and it's well, I mean it's probably relevant but