https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=p7o1-Jj0TRE

 Nice to talk to you. I'm glad you didn't give up. I was trying to land the plane in the conversation before you, and you never know how conversations are going to go. So thanks for your patience. Yeah. So should I just start talking about my- Absolutely. Tell me a little bit about yourself. We've never met to my knowledge. So I'm Adam. I grew up in the South, that's where I live, and I was raised by more or less Southern Baptist family, mostly by my grandparents, but they weren't churchgoers. But they really instilled those values in me. At the same time, my aunt was dating a Muslim man. So I was exposed to Islam at the same time as Christianity. As a kid, to my mind, they seemed to be more or less two versions of the same thing. I was taken to church a few times when I was growing up, but religion to me seemed to be a scary thing. Especially where I'm from, I would hear in a hostel preachers, and I would get scared by it, and the imagery scared me. And so I wasn't very spiritual as a kid. And I remember being seven years old and basically thinking, coming to the realization, OK, someday I'm going to die. My consciousness is going to end. And just having an existential crisis at that age. And so I get a little bit older. And one of the things that I'm dealing with growing up is. OCD. Really bad OCD, something I've always struggled with. And I have lots of religious thoughts associated with that. And I've always taken medicine for it, I've been in therapy for it. And so it makes it hard for me to even consider anything religious. So now I get a little bit in, get on into my teenage years, get into adulthood. And I finally found something that sort of substitutes for that. When I get on YouTube and I find. Stephen Molyneux, philosopher. And for me, that was really, he was almost like, he was almost like a pastor for me. And that he brought some kind of sanity to my life. So. And from there, I've started to get an interest in in. And in. In Christianity from philosophy. And that's really where I'm at at the moment. OK. What is what is. What is the relationship between Christianity and philosophy to you? What I found. And it wasn't just with Molyneux, but several YouTubers, I found. That there was a direct link between. And this is what this is something else I was going to get into. I found this direct link just blew my mind between. The the the Greeks and how that evolved into Rome and how that how that eventually evolved in the east to. Byzantine Empire and orthodoxy, and they were like. This was another YouTube channel where I learned a lot of this from, which was this man named Jay Dyer, who introduced me to orthodoxy. And he was talking about it just blew my mind because I didn't learn about this stuff in school. I didn't learn that there was this it was something besides Catholic and Protestant. And with I discovered there's this whole group of people who who sat and philosophized about. This spiritual realm, the church fathers, I never even knew about church fathers. And there was this I started to realize there was this direct lineage from Greece all the way up until. That empire fell, basically. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Interesting, interesting. So. I really, I mean, one of the first things that you said, so your parents, your parents were, let's say, let's call them unchurched Christians. So they they didn't go to church, but they identified as Christians. I mean, that's that's not uncommon in in the United States. And then your aunt was dating a Muslim man. And then your aunt was dating a Muslim man. And you kind of said, well, it's kind of the same thing. You know, one goes to a mosque, one goes to and then. And then, of course, orthodoxy and the part of what's interesting about orthodoxy is that. You know, the West, the West and, you know, in terms of the Roman Catholic and then the Protestant basically came to ascendancy in the world stage via the age of discovery in the colonial period, whereas the East. Whereas the East. The church was the church was devastated by the the growth of Islam. And. But but, you know, as as, you know, same for me, many of us who grew up in the West, who were familiar with Protestant and Catholic issues were unfamiliar with orthodoxy and some of their their tradition and their heritage. So, so listening to Mala New and Jay Dyer. So it's it's it's of interest. Has it has it changed. Has it changed how you live your life. I would say the. My it made me. It really made me get deep into philosophy and from that, I would say it changed my life. Okay. Made me. Made me. Have a clear sense of who I am, a clear sense of purpose, but it didn't. It hasn't brought spirituality. It hasn't affected me spiritually. What do you mean by that? Well, I've always had a hard time connecting with the idea of a personal God. I, I went from being basically. I mean, I basically didn't really even think much about God growing up. It just something I didn't think about. And then I. After I started getting into philosophy, I became pretty much deist. I that that made the most sense to me. And that's where I'm at. And I, and I was always, I was always confused about certain things in Christianity. So like I studied. When I talk about philosophy, I mean, there are certain things like I studied Hinduism for a time. And it helped me understand what, what sin means, believe it or not, what sin in the Bible means. Because to me, when I was a kid, I was like, well, sin is just sin is just something arbitrary. It's something. And then I come to understand that sin is not just. It's not just something arbitrary. It's something that affects the effects, everything affects the world. It affects yourself. And Hinduism helped me understand that. So I guess when I say philosophy, I'm think I'm thinking more in terms of just. Not just secular, but all these different ways of viewing things. I guess I guess what I'm I'm getting at is. You know, there's there's always this this line between what we think and what we do. And and the question is, if if you're interested in J Dyer and, you know, Mala and you is I haven't listened much to much Mala and you. My impression was that he was a moralist in that some of the some of the videos that I heard him. And he would he would basically be admonishing people to live a certain way, stop doing some things that are that are self destructive, start doing some things that were more productive. That was that was the gist of of the of the little bits and pieces that I'd heard of of Mala and you. So, Jay, Dyer, my impression is that I've heard even less of him. My impression is that he's sort of a. An apologist. For for orthodoxy in that he's he's sort of promoting it and he's promoting it as the truth and. And kind of orthodoxy over and against other perspectives, I would say. I don't know if that's fair, because again, I've listened to I've just listened to bits and pieces of some of his videos. What what what do you think J Dyer's main agenda is? Oh, yeah, he's he's he's see he's he's. What what drew me to the orthodoxy was his approach because he's very, very cerebral. Yeah, I mean, yeah. He's he's definitely tried to promote orthodoxy. Have you visited and I don't know where you live, but you don't have to say obviously here, but have you visited an orthodox congregation at all or looked for one? I've considered it. I've looked for one near me. OK, there is one. And good. And for me, a lot of the appeal is mostly cerebral because I've never been able. Like I said, I've just never connected emotionally with spirituality. It's more of just an intellectual thing. Yeah. One thing I said about Mollin is he he's kind of unique because he's he's an atheist or I guess he still is. He seemed to be on the fence lately, but he he wrote what he believes is the proof of secular ethics. He wrote a book about this universally preferable behavior. And he's always been a lot of in a lot of controversy over that. And so he was really trying to promote. He was trying to promote healthy living in a secular context. And he found he found over time that. Almost all the people who attacked him for that were fellow atheists. And that the Christians were supporting him. Yeah. Well, this this gets into this gets into a lot of the videos that I've been doing lately on the work of Tom Holland, where I think historically. So much of what we define and assume to be healthy. Is really the legacy of of of Christian influence through history in our culture that the biblical stories have have deeply formed our communal moral assumptions. And and so. What we consider to be happy with we consider to be healthy and productive. We're not we're not. It's not self conscious in us. We're not self consciously connecting it with stories in the Bible or the teaching of Jesus. I'm not surprised that the more Stefan Mollen you took a look at this stuff that. He comes to a similar understanding as Tom Holland in terms of recognizing, oh, this is this stuff. This stuff can be related all the way. You know, certainly we get a lot from the Greeks, but it is the. You know, it is the stories around Jesus and the framing of Jesus story that creates all of these assumptions of health and really deeply molds what we decide is true and good and right. And so I'm not I'm not surprised that that Mollen you as you know, if you look around the West and say, what is self evident morality? If you come at that from outside the system and begin to look at it, people outside the system will look at it and say, that looks Christian to me because it's. That's what we've been immersed in and and bathing in. But but it's you know it's it's interesting to me. I mean, we all have 24 hours in a day and we spend some of that time sleeping and eating and you know whatever we need to do to to to make sure we can have a place to sleep and food to eat. But the. You know that at some point it's. And it's really interesting at some point it's helpful to ask Okay, how do these, how do these ideas begin to take shape in the material and physical reality around us, because especially for someone like Stefan Mollen you. I mean, again, I've only listened to two or three of his videos. And, and it was, and the ones that I heard were sort of like a call in show. And I don't know why people continue to call in if they would listen to the show at all because they'll call it and they'll say, Well, I had a relationship and then I had a baby with this person and then I had a baby with that person and then, and then it's like, if you've been to Stefan Mollen use gig, and you've lived that life do you really want to call in and maybe you just want to participate in it but I mean the point of his, the point of his efforts were to. There's this mental image of the good. And, and I think that's what steps do we need to take in order to not just look at that good and agree with it, but to say, I'd like my life to embody that good. And I think that's what I think, especially as someone who's who's who's dealt with OCD. I mean, part of you knows that it's a tremendous distraction and a tremendous. And part of it sounds like and again we're just we're just talking here and I hardly I don't know you at all. But it doesn't surprise me that you've been on a quest for stronger thoughts that can displace relatively trivial things that have been dominating your life. And so it doesn't, it doesn't surprise me that if you start working that system and, and there's this Puritan divine that I can't think of his name right now or even able to quote him, but the idea that he had was that if you have, and this is the way he talked about sin. If you have a sin in your life and most of us have sins in our lives, what is the sense and is a sin is a behavior or something in our lives that sort of like OCD has has taken up residence in us and is is become an enormous distraction and a huge waste of time because it is taken a disproportionately large section of our lives when really it should be down here. That's, that's a, that's a way of, of translating sin and connecting it to obsessive compulsive disorder. Here you have might be a fine thing in your life, but now suddenly think about, you know, I deal with a fair amount of alcoholics, think about alcohol. Alcohol is, it's just alcohol, and it's in wine it's in beer, beer is good wine is good these things. These things have their place in the world and in moderation there's nothing wrong with a cold beer at the end of a hard day's work or a nice glass of wine to share with someone with dinner in fact it's all throughout the Bible, Jesus makes turns water into wine. But if wine becomes the center of your life. Well, or alcohol becomes the center of your life. Well now suddenly the rest of your life is out of order. And so, the spirit and divine had basically the idea that the only way to manage something that has become too strong and taken up residence in too high a place of priority is you need something stronger to dislodge it. And so I think, you know, again I don't know you at all but just listening to you. Just the little snippets that you've told me that I'm not surprised that you found some stronger things in your life that have probably improved your life because to think about these better thoughts and better ideas. Well now some of these other littler thoughts can be littler, which is exactly where they should be I don't know if any of that makes any sense. Yes, and I think anyone who's been through, say, say a trauma growing up, which I went through so that I think trying to find something that's certain in your life is very important, and that's been a big motivator for me with the philosophy and the interesting. And I would think a next step so one step is the idea of it and the mental representation. And this is very. I don't know I assume you found my videos by watching. You probably went from Stefan Molli you to Jordan Peterson to me is that how it went. Probably. I mean, it's, it's funny. He was just not long ago he was banned from YouTube. Yeah. And so watching you sort of replaced him as far as watching videos every day I used to watch his videos every day so now I watch yours. Okay. I hope I, I hope I'm helpful. Yeah, yeah. So, so I think, you know, a next stage for for you might be to ask questions of okay, I found. I found stronger better thoughts that can that can take some of these other things that were dominating me and put them back where they belong. And, and now, what kinds of what kinds of things can I do in my life that can also do that for my physical actions that I do in my life because like I said we all have 24 hours, if we were to sit and write down everything that I do, just, just kind of make a summary of it okay I got up and I, you know, went to the bathroom and I sat on the sofa with my wife and I checked my email and, you know, and, you know, I went to work and I, you know, if we were if we were to, if we were to sort of do what we did with our lives, analogous to doing what we're doing with our thoughts. We are lives would improve because the thinking is one area of life, but the doing is another. And that I think was part of the genius of what of what Jordan Peterson offered a lot of people in that, you know, even with his, even with his admonition to, you know, clean your room or what does, you know, what difference does it mean to make if my room is clean. Yeah, if you can. And of course that could be very dangerous that could be that'd be hazardous if you've got some OCD and yeah, I know I know I have friends with OCD and sometimes it goes the other way sometimes they have the absolute worst rooms, the worst rooms in the world because they're so bad at keeping things and other OCDs have the absolute cleanest room in the world because all they do is clean it. So I don't know, you know, it's so funny the way the way we fixate on some things and how those fixations can dominate our lives so I would encourage you to, to, to say to ask a question say okay I found these thoughts and ideas to be really helpful in terms of cleaning my mental space. What actions can I do to, to improve the kinds of things I do in my life I don't know I don't know what you do for work or, or what your living situation is like but I didn't ask for advice but just listening to you and thinking this through, that might, that might be totally off base, not helpful at all I don't know. I've been wanting to, I've been wanting to join a church, but I guess my problem is not being. Well, the same kind of believer, at least at this point. Yeah. Because, like, the founding fathers in the United States, some of them had the same. And, but they were church. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So I mean that's something I would like to do. But I want to touch on the OCD thing because that's that's caused. That's been a big barrier with with any religion for me because that is called I mean, that has caused me serious. That has caused me a lot of mental turmoil. Yeah. Because you get intrusive thoughts that can just start to dominate your life. Yep. And so even though I wasn't even though, even though I've never been religious. I'm aware of all these things and they start to take over my thinking. So like say, I knew about the, I knew about the, what Jesus says about blaspheming the Holy Spirit. Yeah. So what does OCD make you do? It makes you do that. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. It's like, just. And then when you're when you're in therapy for OCD. They tell you that they train you to say that they are your thoughts. Your thoughts alone can't affect anything. Right. That rituals can't affect anything. Yeah. Well, rituals are part of any faith. Yes. Yes. That's that's so that's that's been a big issue. Yeah. Oh, I can I can so understand both of those points and those are great points. And it's so many of these truths. I mean, because so many of these in something like rituals can't affect anything. Well, in some ways that the therapist makes a real point, you know, it's like I have to, you know, I don't know. Again, I have to keep touching. I have to keep checking the door lock. You know, I have to keep, you know, fixing the fringes on the carpet. I mean, all these things, you know, a good friend of a number of good friends of mine are OCD or have some degree of that in their lives. And and and and these rituals develop. And then but again, just like with the thoughts. There are there are better rituals and worse rituals. And and if you know, if you know you have a strong propensity for ritual, then part of ritual management is find find rituals that are healthier and better and use those to push out the rituals that are insignificant and a waste of time. You know, if I if I always have to, you know, so I have a friend who is OCD and if we go out to eat, you know, he'll get in my car and there might be a piece of paper on the floor and he'll say, oh, can I have that? And the thing is, I know if he takes that piece of paper, it's going to go into his pocket and then it's going to go into his room and his room is just going to fill up with paper. And so I'll sort of lie to him and I'll say, no, I need that. Oh, OK. And, you know, we'll go out to eat and, you know, sometimes we'd go to fast food restaurants. And actually, I stopped going there with him because that became a problem because he wanted to keep the cup and keep the napkin and keep the wrapper. And it's almost anything that he would touch. You'd want to keep. And so then instead, we started going to restaurants where they had plates and forks and knives and glasses because he under you didn't have any, you know, even though he touched all of those things, he didn't have any desire to take those things home. And so, you know, the social conventions meant that he had to leave the silverware in the restaurant. He couldn't take it home. So, I mean, and so a lot of so much of life are these little these little tricks and hacks of saying, all right, I'm going to go. I'm only going to go to restaurants where they have plates and knives and forks. So I don't fill up my room with fast food containers. And so, no, and I can really understand. I mean, just finding a church is a hard thing to do anyway. Because churches are filled with people and people are enormously dangerous. They are. They're terrifying. And they're and they're wonderful, but they're they're enormously dangerous and start going to a church and you start getting involved and you start building relationships and then something happens and then there's issues and trauma and problems and yeah. But, yes. But at the same time, that's, that's. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. But I'm glad you know I'm, thank you for listening to my videos. I appreciate it. I you know you, you do me the honor of, of listening of giving me your time. And, you know, it's not a small thing. So, I appreciate that. Well, your videos are really what I always kind of always kind of wanted. I always kind of wanted to church service to be like, growing up, I was like I just like, they feel more like college lectures. And I like, I like that I'm the kind of person that really likes that sort of thing. Oh yeah. I believe that if you're listening to Jay Dyer and who else you're listening to on the you. Well, and that's that's an amazing. That's an amazing thing about YouTube that here's all this material. And, you know, people just put it out there. And I, you know, I didn't until Jordan Peterson came along. And the funny thing about YouTube for me was, you know, these are silly little videos get shared on social media of, you know, is this funny isn't this silly isn't this you know, cat videos, but, and Jordan Peterson came along and it's like, my goodness I've, you know, just listened to two hours of this guy I've just listened to another two hours of this guy and again and again and again and again and I figured out I can listen to this in the car. I can listen to this while I'm doing dishes. I can listen to this while I'm, you know, cutting grass in the yard. And it makes the, it makes my chores, much less, much less boring, which is what chores are often. So, no, it's it's really cool. That's really cool. Any, any. I don't know that often people have lists of any any other kind of things you wanted to talk to me about or gosh, that's, that's really, that's really the gist of. Okay. Okay. Yeah, it's an honor to talk to you it's funny, it's funny you. You watch somebody. I feel like you know them. And you actually meet them and it's so weird. It is, it really is. I had, you know, so when I did my most popular video on my channel is obviously my conversation with Jordan Peterson, and I had. It's the exact same experience, where here I did listen to this guy. I feel like I know all kinds of things about him but he doesn't know who I am at all, because, you know, the videos just kind of go out there in the world and then they go where they will and no that's why. That's why I like doing meetups and that's why I like doing these videos and I haven't done a lot of these lately. It's a. I should, I should really, I should make it a, I should make it a discipline of mine to keep doing these because I really enjoy this. It's helpful for me to know to what degree, who's listening to my videos what they find helpful. Because it's very meaningful to to participate in making other people's lives better. It's a deeply meaningful thing. I really appreciate I haven't put many slots out there but you were one of the lucky, lucky lottery winners who grabbed it and was able to grab it so good for you. Yeah, and I, I know I, I know I've thrown a lot at you. Talking from a lot of like ideas at you but it's, I kind of thought okay I've got an hour I'm going to try to make it count. Good, good. Well I'll, I'll send this. You know, I don't know what you'd like me to do with this recording, I can send it back to you to have you look at it I can destroy it we can keep it between us whatever whatever you'd like. Yeah, you can send it to me. All right, I'll send it to you. Well I appreciate it Adam, unless you have anything else I'm gonna I'm gonna call it a, I'm gonna call it a wrap. And I, again, thanks for watching my videos and thanks for sharing your story with me. To talk to you. Okay. Take care of yourself. Good luck with the good luck with the OCD and especially with the church stuff. Okay. Okay, bye bye.