https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=QTRnN5VacG8

 videos and have really been enjoying things. Oh, good, good. Well, you've got an interesting story. Why don't why don't we begin there? Sure. Yeah. To start there. OK, I'll start with. How far back to go? It was born in St. John, New Brunswick. We live on the East Coast, Canada. Now I live in Shediak with my wife and two kids. We originally and I was born in St. John. My parents are both from St. John. We grew up. Roman Catholic, mainly, although in the, you know, I would say the time I hit teenagers, we all started to sort of drift away a little bit. My grandfather still Knights of Columbus and still very, very much a man of faith. He's still he's 96 now. So he's still very much involved and. Has been a big influence, even though I didn't quite realize, you know, to what degree Christianity played a a role in his life. It's it's been it's been something I've sort of rediscovered and sort of gotten some a better perspective on some. He had built a very nice foundation, a really great family. And you know, sometimes things are so good that you don't even know where all that goodness came from. Yeah, yeah, that's very true. Yeah, that's very true. Yeah. So work. Can you hear me OK? Is everything? Yeah, yeah, you sound fine. Perfect. Yeah. So are you familiar with this part of the world at all? You ever been to Atlanta, Canada or? Nope, not really. Not really? No. OK, so we're just we're about I'm about an hour from P.E.I. Most people are pretty familiar with Prince Edward Island. That's about that's a good location to sort of put myself. But we're St. John's a pretty old city. It's one of the oldest in the country, about 100000 people with outside area. Very, very blue collar city. For the most part, we had dried ox and one of the largest oil refineries. Irving pretty well is the the main employer for the whole province. Actually, it's you know, our GDP is pretty low, but without Irving, it's almost nothing. So, you know, very blue collar city had a very sort of St. John's kind of unique, though. It's a very large city geographically. So it's the second largest city in the country geographically. So it's the second largest city in the country geographically. Really? The very large landmass. So that's 70,000, 80,000 people are spread out quite a ways. And it takes a fair. You can even though it was a city, I lived in the country of the city. We're still in the city limits, but it was very, very rural. Grew up in a little cottage on a lake. And, you know, with no real neighbors around, you had to go a fair stretch. Didn't have many kids my age and whatnot. So it was a. We only did. We only celebrated the major holidays as Christians, you know, you went to church for Christmas and the big ones and. It's. It was. You know, this Christianity thing has sort of come back big for me is as to explore and to try to come to terms with. I guess I guess I'm getting off. But you're doing fine. OK. I don't talk to many celebrities, so I'm. Well, if I'm your one crack at it for you. I did speak with Papa Peterson four or five years ago. Oh, really? First did the Patreon thing. I was one of the first ones to get on board there and. Oh, OK. And so he. He's been a big influence for me for sure, and that's sort of how I stumbled on to you. So. Well, well, how many how many siblings? I have one one brother. Yeah, he's younger, younger, younger. OK, OK. Yeah. Well, how do you think? What do you think about your growing up years? It sounds lovely. Cottage on a lake. Very, very good. I had I was surrounded by a lot of good men and women and loving people, very good, strong family. Not without its imperfections, of course, alcoholism and things are there. But it was very, very lovely, very well protected. My father is a really, really great guy, very interesting guy. As far as education and what goes for them, they grew up. My grandfather is a French Acadian and. And St. John was a loyal city, very much Irish. Catholics a lot, but the French parts of the province are sort of a little further away. I live in a Francophone area now, so St. John is primarily English. My grandfather was actually the first Francophone police officer. Oh, wow. So and they grew up in the north end of the city, which was pretty rough. And you learn to drop your accent and talk like the rest of the ducks. So, yeah, even though I have a French name, I don't speak French very well at all. And, you know, my my kids go to my my oldest goes to an English school. And but we've done we've we've done very well in the area. We enjoy it. It's it's a nice spot. It's the only beach community really in the province. So we we we we moved here about 11 years ago. And, you know, we've been we've been really enjoying it. It's been a great spot. Kind of going back to the history of my dad had a lot of different jobs, but he was mainly a projectionist. Yeah. So even though we lived, there wasn't a lot of kids to play with. So I would always trail along with him to the theater. And I'd watch, you know, he worked in a bunch of different movie houses, some of them were, you know, two screens, some of them. And then he eventually moved on to to larger companies. And eventually he went out on his own and built his own theater. Wow. That was the family business for for quite some time. So I. I'll help you. I'll get you to help keep me on track. It's I guess I hadn't thought this far back. So I went to elementary school, plant little school, went to a fairly larger high school, about 3000 people in that high school. So it was fairly large. Had some health issues when I was younger. I was. Diagnosed with all sort of colitis, fairly young, seven or eight years old. So I had a. A hard time, the family had a hard time trying to manage that. Going to school became kind of hard. Yeah. I missed 50, 60, 70 days a year. Wow. Yeah. So and one of the, you know, looking back on it now, I certainly think, you know, there's we know more now could have managed things a little better, but that was a struggling point for. I look back now and think how hard it must have been on my parents. To have a sick child, I guess. But it was definitely a big. A big part of my life, and it interfered with a lot of things. School for me was. Because I was I was ill, I didn't get to participate in it in the way that probably that everybody else did. But also, I I didn't really care for it all that much. I had I had a I didn't really care for school up until. Starting to get into studies later in life that I that I start to, you know, kind of appreciate it. But more than that, I think I was intimidated by it because I hadn't participated in it so fully and I didn't. Yeah. Didn't. Feel that I had the intellectual abilities to, you know, to do much with it. I didn't focus much on it. To me, it was sort of a practical thing. You had to go do this to move on to the next thing. So, yeah, yeah. So my. Where would I go from here? Well, so after high school, college or start a job. So when I was done high school, I. I was. I went to university for I wanted to be a cop. That was the idea because I get. But I had, you know, had it in my mind that that I wanted to probably go into detective work or something like that. So I was like, you know, I really need a degree. I thought, you know, I need to get an education. So, yeah. I said, I'll do psychology or I'll do something like that. I had no idea about universities, just nothing. I had no idea. I applied. I got in. I went and. Yeah, I just was having a hard time making it connect as to how this was serving the ultimate goal. Yeah. So I didn't really enjoy it. It was a local or provincial university, the University of New Brunswick. I was. Probably. I had ended up I was probably I was a year older, I believe, going into university, so I was 18 when I when I went. It was. It was a difficult thing because I didn't want to just drop out. And my parents didn't really push me one way or the other. They neither one of them had gone to the college or university, so there wasn't a big push. Yeah. The theater was still running at the time as a family business, and I was kind of managing it part time going to the university. But I did go to I guess it would be like a junior college type thing after that. And they had a nice program where you did two years there and then two years at St. Thomas University. And you could do your four year B.A. there. So I did that, went to went off to the college. And while I was at the college, I started to realize that seconds might be able to handle this. I started to get a little bit more confidence in the intellectual pursuits and did very, very well. And, you know, in university, but about halfway through, I got a part time job at the local jail. They hired casuals. This was a program that they had to try to fill in the blanks. In the summer times, they go hire a core of young guys and girls and shove them through to fill in the vacation spots. And I and my dad had known the local deputy there. So he had they had met at the Tim Hortons one day and said, yeah, hey, you know, tell them to drop by. So I thought to myself, well, this would be great. This would be great for for the resume. You know, I'll go training and whatnot. And I I I got a call from the superintendent and said, yeah, listen, you missed the training classes, this training class. What do you mean? He said, well, why don't you come in and challenge the test? And I had no idea how I was going to challenge a test on a job that I had never done before. But I went in and I did the test. And, you know, it was fairly easy. A few videos and you did your thing. And I did six months there. So I was going to St. Thomas doing a criminology degree, which and with a. Major focus on psychology, the majority of it's cream theory was was interesting, but I didn't make it my main course of study. You know, I really went into developmental and started with trying to get a good foundation in psychology, because to me, that was going to be the most applicable to the policing. But as I started to work in the institution and started to get kind of involved with law enforcement and I had done a few work terms with police forces and whatnot on program development, I started to realize, I don't think I want to do this. The policing thing just it didn't it didn't fit that well for me. So I. You know, I was graduating and I didn't know what I was going to do. So I said, well, I'm going to just apply full time at the institution and see what happens. So I did. And I managed to get full time. And. Started working there. So I guess I'll let you whatever way you'd like to go from there. Well, it's. So I just did an interview yesterday with a small podcast and they asked me, you know, what I would do if if I wasn't pastoring. And at this point in my life, I said, well, I, you know, probably probably retire and keep doing the YouTube thing because I enjoy that. But I'm a little ways from retirement, so I'm not that close. But earlier in life, I probably would have been in law enforcement, which would probably strike people as interesting. Although my you know, my father was a pastor and my uncle was a cop. And my one of the. You know, you wind up before you get a career off and you wind up in different jobs. And one of my more enjoyable jobs that I had was a campus cop at Calvin College and seminary for for since I was I went to seminary there. I had that job for years and and really enjoyed it. And. You know, it's being a campus cop, you know, you don't have a gun. You're not going to shoot anybody. I mean, you're you're not much you don't have you. You have less authority than Barney Fife, but it's you know, part of what I enjoyed about that is part of what I enjoyed. Just this morning, there was a I don't know why. There's there's probably, you know, 40 feet of building here. But the homeless people just love to sleep against my door. And I came in through a different door this morning. So I didn't even know was there. First, I heard coughing. It's like, OK, so. And then I roused him a little while ago and, you know, talked to himself quite a bit about how terrible this world is and how he was the archangel Gabriel. And off it went from there, all of which, of course, I can hear through my door. And I've just always enjoyed. Maybe maybe it's maybe it's kind of the opposite of the. It's opposite of the edited, tailored idolatrous image that that screens project that us constantly of what normality is and what the good life is, because if you're doing something like law enforcement or working in a jail, you're sort of seeing the underside. But there's a there's a truthiness to that world that is not true. That is refreshing and stimulating and enlightening. And so I've, you know, so my uncle, after he spent a career in law enforcement, like almost all other New York cops, moved down to Florida for his retirement and took up doing, you know, motorcycle ministry with motorcycle gangs. And so, you know, I sense and I always I always enjoyed my uncle. He always had great stories, but there wasn't, you know, my father, who was a preacher in a rough area town and my uncle, who was a cop, you know, the commonality between those two worlds is the kind of reality and life that. Is seldom well portrayed in. It's interesting where you've got on one hand, your father is a projectionist. So you grow up sort of in the. You know, in the in the in the in the particular light of the of the movie projector of the screen. And yet, which often it's interesting because. You know, cinematic industry often tries to portray this other underside of the world. And and it seems fascinated by it. But I think partly by virtue of the kind of interchange you need in order to make a film work. I mean, real people are. More monotonous. Sometimes. I mean, when he first starts, when he first started, is the guy on the other side. There is the first time I met him this morning. You know, on one hand, it was OK, because you begin you definitely begin to see patterns. Yeah. And you definitely begin to. OK, so now he's you know, he's starting out on how wretched the world is and how he doesn't want to live. And, you know, I hear a lot of that. And and then the Archangel Gabriel thing came up and. Well, there's a new twist on it. So I kind of wonder what his diagnosis would be. There's a lot of unmedicated schizophrenics that wind up in the homeless community. And so they'll tend to just kind of cycle around. Some of them, of course, will find their way into into prison or jails. They'll get into jails fairly regularly, I imagine. The the really interesting schizophrenics in my life are the ones who actually manage to stay out of jails. And when you think about the kind of that's quite a feat when you're when you're an unmedicated schizophrenic and you can for the most part reliably steer clear of the law sufficiently to stay out of jail and therefore keep your keep keep what you consider your quality of life arise, because the thing you don't want to do is be forced on to medication in the jail or the prison, which is exactly what will happen. And of course, then you'll get guys like David Berkowitz, the 44 caliber killer who was, you know, terrorizing New York when I was growing up. So to me, I you know, when you wrote me and and I've just got a I just I just know that people who work in this industry. Get a lot of interesting stories, but not not just the stories, but are I think develop a certain degree of ballast with reality about human nature and the human condition that I think this this projected image that we live in the middle of increasingly so simply simply can't engage with. So. So I was as naive, sorry, as every young man was going into it. And certainly, I think if I was to try to describe sort of. The experience that I've had in life has sort of been a little bit of a let down. When I start brushing up, you put a lot of professionals and different people on pedestals when you're younger, you have this idea, you know. Yeah. And you the more you go out and rub up against society and its systems and the people in it, you start to realize that, you know, that's not the case. That's not reality. And that our systems are I mean, I was floored when I walked into that institution for the first time, I couldn't believe what I was looking at. I really couldn't. I thought to myself, this this can't be. This can't be real. And I do have to be a little bit careful because I still work for the province. So I'm limited is sort of what I can what I would like to honestly say. But I'm so I'm trying to walk the line carefully between telling telling my story correctly, but not saying anything that might get me in hot water. The letdown of working in these institutions, but also, you know, this our system is probably slightly different. Of course, our jails are remand centers, so we house everybody. So you get a murder beef or whatever, you're coming to us first. And you'll do your you'll stay with us during your whole court process. So we've had and I have had the, you know, I've had a very, very thorough career working with mostly Max offenders, working Max units. That's how they reward you for doing a good job. Good at what you do. Go go down to the Max unit. And yeah, yeah. And what was interesting was I came in at a time when there was sort of a changing of the guard where the old school guys were sort of on their way out. And this new call in an educated group were coming in. Yeah. More social welfare ideas and whatnots. And there was a buffering going on there. There was there was some. I got to see the value, I mean, most of the time, the the, you know, if you had been working in the correctional systems over the last 30, 40 years and were part of that old school, they there was a culture and then and these cultures are breaking down even inside. I mean, you could talk to offenders and they would tell you, like, you know, the generations that are coming in now aren't mapping on to even the cultures and the institutions that, you know, there used to be a hierarchy. It used to be an order. And you were as much locked in there doing time as anybody. And everybody had agreements on how things were done. And there was sort of, you know, there were all of these all of these different unspoken rules and all a fairly stable way of doing business. You know, and everybody understood what was going on. But as we started to get more and more and more. Of younger individuals, and that's when things started to get really, really crazy. We were going through an overcrowding period. We didn't have enough institutions, you know, so. Everything was getting very, very, very. Very charged. So we ended up having a few riots and, you know, these actually a few of them are on YouTube. You can find. Yeah, through the I guess through the disclosures, they were able to get the videos and make your charge, put them on YouTube. Yeah. So so we're going through all these different things and then working the maximum. So, you know, I can't get into too many details, but. I started to. I was really good at what I did, really, really good at I. Diffusing things was what I was good at. I was good at getting in there, no matter how wound up somebody was. I was always very balanced, able to get in there and get it sort of calm down. But, you know, I started to change. I noticed that, you know, the thing I started to get. They call it getting hard. That's the calloused. Or calloused getting, you know, it's this sort of galvanizing that happens, you know, to everybody. And I think in your profession, too, you probably see this quite regularly. I got to assume our professions overlap in quite a few different ways. Yeah. I wouldn't change anything per se. I would I would still, you know, everybody has to a young man. I think, you know, that that called a war type of thing where you go and you grow up, you know, you go there and you have to face reality and look at it. And but there's all kinds of, you know, bizarre circumstances you find yourself in, you know, when you're when you're working in places like that. And. As time went on for five years, I met my wife in there as well. She was she came in as a casual and then went on work. She works for the federal government now and in in in our prison system. It wasn't I met great people and I worked with great people. I did about 12 years was, you know, bouncing and I did three different institutions. There is a bit of a like I have been writing all this down and going through it. I've been I've been trying to sort of piece it together. And again, the what I've been writing is more detailed and goes kind of goes into things. And when I'm in a place that I can kind of release that to the to the world, I hope to to get into a broader discussion about what we know these institutions are going through a change. And it's very easy for. It's very, very easy to pick a side. You know, most of the time, people do pick a side in these types of things. You know, you're either pro reform or, you know, you want to just just water and bread, you know, like, yeah, yeah. There's these two perspectives and, you know, and it's so much more complicated than that. Yeah. And, you know, what I've been trying to do over the last five years is sort through all that and go, OK, we talk about prison reform, but what does that mean? Yeah. You know, what tools do we have to do such a thing? And the truth is, we really don't have that many great tools. I mean, we still really don't know what to do with violently mentally ill people. Yeah. I mean, that's that's just a hard problem. That's not the how do we what do you do? You know, and we've had. A lot of issues with segregation in this country. Our segregation policies have come under attack and court courts have ordered us to make changes, which is fine, except for what do we do? It's fine. Well, when you say segregation, you mean segregation in terms of people and their level of violence in terms of why they're in there? That type of segregation? No, I mean, actual solitary confinement. Oh, solitary confinement. OK. Yeah. Yeah. Solitary confinement's been one of the biggest issues that we've we've been dealing with. It's been a tool that's been used in institutions since, you know. Yeah. And we've the Canadian government has basically said you're not to use it anymore, which I'm 100 percent on board with. I mean, it's I've watched far too many people lose their minds in these, you know. It's strange to have such an archaic system. You know, you think you look around and you see it of all society. You know, and yes, we've built new institutions and we put a lot. Hasn't really changed in the way that we we sort of look at things. So, you know, what I've been working on is sort of my own story, plus trying to, you know, thread that needle of of what prison reform should look like, but what and what can we hope for? Given the given the realities of things, you know, Sam Harris has a nice thing, you know, working with working with human nature. And I think that that said is to not to not to be very, very honest with where we're at, don't overstate what our abilities are. You see this with the mental health system. Everybody's we need we need more mental health. But look at what are our tools? Yeah, look how they are. I mean, when you look at the outcomes for for any most of the treatment treatment modalities, they're they're not great. They really, really aren't. And so I've been really trying to, you know, work on that. But I should step back a little bit and go back a little ways and sort of explain to you the other side of things, which was about six, seven years in. I started to have, you know, some some health issues. I mean, I noticed my family was telling me, you know, you're a little hostile, your aggression is up a little bit. Yeah, it was noticing that noticing I'm getting, you know, going to work looking for a fight. Yeah, you're easy to find that assert. So. You know, I started to notice some things changing about me, started to notice I was getting dizzy, having sort of disassociation. And, you know, and one day I was I remember I was we're at the park. I was pushing my daughter and saying, you know, I don't feel anything. No positive emotion at all, just nothing, you know, and I realized I've been feeling like that for a long time. And, you know, it it I you don't see it happening necessarily. It's sort of a slow progression in a lot of ways. It's protecting you. Yeah. And, you know, we call it. So, you know, I started having pains in my throat, you know, different things. And the doctors started suggesting, you know, maybe it's anxiety. So what do you start the pill parade? Right. Yeah. So started all started with the medications and whatnot. And just we had moved to Chediak. They built a brand new two brand new institutions. They were, you know, 70 million dollar institutions. Huge. They mold them after after a few institutions from from Maine open concept facilities. You're probably familiar with maybe what these look like. But they we used to have a lot of these. We had a lot of these. And you're actually separated from from the units. So you're not in there with the vendors. These were completely open. You're you're in there three stories high and they're just stacked. And it's two officers per per 60. Wow. That'd make you anxious. Yeah. And I mean, and I was a guy who who had lots of years in and lots of hard places. And I was a guy who was a guy who was a guy who was a guy who was a guy who was a guy who was a guy who was a guy who was a guy who was a guy who was a man, I'm like, this is different. This is and you started there. I started realizing this the way I was interfacing with this layout was completely different than before. You're you're you're so in touch with everything, every you know, you're you're you're feeling all of the little nuances and everything and every little situation you're aware of. And it just feels like you're in a pressure cooker all the time. Yeah, well, you know, I'm kind of like, oh, gosh, cooker all the time. Yeah. Well, this was not working well for the offenders either. So we started to have tons and tons and tons of different issues. And just a moment, Paul, sorry. Yep. Started to have lots and lots and lots of issues. And things were just kind of spiraling out for the management for the institutions in general. And my depression and things were just getting worse and worse and worse. To the point where and Peterson makes this very clear and others, since I've managed to read. The moment you don't want to be there anymore, the moment that your body says, I don't want to do this and you're forcing yourself. Yeah. Then you really, you know, spiraled out. And it was, you know, it's hard because in this province, you know, we're making great money. My wife and I, these jobs afford you a very good life. And things were, you start looking around, what else would I do? What else could I do? And you start to go, you know, geez, the opportunities really weren't as plentiful as I wanted. You now you have houses, you have kids, you have these responsibilities that you have to sort of, you know, you're gonna keep paying the bills. You've got to end. So the idea of stepping back and, you know, and making the sacrifices when your family is ultimately going to be the one to suffer it maybe didn't, you know, I was stuck between that. It felt like shackled to this thing. And I just couldn't leave it. And not only that, I didn't realize that the degree that I was violating my own morality doing this job. I mean, there, it was a very, you know, it's funny. You think like, you know, okay, the government gives you the rights and to go and do what you do. But I really didn't realize that I was losing myself to this thing. And I was angry and just resentful and didn't know what to do, really. And in some ways had plateaued, you know, feeling like is this it, you know, I'm gonna do this and pay the bills and keep moving forward. And that's, you know, that's gonna be life. You know, your soul screaming at you, you have to move, you have to do something. And, you know, I let my body go. You know, I think it was 5060 pounds overweight. And, you know, and, you know, relationships and whatnot were suffering. And I, and I know, I'm not alone, you know, I was well aware of the people I was working with, and my brother's a cop, and I'm well aware, nurses, pick the front line, you know, just get it. And you start to realize that you're like, I'm not alone in this. I mean, I'm seeing all these people and you're seeing the same symptoms in them. And, you know, the divorce rates are through the roof and the substance abuse rates. And I mean, everybody's, you know, popping pharmaceuticals just to get through the day and you're going, this, this is broken, this, this thing. I don't know how, you know, at one point, everybody was pretty clear about who the good guy was and what the role was. And that those lines have started to shift in a big way. So about five years ago, I went out, went and seen the doctor and they put me out. Went and seen a psychologist, started to have conversations, PTSD diagnosis comes up, which, you know, that's been my main area of sort of inquiry over the last five years is sort of trying to understand mental health as it pertains to the front line society with, you know, and, and sort of how to negotiate this thing forward. And what am I going to do? You know, what am I going to do with my life now? Because one thing that came almost immediately after the diagnosis was that we have a, I'm sure there's private insurance companies in the states that handle these things, but we have like a crown corporation called WorkSafe. And what they do is if you're injured on the job or whatnot, they kind of come in and deal with you. So I started dealing with them and the doctors gave me a permanent work restriction, meaning you don't get to go back. So, okay. And this is more common than what you'd realize. I mean, I have friends in the military, I have friends who are cops who are all in the same type of situation that these agencies don't really want you back once you get these diagnosis. They, they don't want you. So on top of it all, you sort of get stuck with the problem of what am I going to do now? And many people, their identities are very intertwined with what they do, especially if you've gone to police academy and you've made these major investments. Absolutely. So the identity crisis comes in on top of it all and all that. So I was, the aggression was a big issue, just being angry and irritable and just, you know, just hatred towards, you know, and to think that I felt like I let myself down, really, that was what it felt like. It felt like I had betrayed my better human nature for a paycheck. You know, I was, you know, at the end of the day, I didn't feel like I was helping anybody. I thought I was hurting people from most parts. And I mean, but yes, yes, it's a necessary structure. Prisons are needed for certain. But, you know, those people, a good portion of them didn't look much different than me. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And you start seeing guys from high school, you start seeing, you know, fathers and then you start seeing people coming in, like, you know, you're not living in a huge population center. I mean, it might be a decent size city. Yeah, we have about 200, 200 offenders, you know, and I was responsible about 40 of them at a time. Yeah. But it was a whole province, all of the maximum offenders got shipped to this one institution, which wasn't smart either. So we tend to put all the issues in one place and then wonder why we had such such issues. Yeah. So, so about one had to work about five years ago. Now I've been sitting, I've been I've had this massive chunk of time and sort of been taking it as a as a time to to learn, to try to to come up with a plan to move forward and where I was going to go and what I was going to do. And I started out with YouTube, right? I mean, you get on this thing, you know, what is this? And it's and just getting your mind wrapped around what is this thing? I mean, just talking to you, the kind of like I didn't get a cell phone up in those six months ago. Technology is always sort of I don't know, I guess I never moved beyond the cinema to a certain degree. I've always looked at it like, you know, OK, this is a tool. What do I do with it? Right. I mean, other than word programs and, you know, doing research and whatnot, that's how I sort of viewed the Internet and growing up in a small, small place. We were a few years behind in some ways. You know, I think I was I was in high school before my parents got a CD player. So it was we were a little ways behind and I sort of missed the curve. I was born in 84, but I did miss the curve for the, you know, to be totally immersed in technology. But this YouTube thing, I mean, I'm watching lectures from Stanford, Harvard. This is incredible. Yeah. I mean, how is this possible that I can sit here and take all this in and nobody's charging me? I'm going, you know, it was it was amazing. And then so I got hooked in with philosophy that definitely was the first place to go sort of thing, you know, and started with Stefan Molyneux and all of all of the guys associated with him. And then one day, watching Rogan and on comes Jordan Peterson. And I had no idea what I was looking at. I mean, I was just floored. And I said, I got to talk to this guy. I mean, I like I and one of the things that I come to a skill that I've sort of come to rely on with YouTube is that if you give me enough time and you're to watch somebody, I can generally figure out if they're full of shit or not. Well, that's part of the yeah, it's part of what you learn doing the jobs you did. That's a survival skill. Right. So so and I have this feeling you're you have a similar skill. But more than that, you get to sort of see what's what's behind what's behind them, what's pushing them, what's what's motivating them. And I listened to the career atheists, and I listened to all the minute, from what I could gather, their whole thing was just to beat up on for Christians or to to go out there and sort of, you know, they seem to be enjoying what they're doing. But I don't know that they're trying to actually contribute to anything constructive. That was the feeling I was getting. But Peterson is a different thing. And you're a different man. I'm listening to you guys, and I'm going, these are good men. I know they're good people. I can you start to pick it up with the little tiny things, not necessarily what you guys say. But sort of I just watch what you do. And, you know, I've watched and listened to everything Peterson's put out. And I mean, more than once, I like to think I got a black belt in Jordan Peterson. Yeah. And that was, I go, okay, you got to pick a master. And he was the first master, I can honestly say that I, I want to say I submitted to, but that's what it feels like you feel like you're, you know, part of the working in prisons and things, your trust level goes down for people big time. So negotiating or navigating the internet and trying to, you know, find individuals who you believe it's challenging, but there's so much content with you folks, and it's easy to kind of go, okay, I see what's underneath these guys, I see what's driving them, and it's good, you know, it's not, it feels good. The last couple of years, I would say, you know, things have definitely gotten better. I, one of the options that became available to me was to do a master's degree. So I chose to do it in counseling psychology. So I've been chipping away at that, but also it's been, you know, taking the time to spend time with my kids and try to reconnect, try to awaken the old fellow, the guy that's the, you know, the guy I feel like I used to be a little bit that being able to connect with people. Yeah. You know, I still have been fairly like, you know, this was a reflection time, I was forced to sit, you know, really, really forced to, it's not natural for me to want to sit and do that. But being forced to sit and having this incredible technology at my fingertips, I mean, I think you and other people probably were putting the 14 hour days in on YouTube for, you know, with Peterson in the beginning, too. I mean, I was just, yeah, yeah. And of course, everybody around you sort of, you know, what's the matter with you? I'm going like, maybe you have lost it. Yeah, yeah. Maybe you have your conversation with Joe, I was like, okay, that, that's pretty well sums it up. I'm in the same place. You're watching yourself, you're going, you know, what am I doing? Yeah. And of course, Peterson spun out to so I eventually kind of figured out, you know, the algorithms there, but you don't really necessarily have to let it use you, you can use that if you, if you sort of, so I said, Okay, how would I took my, you know, typical university syllabus? Okay, how do I structure this learning? And, you know, I think of it like kind of collecting Pokemon cards to a degree, I find an individual and you know, I, you know, right, I do a deep dive and, you know, I kind of close the chapter and then I move on. And I feel like you start to create this framework of people who you know, you know, and trying to be brave enough to listen to things that you may have otherwise written off before that was the hard part for me to just be to force myself to listen to something that I maybe before would have, you know, you would have just said, nah, that's crazy. That's foolishness. And really, really, really try to to be as open no matter how much I, it may challenge what I think. That's a hard thing. That's been hard. I got a pretty good ego and constantly chipping away at it to constantly be in that state where you're okay with not knowing, you know, and that's been one of the hardest things for me because everybody wants to cling to a foundation and, you know, I I feel like I've started that I have now or at least the beginnings of it. I don't feel lost per se. I kind of know where to plug data points in now. You've got this framework, okay, put that over here. I know how to think about these things. And of course, after you take in so many people, you know, whether it's whether it's Jonathan Heid or, you know, or yourself or Robert Sapolsky or Steven Pinker or any of the others. I mean, you start doing all this, this deep diving and you start going, okay, listen, there's a whole bunch of really brilliant people out there from all different disciplines. But I feel like we're starting to get to a point where everything's converging. I mean, the experts are all leaving their safe little categories of inquiry and they're going out and YouTube. I mean, I sort of feel like it's becoming, I said to my buddy, I said, you know, is this the UFC of ideas? You know, these guys are champions of thought. And I really do see that, you know, you know, people are able to leave the universities now and have this strong presence that isn't that, you know, I mean, deplatforming is real. I understand that there's real risks with what you folks do. I really do get that. But the more that brilliant people like Peterson and others can come out and have a place to speak honestly with good intention. You know, one of the things I wanted to ask you was what have you come up against that's challenged your faith on the internet? I mean, you've probably been exposed to so many ideas and at times they do seem to pull at what you're standing on or at least appears that way. What have been some of the ones that have really challenged you? Like the new modern, like modern, I call it just modern information. You know, like you come up against stuff that you go, wow, that doesn't exactly map on or that's true. That doesn't exactly map on things or is your level of understanding enough, you know, to sort of combat those things? I can't remember the yesterday. This morning I just posted a video on the Peterson Manson conversation. I'm trying to think of the term Peterson was using zone of because psychology is not my area of expertise. Zone of proximal development. Yeah. Zone of proximal development. Zone of proximal development. I like what Peterson said to Manson in that probably part of the reason that people have found him helpful was that zone of proximal development because, you know, I am a, you know, a, you know, I'm a, I'm a, I'm a, I'm not gonna lie to you, I'm just being honest. You know, and you've said, you've said a lot of this already and you said it quite well, in terms of trying to be brave enough to listen to something that you don't want to listen to and trying to wants to see the pastor de-convert. Everybody wants to see the atheist convert. And so once you achieve a degree of status in a hierarchy that's connected to something, you are in a place where you are in real danger of bullshitting yourself. And part of, I would imagine, your profession you have to know in a population like that, that there are people who can take you out. And certainly if they coordinate with each other, you don't stand much of a chance. And I came into this, I talk on my channel often about my relationship with C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles. I came into this partly because I, you know, the, let's say the, how can I phrase this? We kind of, so we sort of have things on two sides of us. One of them is sort of the idols of Babylon and the projected lie that is continued to be reinforced subtly under the surface that, again, I liked I liked how Mark Manson talked about it with his self-help that, well, we all know the good and the good is, you know, the, you know, better looking is better than less good looking. Wealthier is better than poor. Healthier is better than more sickly. And you can just kind of go through life looking at all of these things. And we're to a point in our world, especially with this projected idolatry that my wife, my wife and my daughters were watching. Well, I've been watching a whole different, when I had my sons living at home, we watched different TV than when I have now my daughters at home. And so we're watching things like The Bachelor and The Bachelorette and Selling Sunset. And there's this image of, you know, these people are spending enormous amounts of money on clothing and makeup and lifestyle and plastic surgery. And, you know, it's the top of the hierarchies and all of these different areas. And the point of the show is the relational drama between them. And so you'll watch this stuff and it sort of has, on one hand, it is subtly grooming us to worship what's at the top of these hierarchies, which comes very natural to us. But at the same time, it is also exposing the seedy underside and the deceit of wealth. That's one of the really interesting lines in the parable of the soils, whereas the one particular soil has rich soil on top of rocks. And in the Gospel of Mark, it talks about the deceitfulness of wealth. And well, what is deceitful about wealth? It always promises something that it can't finally deliver. And so we've got that, which is just present, you know, continually bombarding us with that. And then there's the other side, which is the other lie that through science and technology, we can cure all ills. And nested in there is the mockery that is present in celebrity atheism, the mockery and the contempt for the foolish fetishist who continues to cling to maybe not guns, especially if he's a Mennonite, but continues to cling to hope in God that God will somehow deliver. And these things, you know, I really liked the way you talked, you know, you shared your story in terms of these things colonize us under the radar. You know, sometimes imperceptibly slowly until we do something and we have to, or those who love us around us stop us and say, hey, what happened to you? And, you know, there are, again, because I've got, you know, Peterson's, I did that video yesterday, so I've got Peterson's talk with Manson on my mind. And Peterson quite rightly notes, he says, you know, Jung's idea that Jesus Christ represents the ideal, you know, the ideal man. And of course it was so funny when Michaela shoots over her head and says, well, he didn't have it so good. I mean, he's not on selling, you know, selling Sunset or The Bachelor. And, but what I find is that part of what is, part of what is healthy for me in terms of not losing touch with the person in jail, the person who is homeless on the street, the mentally ill person, whereas this in all likelihood untreated schizophrenic that went from cursing the world and hating his existence to identifying himself as the angel Gabriel, you know, in the course of, you know, three or four minutes of monologuing outside my door. I do see this continuousness. This is another thing that sort of is a flag to me when I'm watching people is that there's still a dialogue going on all the time. And it's not gonna go away. No, it isn't. It's there and you have to contend with it all the time. I've never, the more that I read, the more that I listen, the more I have to be okay with this not knowing to a certain degree, this faith idea intellectually, like I believe her name is Po. She talked about this idea of intellectually getting the ideas. And Peterson, that's what he helped me do is connect intellectually with theology, which is something I've just stayed away from. I just wrote it off. And, you know, this idea that there's a deeper thing there. You need to go back and look. And, you know, I've been a person who's been, you know, I like to think of myself as I'm a rationalist and I still hold onto that very tightly. I almost, I'm afraid to let it go. You don't wanna be the fool. I say, I don't wanna be the asshole who doesn't get the joke, you know, like that's, you know, to be that person who just, you know, was naive. Because I've been that so many times. But at the same time, you know, all of the people who I seem to admire, all of the men I look up to, I go, what are they standing on? You know, what's my, you know, my grandfather was, you know, I'm not so sure that he ever understood more than the 10 commandments. I mean, he went to church every Sunday and he, and this is one of the things that I agree deeply with you. And I hope that for Vakey's group gets the scalability issue that you've been talking about. Because if it doesn't make sense to my 96 year old grandfather, if it doesn't ring true to him, if it doesn't have that scalability, I mean, and I think that that perspective, when you've spent all your time in academia or you've spent time with an upper side of society, sometimes it's very hard to relate or even understand everybody else and finding the medicines that are gonna work properly for them. And, you know, this is where I feel like the moment that we get into these word salads and we start creating a whole new vocabularies to describe things that have already been described. And we're done very, very well, you know. And then you see people producing books and they stand there like, look what I did. And I go, I'm scared to even go out and talk, you know, in forms like this, because I don't feel like I have an original thing to say. Really, I feel like I'm just regurgitating or repeating many greater people than me. And I always feel that way. And so the idea is, I almost feel like I don't have a right to them to a certain degree, you know, I haven't earned them. And it's not from lack of being exposed to them because I really have obsessively gone about trying to understand it, but I have broken up. Obviously I've had to balance my obligations for my graduate studies with my personal endeavors. And, you know, we use sort of a bio-psycho-social framework. And what amazed me was that when I started, you know, the program I'm in, and a lot of the programs these days, they're so focused on behavioralism and, you know, these scientifically based interventions. The moment you start talking about existential or spiritual ideas, I don't know if they've lost the language or that the language has lost its, you know, like you can't talk about young. You talk about young, you're left out of a classroom. I mean, like that there's no value there. And then you start to carry that idea forward that, how many, have we written off a lot of value? I mean, it's clear to me we have. I agree with the meaning crisis. I agree with that that's where we're at. I agree that it may be getting accelerated because I mean, now the meaning crisis, you've got to be at the top of Maslow's hierarchy most of the time. You've got to have ascended to the top before you have the privilege to deal with this problem. Right? I mean, that's- That's true. And, you know, and that's what I try to realize is that, you know, okay, first of all, it's a privilege to sort of have the time to sit and think about this. Yes, it is. These issues. And I've been not that they don't come without suffering. And I think that that's why I appreciate Peterson and yourself so much is because, I can see that you've suffered with these ideas. I can see it. I can see that when he talks, he's not talking to you or me. I mean, these are the inner dialogues. Yeah. I mean, you can see it the way he sets things up and the way he carries on his narratives that, you know, these are, he has, that's a man who has struggled with all of this. And it maps a meaning as any indicator that, you know, now being a guy who has dealt with a stress disorder, I see a lot of the same sorts of things in him that I see in myself. And you feel like this meerkat who's, who constantly is looking around, you know, for the next thing, because you're so aware of that this is the reality that we're living in is a gift. This has never been seen before. And we're dealing with some cards that we haven't, but at the same time, the substructures that are underneath are the same, haven't changed. I don't think our solutions are necessarily gonna come from technology or anything else in a major way. I've been a martial artist most of my life. That's been something that I've, that had gotten me through my youth. I had a strange relationship with that as well because it was contributing to my health issues. I started competing very, very young, was blessed to get good coaches and was very, very successful at it. I was on the Canadian team for a few years and fought at the Pan Am games, world championships, did all that stuff. But the competition anxiety and whatnot, sorry. That's okay. Was causing me, my body to just break down. My body couldn't keep up with it. So when I was in my early twenties, I had to say goodbye to it. I said, okay, I'm done. I can't do this anymore. And focused on my studies. And about four years ago when things shook up, and I'm sitting here, I'm 50 pounds overweight and my body is just a mess. My mind's a mess. I went back to it and started to... One of the things that I experienced so much as a martial artist was these false prophets. You meet so many people who are in, they're wearing a belt or they're, and you're supposed to just accept everything that's said. Don't challenge it. And what I experienced was is that the belts didn't matter. It didn't in the real world, which was the competition arena, it didn't matter. I could see that most of the guys who were teaching, they couldn't, they weren't athletes. Most of them couldn't go in and hold their own in any combat situation. And I sort of carried that same thing forward that when I got into academia, I'm like, okay, this is great. Theory's great. It's wonderful. Having working in the institutions, I'm going, this is not mapping onto reality. It's just not. And this idea that, I realize that we're in a meaning crisis, but I don't know that inventing new religions with more complicated language is the way to go. And it seems to me that there's an awful lot who are standing on the backs of a lot of other great people just using the same language, same ideas to try to influence people when really, I mean, even Peterson, after you're done with him, the most responsible thing to do is go back and sort of look at everything that he's built on. So I went through this book list and he said, okay, how did he come to this? And then you start, there's a level of analysis that I think is right when you're trying to, especially when you're jumping through so many categories of inquiry, like you can't go too deep. So what I do is, if I can trust the expert that I'm sort of relying on, like for yourself, I'll never be able to deep dive as deep as you have, but I'll let you be my guide. This is the magic school bus for me. I just, I go on and I find the right people and people that I feel like I can trust and that are genuinely driven by something good or something beyond themselves. And that's sort of what I use. And I navigate as much as Sam Harris. Sam Harris does constantly dialogue with himself to a certain degree. You can see his change. Yep, yep, you can. You can, I've seen him change over the last couple of years and I'm listening to him. I mean, even his position on Trump, I watched it sort of, he could not understand in the beginning how this is possible. And finally towards the end, he's like, so when I, the people that I do kind of shut the door to are the ones who seem to be so certain. They get on and they're beaten. They're so certain. And I go, I appreciate where you're coming from, but I don't, I find it impossible that anybody could be that certain about anything. And I've walked with you and I've walked with Peterson up until this point where I said, okay, I've accepted that I'm a Christian socially and that has been the foundation that I've grown out of. And I thought, I really thought I was going somewhere with it. But last year, my grandmother passed and I was at the funeral and it was time to go up and receive the body of Christ. And I couldn't do it. My cousins, I watched them walk up. And I mean, I know these guys haven't been at a church in years and they're walking up and they're taking it. And I'm going, and I had this moment where I just, I knew that if I did it, it wasn't because I meant it, it was just going in motion. So at that moment, if it came clear to me that I'm not all the way any which way, I'm still watching, I'm still listening. And that's sort of where I'm at and I've got to be okay with that. And I'll continue to listen and continue to watch. And maybe, you know, I've had some strange things happen to me. And you know, at some point when I gave up control, at some point, maybe it was to the universe, maybe it was to God, maybe it was to, but I just knew that I wasn't in control anymore. Like I'm not, you can set the sail, you can get the mass ready, but the wind's gonna blow the direction it goes. And once you, you know, and for the first couple of years, I raged against it. I mean, I was gonna have my will met and all of a sudden, yeah, it just wasn't happening. And then about two, three months ago, within a day, everything became clear as to what I'm supposed to be doing. And, you know, four or five things just sort of unfolded in one day, you know, four years of waiting for, you know, information and for things to come to, you know, working through these processes. And it all came clear one day and this is the way you're supposed to go. So COVID has definitely thrown a whack into everybody's lives. And your videos, you know, what I'm getting from them and the most important thing that I've been taking from them now is, you know, I'm gonna be working with people as a therapist. I'm gonna be working with people navigating something. I mean, not everybody's going to be, but I think more people are than they even have the language to express. And I needed to make sure that, and even now still, I've got about a year and a half left before I have to start, you know, getting into clinical hours and whatnot, but I wanna make sure that I can help people with this, with this thing, you know, and, you know, I can't give them answers, but I mean, at least if the maps are there for them to say, you know, and with the internet being such a powerful tool now with people, you know, even your, the communities that you've created and whatnot. I poked in on them. I looked at them. They're not for everyone. They're not for everyone. They're not for everyone, but they also, they just, I said to you before, technically I'm sort of a little bit illiterate and I go on and decide, I don't interface well with the groups. So, but I mean, this ability to be able to find others who are struggling or who are having, and, you know, I'm watching your conversations and I'm watching you in real time work through with people, you know, about very deep things. And I mean, maybe I'm not learning a how-to manual here, but I'm, you know, if I watch enough, but I feel like I'm starting to kind of see that, you know, okay, if you can just be open and non-judgmental, that's the big thing is to not judge somebody. The moment they start to feel judged or that, you know, that's the hard thing is to just go look at, you know, you're a human being struggling and, you know, how can I help? You know, and that's, I kind of realized, you know, okay, you've got these skills. You're good at talking with people. You're like good at being with people. I had this guy come in in a wheelchair. Yeah, I know. They brought him into jail in a wheelchair. He had tried to commit suicide and his wife had gotten involved and it turned into a hostage situation or whatnot. So this guy came in and I'd spent about six months with him. I'd spent about six months with him and he was in chronic pain, but the nurses would say, oh, there's nothing wrong with him and this and that, you know, so about two days before he was getting out, he had had an issue with his roommate or whatnot. They had a fight and I went in and I was talking with him and he reminded me of my dad a lot. My dad has a chronic illness and, you know, for whatever reason, the guy just loved me that way. So I sat down and he led me to believe that he was gonna do it again. He was gonna try, this is gonna be over as soon as I get out, I'm worried about it. So we're having a talk and I said, look, you drugged me into this now, you know, like I'm here and I said, you know, you go through training and whatnot and you have a plan and what are you gonna do and all this, I threw all that into him. I just said, look brother, like, what's your plan? What are you gonna do here? And he, yeah, I believe he was going to, I really do. And I said, look, what will God think if I didn't intervene? You know, what you want me to just leave? You know, what would, so I sat there and we talked for about an hour. And I don't know why I did it, but I wrote down my phone number and I gave it to him. Wow. I said, if you're gonna do it, you call me first, at least give me a chance. Just give me a chance. Yeah. I instantly regretted it, instantly. Why did you do that? Why would you do, I mean, that's stupid. Why would you do that? So the three months go by and I get a call. It's him. I'm all right. I'm okay. Things are okay. And he thanked me and he said, I've been in institutions most of my life and I've never had anybody do that for me. And in that conversation, this was in and around the time when I could barely bring myself to work. And then I realized, that's it, you can't do this anymore. But you're not doing what you're supposed to be doing. You're supposed to be working with people. And when I say being with them and helping them through and you're supposed to, this thing that I found myself doing was so against my character. But again, it was valuable. I don't wanna say the suffering wasn't necessary. I think I had to go through it. I had to go through it. And I decided, and I've had a lot of people kind of support me with the idea of doing therapy and working with people. And I've been really trying to figure out how I wanna do that. I mean, I've been through the system myself and this is a lacking thing. I decided that I really, martial arts gave me my, I started using the fasting methods, started doing the martial arts again. I dropped 60 pounds, got my body back, got the hormones and got the blood sugars and everything in check, got my body back. I've started to develop this, at least a simple theory of philosophical theory to guide myself and it's not a theory so much as it is just a constantly reminding myself to be open to everything and not shut any ideas down and to be flexible enough. And what's funny is that the more sort of frameworks that you get, you realize it's all connected in so many ways. And I feel like if I'm seeing God anywhere, I'm seeing him through that. And it's just, no matter how much you try to get away from that conversation, it always boils back down to it. I know that the idea is the meaning, I know you've spoken about the meaning crisis a lot and others, it's a feel like it's gotten attention, it's starting to grow it, but I mean, what does it mean to try to tackle that problem? I mean, I sit back and I go, I don't know if reinventing the wheel is the way to go here. I really don't. I think one man like Jordan Peterson, when you watch the ripples from that particular rock and you see, and you can almost hear it, you listen to politicians or you listen to other people, he, thinkers like him and the Weinsteins and everybody else are getting into people's heads, those psycho technologies are spreading around, you can see them, you can see them in people's, and it is working. But I don't know if it's gonna work for my 95-year-old grandfather or that the man with Down syndrome that you spoke about. I think that we need, I was really interested to read that the majority of the scientists that worked on the Human Genome Project, Christian, the moment I heard that, I was like, wait a second, what, what am I missing? What am I missing here? And then there's so much that you start to realize, I bowed at the ultra-science for a long time, but when you start to play that out and realize how much of that is really unsettled, that's a very, that was a destabilizing thing on its own too. What do you mean? We don't know as much about anything as I thought we did. Which again, puts you in a precarious situation because you're going, nothing seems to be what it was or what I thought it was. Yeah. So it's been a very difficult couple of years, but I say the weight hasn't gotten any lighter, but my legs are getting stronger. And I do wanna thank you and all the others for the efforts you're putting forward. I mean, I don't know what I would have done. I really don't. I don't know what I would have done if I would have been sitting here as alienated from everything and being by myself. I mean, that was the first time I had to ever be with myself and I didn't like myself. So it was terrible company. It really, really was. So, and I am learning a tremendous amount from watching you navigate your relationship. So with the randos and all of that, and it's been very, very good that way. And all the other things that I've been working on, the stuff I had mentioned to you in the email, that's really just putting my past 10 years to bed. Even the book that I'm writing, I don't care if anybody ever reads it. It's just me trying to close that chapter and trying to say, okay, look, if you went through it, what did you experience? What did you learn? Is there anything there for anybody else? And if that's all it is, that's fine. Moving forward, I've been really trying to figure out, okay, how am I gonna take my love for martial arts? Because it was such an effective tool for dealing with me. How can I take that? And how can I use that as a scaffolding to help guys like myself or even younger people who are having issues with aggression and whatnot. And that's been a difficult thing. And I always see things through this lens sometimes, but when UFC was created, the idea that you had all these different disciplines and you created a game set that you can invite them all into and that somehow this game set is going to validate, whether it's Judo or Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu or karate or kickboxing or whatever, I sort of see all the different disciplines in the academic world that way too, that they're all sort of, they all have some of them have a more broad philosophy and I kind of break the world up into tools, techniques and philosophies. Is this a tool? Is this a technique or is this something bigger? And has it been overarching? Is it a meta philosophy? What is it? And I go through information that way and I go, most of what science is offering us is a tool or a technique. That's it. And that's wonderful, but the how is so much more important than the why, right? I mean, or no, sorry, the why is so much important than the how in that sense. It's trying to figure out why did you use. In the interview you were talking about earlier with Michaela and her father, that was a great interview by the way. It was a great interview. It was a great interview and I enjoyed watching the other lad squirm a little bit there when. That was good. But I mean, I've been wondering like, the intellectual dark web and you kind of see these individuals and I don't see the same, what's the word? I mean, like the Weinstein brothers, I enjoy listening to them. I've learned a tremendous amount from them. They're very, very brilliant guys, but they don't seem to be putting themselves out there necessarily as much as some of the others have been. You know, and I kind of go, are these guys really interested in the big picture of, cause to me where the rubber meets the road is the point here. This theoretical stuff has to boil down to something that's actually real and that we can move forward with. So much of this stuff is so abstract and so beyond the realm of a regular person that you go, are you gonna point to this or is this just, I used to think when the masters used to fly in from Japan, they're sixth and seventh and eighth degree black belts and they're talking about this nuanced stuff that really had no application to the real game. And not only that, they didn't even have a responsibility to make it that way. I mean, it's sort of, at what point are you guys just stroking each other's egos and going back and forth? And I hope, but watching them break ground, you realize it's important. It's important. And rebel wisdom and the others, one of these, I don't know what you call them, one of these initiatives I believe will emerge as the arena for these things to take place. And I think that, I had never heard a sophisticated Christian before. I just never had. Being mainly in a Catholic church and everything was so beyond me, the language and the, when I say the, the whole thing was for me just seemed so outdated. I just didn't have use for it. I had all these wonderful role models of my life, these men who in my work, I had everything I needed. I really did. I thought I had everything I needed to move forward. And it was very effective. I climbed, I was able to navigate the world and get the trappings and success and all the things that you're supposed to have, but it didn't, I kind of sold my soul a little bit to do it. And then you're left with not much guidance. And I mean, I'd even gone around to sort of all the men in my family and like, you're pulling at them for something more deeper and they didn't have it to give. They just didn't. It wasn't in them to give. And then you start to think, oh, I'm not gonna find these answers everywhere, anywhere. And going online was, once I figured out what YouTube was and figured out, oh, wait a second, okay. This thing, I can use this thing and it's powerful. And I'm still interested to see where it's all going. I mean, are you gonna have a hundred thousand people? I don't know. You know? I hope not. But I mean, when I look at the scale of things, I go, he's probably going to, right? Well, but if I do, I probably couldn't have this talk with you today. And I think part of the reason why things do just sort of float up is because we're not having conversations with people who are prison guards and beat cops and movie projectionists. And I think Joe Rogan has tried, Joe Rogan has sort of, has part of this because he talks to athletes and MMA fighters. And so there's a reality. I think that's part of, I've never done any martial arts myself, but I would imagine part of the daily contact and the discipline forces people to not just, will not let heaven and earth get too far apart from each other. So, yeah, but you're, you know, I guess, and this is sort of what being a local church pastor is too. You know, most of the people in my church don't watch my videos. My mother might watch this video because it's a conversation. And she, you know, with these videos, she has a hope that someone interesting is gonna share their story. And it's not gonna be a story about, oh, I was down in Hollywood and I rubbed shoulders with these celebrities and yada, yada, yada. It's going to be a story that she can identify with as the vast majority of people who, you know, live life every day, have health concerns, worry about their kids, their grandkids making ends meet. You know, that's where the battle is joined on heaven and earth. And local church pastors are at that front as our nurses, as our cops. You know, as our EMT workers, they deal in an area that the idolatrous projected image cannot fully capture even though it tries, but certainly in some ways can't understand. And so that to me is where the rubber hits the road as they say. So that's why I appreciate, that's why I appreciate your story. And I appreciate your sharing your story and telling your story. We should probably wrap it up. And I'm going to send this to you and I'll have you take a look at it before you decide whether or not I should share it. Because again, you know, people, a good many very wise people will say, well, I don't wanna have a conversation with you, but I don't wanna post it. Totally understand that. You know, when I started this, I knew that YouTube for the amazing tool it is, it is a place for people with not a lot to lose. And when I mean a lot, I mean all of the kinds of things we're talking about, because you know, your marriage, your children, your job, you know, things that make up the bulk of your life. These are things that have value. And we live in such a screwed up economy that we think all of these things up here have value, things going on in Washington, DC or Ottawa or at the universities and certainly they have value. But the sheer immensity of the value in people's personal lives, that's the value because as you see with the places that you've been, people who when that goes awry and it goes awry all the time, when that goes awry, they have nothing. Again, just this homeless guy this morning, he wasn't hatched. There was a man and a woman that contributed genetic material to his conception and eventual birth. And he probably went to school someplace and had friends in school and quite likelihood somewhere in his late teens, early twenties, you know, schizophrenia grabbed him or maybe he did drugs or who knows what, but you know, this is, he has lost touch. And at some point, because as a society, we don't just shoot these people or, you know, put them to death, we say, well, we want to help them. Okay, now we're trying to do something really hard. We can put a man on the moon, but this dude we have no answer for. And that is a reality that escapes common. I think it is actually willfully suppressed by society because we all understand to one degree or another, we are just a hair's breadth away from being that person that our sanity can go, our health can go, you know, we are on the precipice of that. And because we see people drop off that edge all the time into the chaos and then land in, a jail or a hospital and eventually 100% of us, a cemetery. So no, this is- Can I ask you one more question? Yeah, go ahead. One more quick thing. Sure. When we talk about Peterson's, you know, main claim the same as the meaning, you know, and, you know, how you create that meaning through responsibility and this and that. I can't help but thinking that it can't exist without the social component though, right? Right, right. Like this idea that, you know, cause I mean, if you're, I've observed this from watching men alone in a box, you don't have a whole lot of context when you're in a box by yourself. Right. And the idea that, you know, it is meaning to each other, isn't it? It's meaning and that meaning is established based on the group. Yep. You can't be meaningful by yourself. Right. So it, you know, I tend to wonder, you know, is it as neatly separated out as a group? Is it as separated out as, you know, meaning at an individual level when it really is ultimately folded into a social level or at least contextualize that way. Anyway, that was just a thought that I had about it. Like it's, and I've, again, I've enjoyed your videos and keep it up. I'm really, you and I've got you and Vervecky and Pajow as my three wise men at the moment. So I've been, you guys are the rabbit holes I'm gonna be in for the next year. So. Well, good. And appreciate everything you're doing. Well, thank you, Corey. I'm so glad you contacted me and I'm so glad we had a talk. And I do pray that your studies are fruitful and that, you know, if in fact you do go into clinical work or become a therapist, I hope that it becomes a deeply meaningful path for you. Actually have, I might send you, I'm gonna talk to, I have another Canadian therapist that I actually speak with regularly. We don't post. I should get him online because he works actually with a lot of indigenous communities that are very remote. And I'm sure in your line of work, you see plenty of people who come from those communities as well, because, you know, the, in some ways there's the story of, you know, the long story of those communities is also a deep meaning crisis where, you know, we, you know, Christians might feel like modernity sort of started kicking the stilts out from under their, you know, axiomatic structures. Well, the Europeans on the shore of the new world and everything that they brought, whether they were, you know, bringing it for good or for ill, seriously undermined the entire world of the fragments of this population that survived the germs. And it's, yeah, I really, I should really have him on the channel to talk more about that because he, you know, when I listen to you, well, you're both Canadian, but when I listen to him, I see many of the same, you know, we think we are so smart because we can make these amazing little internet devices in our pockets that can do incredible things. But we can't deal with the basics for how many people and then we put them all in these boxes because we don't know what to do with them. And then we sort of tell lies about, oh, well, you're exactly what. Really, really, you know, anybody who has any personal experience with this stuff at all knows, okay, you go to that, you go to that shrink, you go to, you know, you get on the pill parade, it's trial and error, baby. I've seen it all the time. And you can talk a big game about what you know, but show me the omelet, show me the results. I know how to see it, so. And that's just it. Brother, thank you so much. And I hope maybe, you know, in the future, we'll have a chat again. Sounds good. If you're ever in Atlanta, Canada, you let me know, I'll show you the sites. I do live in the lobster capital, which is important, right? I love lobster. I love lobster. We have the Lobster Festival every year. So you let me know and I'll make sure you're in. That sounds great. Thank you, Corey. All right, well, take care. Thank you, bye.