https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Vf_ctgSDT7U

 Yeah. All right. All right, Tim, why don't you know you and I have met. You've come to our Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetup. You don't live very far from from where I do. And why don't why don't you just introduce yourself and tell us what you'd want to tell us before we get into whatever you want to get into. Sure. Okay. So my name is Tim. Like I said, like Paul said, I live nearby live near Sacramento. And I've been going to the the meetup group missed the last couple just because of life. But I've probably been to maybe four or five of the meetups and that's been interesting experience. And well, I guess should I tell you about my my like my my background my yes, please do. Sure. Okay. So my I kind of I came from Reno. I grew up in Reno. My my parents were school teachers up there and then they all they worked in a casino admit it. Come on this school teacher story. No one's buying it. Right. I'm sorry. Go on laugh at least once in the oh my internet connection is unstable. Oh, that's that happens. Keep going. If it cop did well. You did drop out I can always pause hang on. All right. I can always pause it if it gets unstable. So, okay, then we'll just see if you come back or if you do get disconnected just jump back in the room. Sure. Okay. Yeah, so I grew up in Reno. My parents were school teachers up there and they they quit quit teaching and they actually were River rafting guides in the Colorado River for a while and so, you know, I was born up in Reno in a very poor neighborhood. My parents were my dad eventually became a car mechanic and so when I was a little kid, he was a car mechanic and he had a tow truck and he would tow people off the mountain, you know, in the Sierra Nevada when it's snow the wintertime he would tow people down off the mountain and so we kind of grew up in a poor community there. My dad eventually got a job with ups and kind of middle moved up in middle class and as far as church is concerned, I don't really think we were very we weren't necessarily churchgoers. I remember there was a story that my mom always used to tell. I haven't heard her tell in a long time about my older brother when he was like four or five years old. One of his friends asked him are you a Christian and and he said, well, what's a Christian and and and the kid said, oh, he's a Christian is someone who goes to church on Sundays and my brother thought about it and he said no, we're campers. Yeah, so we grew up hunting and fishing camping in the desert, you know, very outdoorsy. We, you know, we went to church, I think once in a while, but it wasn't I think when we were little kids. I don't think it was a big part of our identity that we moved to when I was about seven years old. We moved to the Sierra foothills in California and I started you want to pay taxes, huh? Yeah, exactly. Move the other way. Oh my God. Yeah, the belly aching from my dad about that. So we started going to a Christian school in the foothills. I would describe it. This is like the early 90s. I described as being like fundamentalist probably. I don't know if it's like that anymore, you know, but there's a mix of people there but in the early mid 90s, I think no fundamentalist fundamentalism was like really powerful still and so that that school was I think had a very strong fundamentalist bent. I remember our Bible study classes in school had a lot focus on, you know, young earth creationism and other issues like that. Well, people often don't understand how diverse California really is. They think diverse. Well, there's you know, racial diversity, but you know, there's there's Bible Belt in California and foothills would would very much be that type of that would be the Bible Belt of California. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, it makes sense. Yeah. So, you know when I was going there, you know, the kind of like I think that's when like being a Christian really became part of my identity and when I went to high school into the public high school and I identified myself as Christian really strongly because I thought, you know, I pretty much know everything now. So, but we I think are like still my family's my family's church attendance was probably intermittent at that time. I would say and the Christian school thing just sort of really yeah, you you were you were teen Christian from the Christian school. Yeah, definitely. And I remember my my mom. Well, my mom's dad died. So my grandfather died. This is actually after high school. I went to I would Sac State. I was doing mechanical engineering studying mechanical engineering and my mom's dad died and it really hit her hard and he and I remember her a family friend of ours from Reno who actually is a Serbian man and he married my mom's roommate from college. He he was he came over to our house and he said some kind words to my mom about it and he asked if he could pray for the soul of my grandfather and she said, okay, and he said, okay, can we all look can we all turn toward the East and this isn't what I got caught in the fundamentalist school. No. So he started he started chanting and I think it may have had some Greek in there. I don't know. It was you know, I just remember it was a long thing and he was chanting from heart from memory this very very long prayer and and made a big impression. So on you mom not so much on me. I mean I was pretty indifferent but my definitely my mom. Yeah, and so during that time I was going to Sac State and met my wife there. We were we met in a I started going to a like a Pentecostal on campus like Church Group which was they didn't identify themselves that way. I didn't even know what that was. I didn't know what Pentecostalism was. I was just going to know it's Christian. Okay, I've gone here and so that's where I was at and during that period of time my mom started has been attending a catechism classes at the local Catholic Church. And she said that after she finished the catechism class. She was still uncomfortable about some particular issues and the priest there said well, I think you should go talk to Father Chris at the local Orthodox Church in town. And the Roman Catholic priests told her to go talk to Father Chris. Yeah, that's interesting. I mean, that's what she told me. I imagine there probably was something about the particular issues that she identified that made him say that or I don't know. I don't know. I'm speculating. So they went to my mom and dad started attending the local Greek Orthodox Church at that time, which was meeting in a rented space in a strip mall in Roseville. And it was at that time my girlfriend and I were, you know, I was about to graduate from college and we're thinking about where we should go to church on Sunday. And I thought hey, why don't we just go where my family's going. And so we started going on Sunday to the Greek Orthodox Church and to me it wasn't a big deal at all. It was just, you know, it's just church. I mean, Christian. To me it wasn't, it didn't really make a big impression on me really. So wait a minute. You went to school in a fundamentalist school. Then you were going to a Pentecostal group at Sac State where you met your girlfriend. Now wife. Then you go to a Greek Orthodox Church and you say, it's all the same. Yeah. Yeah, that's a little surprising to me. I looking back at, yeah, I don't know. I don't know why it didn't really, I guess maybe ignorance, I guess. Is this one of these Greek Orthodox churches with smoke machines and guitar bands? Is that is that the kind of outfit that Father Chris is running? Not so much. Because there's a lot of those in the foothills, you know, Rockland, Roseville is full of Bayside, all the Bayside clones, First Covenant. I mean in suburban Sacramento, it is, you know, big box Church is really big. So, you know, Father Chris and the Orthodox are really a change of pace in that neighborhood. Yeah, yeah. They are. Yeah, I think maybe one thing that was an impact, I think maybe possibly I went to England with some buddies in college. We just, you know, did our backpacking trip kind of thing. And so we got kind of, we got to experience when I was there, got to experience some historical churches and stuff and I thought, oh, this is all part of our story. This is all part of the same story to me. And so at the time I just, you know, it wasn't a big deal. It was just, oh, this is a different building. It's a little bit different and you know, it's all the same faith. Interesting. So yeah. Wow. You are unusual in this way because most people, most people really not only see but get tripped up on a lot of the particularities, you know, and again, I mean part of what's convenient about this conversation is we're from the same place and of course Granite Springs, which is a sister church of ours in now in Lincoln used to be in Rockland, but that whole area again, there's a lot of big box, assemblies of God, Covenant, non-denominational. I mean, these are really successful churches in that area. And again, you know, I know Father Chris a little bit. He's a friend of Kevin Adams, who's the pastor of Granite Springs. That's a very different. I mean, it's a very different MO in terms of what church is like. Yeah. How big is your church now? How many people come to attend worship? On a typical Sunday, I would say it's probably 200 people 200 to 300. That's good size. I mean when I started going there was like I said, was in a tiny room in a strip mall. So it's very, you know, since the time I've been going there it's increased, you know, fivefold at least. The increase has that come from immigrants or people with stories somewhat like yours. I think that there were part of it is when we got a bigger building, there were more people who were already living in Roseville that were already Orthodox that couldn't fit in the smaller space and so they they moved in. But there's a lot of people with with my background. I think in our in our church, I would say that probably at least now is actually we did a count. We did a survey and this was back probably 2000 and 2010. 30% of the people in our church were converts to Orthodoxy. Okay. And today I would I would I would hazard to guess it's over 50% at least. So it and that may have been a factor as to why it wasn't that it wasn't a culture shock so much at least initially in that the church has always been all English essentially all English. There has never been a very ethnic Greek ethos so much within the church, which is pretty rare. I actually in Greek Orthodox churches, that's not the not the norm. Definitely not the norm. Yeah, that's a really interesting dynamic to me because again, I mean church planting included in the Christian reform Church as we planted a church up there. The Reformed Church of America as a church in Carmichael. I mean that whole area has been you know that that whole area was a place where church plants did well and Granite Springs was planted in 91, you know, many of the churches were planted when that community was being built out for a lot of places in the world. They don't understand how places like California work where cities cities have rings and communities can sort of get disposable because the for a long time the suburban growth has has been moving out and that was one area where you know suburbanization really was very successful and so church planters flocked there. Yeah, but this is again the the Orthodox the Orthodox Church is a very different thing from traditional church planting because the church planting mode was get some guitars big sound preacher and skinny jeans life application sermons and Granite Springs started with you know, basically the Willow Creek Bill Hybels, you know do a little sketch have that go into a sermon even you know, cuz I got here in 97 Granite Springs was planted in 91 and when I got here they were still doing the seeker service on Sunday and then the believer service on Wednesday night and you know Orthodoxy is just like that that's that's very new. It's very different even though it's very old. Yeah, so talk to me about so you started going there because your parents went there but you wouldn't necessarily stay there for that reason. Yeah, definitely. It was kind of like, you know, I should I should go to church where my family's going that was really the impetus for for going there and funny story that happened. My roommate I was still living at a house in Sacramento with my buddies who are from the Pentecostals Pentecostal group and they're like, okay, that's cool. Well, you know told him what I'm doing and that's neat. And one of my roommates he's involved with the Russian Baptist community in Sacramento at the time, which is another big community. Yeah. And he said he said you're going where? And I said, I'm Greek Orthodox Church, you know, you know, it's pretty cool. You know, it's different and he said not to him. He said do you do you know what they believe and I said I know I don't know. Christian, right? And and he's he's like, you know, they believe in they have some really weird beliefs. You really need to look into it. Like I'm very concerned about you right now and I you know, I was kind of taken off guard and okay, so I should take this seriously. So I started reading. Started doing some research and reading and stuff on and and my experience was I realized well, this is like, you know, I I wasn't like a great scholar or I probably thought I knew a lot about about the faith at the time, but this is the first time I really like digging in on my own into into Christianity in general. And I just but I was looking at, you know, what's the difference between, you know, Orthodox and others and and and as a as a red I just felt like well, this is right. I really I agree with all I believe all of this. This is kind of it was kind of that experience of like of remembering, you know, like Jordan Peterson says it's like you would learning is like remembering if it kind of felt like that it felt like oh, this is this is really what I always believe, but you know, really necessary wasn't necessarily that's not necessarily the case. It's just that you know, this felt right. And so I really took it very seriously and then my girlfriend and I were both we wanted we were wanted to get married and we both decided let's get married in the Orthodox Church. So we we both were received into the church and this was like 2007 roughly and then we got married in 2009. So at that point I started to really nerd out on reading and I got very nerdy my poor wife like had to go through that with me, but I started reading all kinds of stuff and I I started reading Alexander Solzhenitsyn and I would say that probably he's been like the biggest his writings have been the biggest influence on me in terms of literature. I read the Gulag Archipelago the unabridged version. We've got a hierarchy. Yeah, so and that it's just that's a that's something that like you can't read that and not just be completely changed is just like Jordan Peterson said. So what will talk a little bit more about that? How did it change you what what opened up in your mind as a as a result of reading that? I think the I think you know, it's just it's a it's an immense work of that documents incredible tragedy. That's just totally unbelievable and and you just it's really a window into into the human soul really just seeing how people reacted in in really extraordinarily terrible circumstances. It's just really really enlightening as far as understanding yourself and understanding people. And and there's a theme in in in the Google Gulag Archipelago of And you I'm sure you're sure we've heard Jordan Peterson say this a number of times as well. That the line between good and evil runs through through the human heart rather than being distinct between people and it's really true. Yeah, and also the yeah, I mean, I don't really have anything else to say about it at the moment, but it was very very impactful for me at the time. Yeah. So so you nerded out on the on the orthodox stuff. Yeah, and obviously you you're nerding out very much confirmed that you wanted to be there your wife. Sounds like she she took to it to what was her background. She she grew up in like in non-denominational Church in Livermore area. The Bay Area. And she's told me that before that she she assumed that was it that this was all a phase. So be careful. Yeah. So no, she she went along she went along with she went along and you know and yeah, she went along along with it and also I you know, I think that it's been impactful for her. She doesn't hasn't nerded out like I have but I think for her I think probably being part of a really tight community like we have is probably the thing that she values the most in our Church. Does she listen to the fish when you're not in the room? No. No, not so much. The fish is the Christian radio station around here. Yeah. Gosh, I wish we could sing these songs in church. Oh man. I'm so bad. I should make videos. I should watch my channel. Very entertaining. Yeah, me and you know the Truman Show. I'm sorry. I interrupted your story. Please continue. No worries. No. Yeah, I nerded out a lot of stuff. I would say I kind of had a I read St. Augustine. I read Confessions. I read For a non-Greek of you. Yeah, right. His Greek was very weak actually. So yeah, yeah, but yeah, he's a remarkable it's a incredibly remarkable book and his piety and and his spirit is just awesome. And yeah, I being being Orthodox here a lot of a lot of slamming on Augustine which I I understand. I think that I think that August that he's somewhat he's misunderstood. I think in some ways I think that you know, he's his he's been foundational in Western theology and and his works have just been kind of like processed and crunched through through over the centuries and maybe the way we understand it today is a little bit different than maybe how he then in the context in which he was writing. So almost certainly that's definitely my that's my take on Augustine. I feel like he's he's a great person read a great Confessions is awesome. I another book that was really actually that I wanted to talk to you about. Okay was and I don't have it. I lent it to somebody it's gone now. What book is it? Venerable bead the ecclesiastical history of the English people. It's a very famous book. Yeah, I haven't read it but it's a very famous book the Venerable bead because who can forget that name the Venerable bead, you know, I have these Nigerian Anglicans who who worship in our building and they've got all these, you know primates and venerables and all these titles and it's like wow. Yeah, we just have ministers in the CRC. Yeah, so I picked it up. I picked the book up in a in a bookstore somewhere just randomly and and it's really stuck with me. It's always stuck in my head. I've read it one time. I've never opened it up again, but that was probably 10 years ago and still it resonates with me. I keep remembering and connecting to it. That's another really old book written in a very different context. Yeah. Well, it is you really are a nerd. You're very open nerd because you know, and that's what I don't know about that. No, but you know listening to you you I mean, I don't hear I mean you're interested in a lot of nerdy things, but you don't come off as very polemical. Are you? I've had my moments. Okay. Okay. Well go on about go on about the venerable. I mean it's been it's been you know, I've been I've been nerding out on this stuff for you know, 12 years now and at some point, you know, and I definitely have had some of those interactions with people that I regret in terms of just you know, not really knowing what I'm talking about being excited about it. None of us know what we're talking about. I said none of us know what we're talking about. That's our dirty little secret, but also not knowing how to talk to people how to converse and how to listen and you know kind of coming off as a know-it-all I'm sure. So but the so back to venerable bead. So this book was written I think about 730 AD very old and it was it's the ecclesiastical history of the English people up to that point and in that book is documented all the stories of the Celtic Saints in England. It basically covers the history from the point that the Romans left the English Isles in roughly the fourth century. I believe from that time until until beads own time and I don't remember a lot of specific stories from the book. Like I said, it's been like 10 years since I read it. But the reason I wanted to talk to you about it is I think that it's a remarkable perspective on on evangelization. I think that the example of the Celtic Saints is a great example for us today in some ways. I don't really know specifically the application exactly but there's just this incredible spirit that they had and recently saw a video on a channel called protecting veil and it was there's an interview with a monk named Seraphim Aldea who is establishing a monastery on a Scottish on an island somewhere out in the British Isles and he was talking about some about Saint Columba and about the Celtic Saints and and I remembered reading about it in reading about them in in beads book. And he said that the there's almost like a kind of there's an incredible freedom that they had and they they weren't tied down like like we are today in many ways and particularly I would say like Orthodox Church in a lot of ways people are very afraid to be open in in trying things. I'm going to an example is the Saint Columba. He he was a Celtic Saint and he he established a monastery essentially on a boat. And so they had a boat and he invited people to you know, come on the boat and the whole point is they were just completely detached from from the world. To the point where they lived on a boat going from place to place and there's just almost this madness that they had like they would they wouldn't shelter on the the the eastern side of the of the island. They would go on to the western side where it's the most dangerous just just with incredible faith in in in God and they would go from place to place and sharing the gospel and they the Celtic Saints and not just the Celtic Saints but those who came later the missionaries who came later from the continent. They had this they established this well, it's really not a new tradition, but they they followed the ancient tradition of adopting and transformation transforming the local culture of the British Isles and there was this there's a letter by from st. Gregory the Great who is the the Pope of Rome in he was when he sent missionary he sent missionaries to the British Isles. I just want to read this quote real quick. St. Gregory the Great. This is in his instructions to those who he was sending to be missionaries. Quote the idol temples of that race meaning the pagans of the British Isles should by no means be destroyed but only the idols in them take holy water water and sprinkle it in these shrines build altars and place relics on them when the people see that their shrines are not destroyed. They will be able to banish error from their hearts and be more ready to come to the places they're familiar with but now recognizing and worshipping the true God thus while the outward rejoicings are preserved. They will be able more easily to share in the inward rejoicings. It's doubtless impossible to cut out everything at once from their stubborn minds just as the man who is attempting to the climb to the highest place rises by steps and degrees and not by leaps. And I in this in these instructions, I think you see like a very pastoral approach, you know very understanding and and gentle and humble approach to evangelizing and that was that was a pattern in in beads book. You see that over and over because basically you'd have missionaries would come and establish Christianity and then Vikings would come and kill all of them and establish paganism and then they would send more missionaries out to evangelize and then they would get killed. Wow, it was just this pattern over and over and it's incredible incredible stories. And and it was just that was just the way they did it and the common way that the that they would evangelize is they would send monks and the monks would go come from the continent and they would go and go to a Viking settlement. And they would just live there. They would set up a little hut and they would just pray and they would live among them and just sort of pray and go about their business and there's no there's no shouting in the streets. There's nothing aggressive. And people would get curious. Like what are these guys about and and they would either, you know kill them or they would start asking questions and they would just sort of, you know, start having conversations with people and by their prayers and their gentleness. They would they were very successful me cases. So I think that that's a that's a good example for our time today. In some ways not that we're like, you know, pagan Vikings today, but I think that that example of of prayer and of gentleness and also like openness to openness to following Christ in all kinds of ways. I think is a great example to us today. It's really cool. Well, and I can see that in your, you know, in your in your church and again in Rockland, Roseville. I mean a lot of the other big box Christian churches are pretty noisy places and your church isn't terribly noisy and you're going about your business and that's and that's Father Chris to Father Chris is a I've only met him on a couple of occasions when we've done some when Kevin's hosted some things that at Granite Springs and and I've been there and Father Chris has been there but very unassuming gentle patient let the let the let a calm witness make its consistent gentle impact over time. And another characteristic he's got is he's very open as well. The and this this was another thing I wanted to kind of chat with you about was the your comment about matter being for communication. And you said that a while ago and now lately you've been saying something a little different matters for glory to well worry everything is for glory right? Yeah. And and specifically, you know, you're talking about like wheat and wine and oil and all of these things that are transformed and used for for God's glory. I think that's that's really right. I think even communication is kind of an interesting term because it you know, it it denotes like a you know communication with with other persons with you know with with each other and also with God. And so I think that's a that's a really good term. I think to use so we have within our you know, we in our church. We have like we have bees. We have beehives out on the on the side of the hill. We've got we're vineyard. We're making wine really yeah, we're doing all kinds of stuff like that. So, I mean, it's all part of this wine growing does do vineyards grow well in California? Well, this one I'm in charge of this one is not so great. Come on. We got nothing but vineyards over this any square inch. It's like it's like Abraham Kuiper meets a vintner and every square inch should be covered with vineyard in Northern California. Yeah. Yeah, so I'm now we're learning but yeah, this is like this, you know, it's it's cool to like be is that we can kind of come together. Oh, you're back. Okay, sorry have these ways that can come to come to come together and and work on something and transform it and and you know, we make communion wine and then we use it in the liturgy and all that stuff. So, you know, it's I think that I think that that that's why your your comment about the matter being for communication. It really connected for me. I you know, I I noticed when I listen to materialists matter is everything but it's for nothing. I mean, it's the basis of everything but it's for it's for nothing. There's nothing that it's for and I think that that just makes us empty and and it's not only it's not only what the philosophy of the age says that that trickles down into how we live that, you know, we we're we're incredible. We're prolific makers of stuff and it goes, you know, a single touch into the landfill. I mean, we're just we're just consuming astounding amounts of matter because it's it's everything and it's for nothing. So yeah, and that's sort of surrounding surrounding me all all the time in terms of just the culture that I I have acculturated and I think that it gives it actually results in a fear of death and I think that that is part of the meaning crisis issue and I say that because that's what I've experienced. The you know, I have sense within myself a fear of death at times and and I believe it comes from, you know, being focused on this world, you know, there was I got a quote here from I believe it's from Saint Isaac the Syrian. If I could read this real quick. This really connected with me because it connected with me because I felt I felt like oh, this is me. Okay, when knowledge follows the desire of the flesh. It brings about these tendencies wealth vanity adornment rest for the body and eagerness for the wisdom of that logic which is suitable for the administration of this world. It's count. It's constantly making new discoveries both in skill and in knowledge engineer and abounds also and in everything else. That is the crown of the body in this visible world as a result of this it comes to oppose faith for stripped of any concern for God and makes the mind irrational and powerless because it is dominated by the body. It's concern is wholly confined to this world. It thinks that everything is in its own care following those that say that the physical world is not subject to any direction yet. It's unable to escape from continuing concern and fear for the body. So faint heartedness and sorrow and despair take hold of it and worry about illness and concerns about one's lack of necessities and fear of death or does not know how to cast its care onto God the assurance of faith in him. Therefore it engages in contrivances and trickery in all of its affairs. When its contrivances are ineffectual for some reason it does not see the secret Providence and it fights the people who are obstructing and opposing it. It does not see the secret Providence. Yeah, that's well. A lot of the lot of the contemporary push against Christianity. Christianity has been not only the not seeing the secret Providence but the declaration that there is no secret Providence that see that the that the said secret Providence is illusory is superstition. I mean that's that's the entire that's the whole shtick of of the new Atheist that the secret Providence the secret Providence ought to be mocked. And now when you get to something, you know what it what it for me mocking is a thing that I have to really watch in myself because I'm I'm you know, at least part Friesian from New Jersey and so mocking is my is is is my love language. People don't understand that. So when I mock them they they get insulted. I said no, no, no, you don't understand. What do you mean? I don't understand you're mocking me, but I do it in love what so but but the you know, one of my one of the most poignant places in the Gospels for me is when they're mocking Christ and that mockery makes a world of sense from their perspective, but it illuminates where they're standing in seeing him now. How Christians see that moment. I mean that's that's that's a moment of of absolute inversion where two ways of seeing simply do not meet because one is you know, this this this terrible loss, which is of course the despair the disciples feel and in the light of resurrection. It becomes a very different moment. So now that's that's really true. That's true. Those are and and they're I mean, there's such hard things for us to to live with because it's so costly. I think I think people don't recognize that in many ways the main the main complaint to get against Christianity is that is it is irresponsible. But the difficulty is you know, because you you ought to you ought to value these things, but the I have a mouse. It's on run. They come in this time of year all the time and my office is such a mess that makes me clean my office because I have to deal with the mice but anyway, Kevin Adams can talk about that too. We lots of lots of mice in Northern California, not just wineries, but where was I going with this? Oh no, it escaped me. Oh, it's it's just the irresponsibility of Christianity versus if you see it in a different light, there is no ground for the imagined framework that we are using for responsibility and irresponsibility without the base framework of what matter is for. I mean our bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit, but sacrifices. What do you do in temples? There are sacrifices in temples. And so sacrifice and temple go along with each other. So anyway, and I think that's an insight that there's insight there in Solzhenitsyn in terms of the projects that people have. You know, the Soviet project was supposed to bring about happiness and the freedom for the proletariat and Solzhenitsyn just rips that whole thing apart. He just he unveils the poverty of the whole project and it's not just the Soviet project. It's all of the projects that we have because there's you know, you're going to have to break a few eggs to implement any of your any of your projects. Yeah. And so well, I you know, I sometimes I have too many thoughts to get through. Actually, sometimes I don't produce some of my own videos because I have too many ideas and it's really hard to pare them down and the comment that Peter Thiel made in his conversation with Eric Weinstein, which he got from René Girard with respect to the Soviets and killing that, you know, the Soviet Union lost its magic after the you know, after the Stalinist error because there wasn't as much blood and it completely reverses the romantic assumption of our goodness that dominates our own culture because and actually it's sort of what I want to make the video about today if I can pull it together but René Girard has really interesting insights into how we work and so the video that I'm trying to pull together might be entitled something like, you know, what if violence is not a you know, is not a bug but it's a feature of humanity. I mean that's that's a thought that our culture can't dare to think because we've been so you know, we've in many ways simply assumed a very Christianish morality that values human life and gratefully so and I believe that's exactly right but it tends to deny which I think is what why Jordan Peterson was so came on the came on the scenery in such a stark way because he said no, you know, we are we are violent bloodthirsty creatures. That's what we are and and society it isn't the fact that society is contaminating us. The fact is that we're actually using society to cover I think of Peugeot and his you know, his garments of skin. We're using society to cover violent creatures that we are and you know, then Freud comes along and and says, you know, some deeply disturbing things about us not all of which he got right but probably a lot of the deeply disturbing stuff was the stuff he got right and and but you know, but you see that in Solzhenitsyn because you have this you have this context of just sheer atrocity but then you'll find these tiny glimmers of people who do amazingly courageous small things sometimes that cost them everything and so you say well, where does that come from? Yeah, so yeah. No, it's it's and and the you know, the I've often think that you know, the the stubborn inherit the earth because and you hear, you know beads, you hear beads description of okay. Well, you know, we're they're just going to keep killing our missionaries. So we're going to keep sending them and and we will we will send more missionaries than they have strength or will to destroy and that's how we win and yet and we have no framework for that. I mean the West is you know had no longer sends many missionaries because well, that's somewhere between offensive and pointless. Right and so no, but the Koreans do and the Africans do really do right. So we're just about out of time and I have another convo. So okay, unless you got one or two last things because we got a few minutes yet. I think you know it. I just want to avoid grinding any axes really. I mean, because you kind of you know, you kind of you know, and people are reflections of the churches that they go to and I think in a lot of ways your openness your ecumenical spirit is is something very true of your community as well. The the one the one thing I would just wanted to mention and we have no time to talk about it really but repentance. I think something I saw I've seen myself. I read a quote from from Martin Luther. You got me you're back. Okay. He was talking about before you know before the before his reformation breakthrough. He said that he I long to understand Paul's abyssal of Romans nothing stood in the way but that one expression the justice of God because I took it to mean that justice whereby God is just and deals justly in punishing the unjust my situation was although an impeccable monk. I stood before God as a sinner trouble in conscience and had no confidence that my merit would assuage him. Therefore I did not love a just an angry God but rather hated and murmured against him yet. I clung to dear Paul and had a yearning to know what he meant night and day it pondered till I saw the connection between the justice of God and the statement that the just shall live by faith. Then I grasped that the justice of God is that righteousness by which through grace and sheer mercy God justifies us through faith thereupon. I felt myself to be reborn and have gone through open doors into Paradise and the reason I wanted to read that is I think that there's a there's an approach to repentance that Luther had and when he was describing that I thought that's me because I felt like that and I think that that has that particular issue has a lot to a lot to do with where we are as a society today in that repentance is misunderstood because I don't think that that's a proper understanding of repentance and repentance that there's a repentance that leads to joy and a the repentance of the of the of the prodigal son and the pig pen who goes toward his father and his father runs out to greet him and that I think is a that's been a my wife just go home, but that's been a key for me. I think we don't have time to talk about it really but if we were to talk again, I think I would like to talk about that. That's a bright way access, but yeah, there's a just the ancient when I read the you know, there's this just not a traditional understanding repentance. I think that would be a very interesting topic of conversation partly because I'm of the Kenneth Bailey school of Luke and 16 and Kenneth Bailey posits that the prodigal son did not have his moment of turning in his moment of turning when he was slopping the pigs was a self-interested one and because what he does is he he he picks up Pharaoh's speech and and what he thinks to himself is Pharaoh's speech and and anyway, so yeah, we could have a get a very interesting conversation about that. Yeah. Yeah. And it plays into another another thing that Jordan Pearson strongly has which is a pessimism anthropological pessimism. Yeah, and yeah, anyway, I think it's hard to be I think it's hard to to not be a pessimist if you're a materialist. Yeah, and not a Christian I find I think Christianity is the most optimistic religion you could imagine because I don't see any other I don't see any other worldview even coming close. So anyway, well, okay, I got to shut this down because I got someone else coming. Thank you very much Paul. I really appreciate your time. All right. Shall I shall I just post this it'll probably be late this week or early next week or something. Yeah, you think so. Yeah. Okay. All right. Thanks Tim. Bye bye.