https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rzDRIFxvg1U

 Hi, this is Paul. As I was sitting in the dentist chair, dentists has been like a Monday morning thing for me for a while. At least I can move the side of my mouth again. I was thinking about what to call perhaps my Monday videos because so often I preach on Sundays back before COVID. I was doing Sunday school. Sunday school hopefully will start up again, maybe in the next few months as more and more of our regular Sunday school folks get vaccinated and all of this. California, California, state of California says no more COVID restrictions come middle of June. And wow, I sure hope so, that'd be wonderful. But I was sitting in the dentist chair this morning thinking I should really just have a regular Monday morning video or Monday afternoon video that I call Sunday leftovers because I always think of things as I'm, after my rough draft on Friday, as I'm going over my sermon in preparation for Sunday, as I preach it on Sunday, once we have Sunday school class again, I always get these new realizations that sort of continue to bubble up from the videos that I do during the week, from the thinking that I do during the week, from my Sunday sermon. And as I often say with my Friday rough draft or Saturday rough draft, things change by Sunday. And in my Sunday sermon, I had that little section on superheroes. And as I wrote the sermon on Wednesday, Thursday, and then I did the rough draft on Friday, and then I go over it again by myself Sunday morning, and then I preach it on Sunday, and I was a little worried about the transition in terms of how the superhero section fits because the demographic for my YouTube audience is quite different from the demographic on Sunday morning. And I sort of keep both in mind when I'm making my sermon. But I was thinking about how and why we use superhero stories and fantasy stories, magic, Harry Potter, Star Wars, Marvel Cinematic Universe, why we use these stories and how we use these stories and why these stories please us and form us and inspire us and colonize us. And I think we use them as sort of a distributed cognition. I think that's in our culture and increasingly in our world because these movies are movies that the whole world goes out. In some ways, these movies are global distributed cognition. Now, there are a lot of people in the globe, seven to eight billion people. So not everybody sees these movies, but these movies have about as much reach as almost anything that we have culturally that is substantive, that is formative. And so in some ways, these movies are attempts at distributed cognition, global distributed cognition. And the fact that these movies are fantasies, I think in some ways puts them at arm's length. Now, my daughter got up this morning and was telling me about some crazy dream that she was having and this one particular daughter has always had crazy dreams. And I was listening to her dream and of course there are elements of the dream that made sense given the events of her life and our household life. And I was thinking again about, okay, what are dreams and how do they function and what is really going on with them? And then my friend James said he was gonna performatively unsubscribe because I was teasing him. My friend James talking about, the question as to whether or not we're not actually always dreaming, but it's just in our waking hours, the impact of the physical world via our senses is so important and profound, our dreams sort of get pushed down. And so then when we sleep at night, our dreams sort of come to the surface and we continue to process and make sense. And so I think in a lot of ways, movies, not just fantasy or superhero fiction and not even just fiction because anyone who looks at our telling of history knows that in many ways, our telling of history is dreamlike. We're trying to work out our morality, how we should act, how we should live. We're always trying to do all of this stuff and we're trying to do it globally and communally because if we can do things together, we can accomplish things. And so I think this is a lot of what we're really doing with stories in our minds. Now, remember, stories are massive, lossy compression algorithms for a world too big for us to manage. And again, back to Benjamin Boyce's conversation with John Vervecky now a while ago, when they were sort of talking about story, basically autobiography-ing, I need a word for that, which is something that we start doing when we're two, three or four and we start to begin to organize ourselves as story, as autobiography. And I think in a lot of ways, these are important portions of what we might consider our soul. And so these stories, these autobiographies and so the stories that we tell ourselves, these are massive distributed cognition and they're vital for sense-making. So rebel wisdom has sort of camped out on that sense-making idea, but that's exactly what we're doing with sense-making. And then, so the news that is now so much up for debate, well, why is news so much up for debate? Well, there's many, many reasons for that. But a big part of that is because in the telling of the news, we're doing that sense-making and that distributive cognition, but our most foundational stories seem to be, in some ways, the most fantastical stories. Now, I was talking about this, oh, I didn't, I was talking about this on the Discord server Thursday or Friday, I got into a conversation with Shane and with Andrea, we'll be talking to Andrea and Jonathan Peugeot coming up soon. That'll be a fun conversation. But I've been thinking a lot about this idea of storytelling and reciprocal broadening. So of course, I've been watching The Critical Drinker because once you start watching someone on YouTube, they just keep pushing you because YouTube wants to take over my life. And he did a review on Thunder Force, which is, I guess I maybe saw it advertised on Netflix, but I didn't know anything about it. But he really panned the movie. And the movie didn't look terribly appealing. I don't know if I'd watch it anyway. But what struck me as he was going through the review of the movie and why he thought the movie was not, in his words, absolute garbage. Well, what is garbage? Garbage is something that we throw in a bin, as you Brits would say, or we throw in the can, and someone takes it away because there's no point or use for it in our life anymore. It's something we've used. In some ways, so basically his point with that movie was that here they had some characters and they had a story and they could have done something interesting. Well, what would be interesting? Well, they could have actually worked on some of that distributed cognition that we're all sort of working through. That they could have made a contribution to humanity if they had used creative storytelling in order to do something productive for all of us. Now, again, there's huge variations of taste and people are always working on different things and if you have a child sitting in front of any kind of video content, you know that children tend to repeat and repeat and repeat and repeat. Jordan Peterson talks about this with respect to Pinocchio. And so in many ways, and the one video I did that Jordan Peterson, that I know Jordan Peterson actually saw was my video a long, long time ago on The Office, where I was watching my young adult and teenage children rewatch and rewatch and rewatch The Office and how I went through that video, how The Office had all these archetypal characters in it. And I think in some ways what was happening with my young adult children was that they were processing a whole bunch of things through that literature, through that medium, okay? That's what they're processing, that's what they're doing. Now, I've also been fascinated by this video that Jonathan Peugeot did on parasitic storytelling because there's been a whole lot of complaint about wokeness destroying storytelling. And this is parallel, as I mentioned in a video recently, to why so many Christian movies are just terrible movies. And there's all kinds of reasons for that. But I think actually beneath a lot of this, there's a fair amount of deep coding, okay? And that deep coding, we have an intuitive sense of reciprocal narrowing and reciprocal broadening. And part of the problem with woke storytelling, parallel to bad Christian movies, is because it winds up being reciprocally narrowing. Well, what do I mean by that? Well, I think with reciprocal broadening, and even with this idea of sense-making, we begin to understand the whole world by virtue of that story. That story becomes a lens, and I'm riffing on C.S. Lewis here, because why do I, you know, I should have pulled up that Lewis quote, but why do I, I see everything with it. I see everything through it. In other words, good storytelling is illuminating. And not just for the main point. I mean, part of the problem with a lot of Christian movies are, as a lot of people on YouTube will tell you, they're just basically sermons. They're saying something about my profession. They're basically sermons. They have one point, and the point of wokeness, okay, I got the point. And that's part of what defeats these agendas, which is, okay, I got the point, but your point isn't broadening the world. Your point is narrowing the world. Your point is reducing my agency. Your point is basically killing life instead of opening it up. And that in some ways is the question. Jesus says, as I was thinking about all of these things in the dentist chair this morning, I come to give you life and life in abundance. And so I think that's, in a sense, that verse is all about reciprocal broadening, that it's through the correct story that now suddenly every other story comes alive, and all other life comes alive. And if your reciprocal storytelling just makes the same, if your storytelling just simply makes the same point again and again, or is parasitic upon other stories, it's not life-giving. There's another phrase that has been popular for a little while. It's not life-giving. It's not expanding the world in a productive way. And I think this is in some ways sort of a good dead reckoning of, okay, well, what's leading us in the right direction and what's leading us down a blind alley? And so we do communal storytelling, and think about that as distributive cognition, in order to continue to recalibrate our mappings of the real world inside our mind. And this is, Jordan Peterson had that interesting section in his conversation with Bret Weinstein that I played in my mapping the story inside and the story outside video, where Jordan is noticing that his granddaughter is sort of processing Pocahontas. And in some ways, Pocahontas for his granddaughter sort of becomes a prism through which she can engage the rest of the world. And if it weren't productive, I imagine children probably wouldn't use it, because actually children are tremendously productive, even when adults keep wanting to colonize and recalibrate their productivity, often in unhelpful ways. And there was a New York Times article that the Memesters posted on their Twitter account that I said, you gotta post the link to it, because I'm a digger, I dig these things down. And so a guide to neopronouns, are you a person, place, or thing? Okay. But this is what people are doing, and they're trying it, and they're using fantasy, because in some ways it's safe, but the fantasy's increasingly getting closer to the real world, because that's exactly what we're trying to do, back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. Now, on the Discord server, someone mentioned, I do lurk more than I chime in on the Discord server, but someone mentioned, oh, I hope Paul does a commentary on Trent Horn versus Matt Dillahunty on belief in the resurrection reasonable, because I saw that there was some, so then I searched it on YouTube, and did Trent Horn say that the resurrection was unreasonable? Oh! Atheist modernist pearl clutching. I tried to watch some of this. I just get very frustrated with this kind of content, because I find this to be modernity leftovers. A lot of debate around Easter time about the resurrection, there always is, and I find it entertaining, but mostly unproductive. Hardly a newsflash that these debates don't prove anything. C.S. Lewis's comment in Miracles, when modern writers talk about the resurrection, they usually mean one particular moment, the discovery of the empty tomb and the appearance of Jesus a few yards away from it. The story of that moment is what Christian apologists now chiefly try to support and skeptics chiefly try to impugn. And I look at this, and there's a reason C.S. Lewis begins his book, Miracles, with a ghost story, because as Lewis points out at the beginning of the book, you don't win any debates here. People either believe or don't believe in ghosts based on the general mapping of their terrain, okay? And so what most of these debates boil down to is do supernatural things happen, and they're even getting into Craig Keener's book on miracles. But the point that Lewis makes here is that the resurrection of Jesus Christ is a fork in the story. And the point that many skeptics make to me, which is often, well, and this is a powerful point that skeptics make. Well, I'll give it to you, okay? I'll give it to you that Jesus walked out of that tomb, you know, hobnobbed with his disciples 2,000 years ago, and then, you know, zipped up into heaven a little slower than through, you know, he didn't have a chariot of fire, but that's the main point. And Lewis goes into this in his book, Miracles. And Lewis's point is that what we're really talking about is the change of history, and that's much closer to Tom Holland's dominion than one of these little squabbles on the internet. Because truth be told, as Lewis says in the first chapter of Miracles, the mapping of the world that you experience things with determines what you see to a great degree. And this is where we get the story inside and the story outside, and the constant recalibration of our mappings. And Rationality Rules did another Jordan Peterson video, and just a little bit of commentary on the Peugeot Peterson conversation. And I've been debating with myself if I wanted to talk about some of these points in a little bit more serious way. But two early points that he makes are about the God of the intuitions and the God of the gaps. And in some ways, my response to both of these points is exactly my response to, which arises from C.S. Lewis's first chapter of Miracles. The mapping that you have, the default assumptions that you bring to personal experience guides what you see. Oh, what do I mean by that? It guides the interpretation of what you see. And as the Horn-Dela-Hunty conversation, what amazes me about these conversations is how much these conversations are in fact creating mappings and changing the conversations as they go because now it's not uncommon to find even highly skeptical people like Bart Ehrman and other scholars, and Horn makes these, the Christian apologists usually make these points, that almost everyone agrees that it's not a fable because the first century disciples just made it up. No, you don't. People on that scale don't lose their life for a lie. They saw something. What was it some, and again, you can go through the various menu elements. Was it some mass delusion? Was it some, who knows? I mean, and this is the point about human experience and cognition that we're, I listen to these things and the skeptics make some good points. Human beings, our grasp on the world is pretty tangential and pretty flimsy, but that point goes all the way round. You say, yeah, well, if I can have certain processes that I can distill down into physical causation then, and I say, yeah, well and good, but most of our life is not like that. And so, I often hear about the God of the gaps, and I've made this point before. I've said my God number one, God number two, in many ways, God number one is not the missing puzzle piece that you fudge the puzzle picture with. He's the table beneath the puzzle when you don't have the piece that fits. In other words, it's your assumed narrative of the world that you default to. And so, for example, rationality rules tells a story about he's driving his motorcycle and he somehow intuitively knows when to slow down. He has somehow, some other member of his consciousness Congress saw a car slow down and that somehow psychologically impacted him so he knew the little voice in his head said slow down and he believed the little voice. Why do you believe the little voice? It's because you have faith in something and it's the table underneath the puzzle that's actually making up your worldview. And call myself a good presuppositionalist, but that table is not subject, is not highly subject to our volition. And whenever I talk about formation, that's really what's making the table. It's all of that mapping that we start doing as a child and it's the constant recalibration that we're always working on. And when we see, and of course the Protestant Reformation is the pushing back against bullshittery writ large. See if I put it in the middle of a big word, some of you who work with more sensitive ears might not be so offended. But it's mass skepticism in some ways. And okay, so well, lots of parts of babies get strewn across the lawn when the bath water goes out. And so we're always going out into the yard and picking up parts of babies and thinking, huh, shouldn't have thrown this out. Maybe I'll bring that back. And that's an awfully gory image. But in my opinion, my experience as a pastor, gory images stick because one of the things that pastors do major in maybe isn't always so much just rationality and rules of debate, but rather evocative images that can stick in your mind because pastors are of course natural colonizers. That's our job. And that's why I just seldom have a whole lot of, I listen to these debates and I always pick up some things from them and I sort of tuck them away in my mental file cabinets, but that's not what moves regular people's lives. And as a pastor, that's really what I care about, moving regular people's lives. And of course, Newton, I made this point, I think in the Friday Question and Answer, Newton was practicing natural theology. Why? Because God number one, he was pursuing the pieces of the puzzle that aren't there and he's trying to, he understands that in a lot of ways, these pieces emerge from the table. All right, it's a very different image about puzzle making. I mean, imagine if the, you can probably get a better idea of it now with computer puzzles. I've seen a few of these online. We take intuitive leaps to guess at what might be right there in that blank space in our puzzle. And so we imaginatively lean into them. And what do we use to do that? We use stories. That's where the superhero stories and the fiction and the mythology, that's what all of that's doing. It's all trying to penetrate into the table in order to see the puzzle piece grow out of it. I mean, that's what early, that's the basis of scientists that they're penetrating into the table because they want to know God more. And that's almost exactly the definition of knowing a person. And so, let's say you're a young single person and because we're doing a lot of this conversation on the Discord too, you're a young single person and you just feel a pull for, you want to go on the bachelor so you can find true love. And you're pulled toward it and you're drawn towards it. And then you meet a person and you don't know why. And this story is so common. Just ask people who have been couples for a long time. You walked into a room and you saw that person across the room and some people have the experience of saying, I'm going to marry that person. They knew it right away. Well, why did they know it? Well, it's not unscientific. In fact, psychologists go into that. I remember the moment I saw my wife for the first time. I remember it. She immediately caught my attention. And now those of you who have been watching my channel, know I'm actually a very patient stalker. And so I didn't have the confidence that I could run over to her and introduce myself never having met her before, yada, yada, yada. No, I took my time, but I achieved my goal. And so this is sort of what natural theology is. And this is sort of the way we actually learn and fill out the world. And now let me draw those connections because they're probably, what Isaac Newton did to God was what someone who looks across a college campus or a bar or a party or a church and sees someone knowing nothing about them, mind you, sees someone and thinks, either that's a person I want to get to know or that's a person I want to marry. And then what you spend your time doing is investigating, going further into that person, learning them, understanding. And of course there's enormous projection going on there and back and forth, but you keep looking and hopefully your projections keep you focused there. And hopefully the person on and on and on will begin to emerge from your projections and you'll actually know something that's far more real than just the projecting that you're doing on this person for all of your own needs. So we take these intuitive leaps to guess at what might be not only holding up the puzzle pieces, but the pieces that will emerge into the puzzle to the degree that the puzzle sitting on the table is a good and correct mapping of everything, of what it is we want to know. And then we try on stories that are fantastical. I don't know why I'm so dim sometimes. Sometimes I think of things it's like, I don't know why I didn't think of this three years ago. Archetypal, archetypal, archetypal, archetypal, archetypal. Arche, look up what the Greek word arche means and look up what the Greek word toupos means. Toupos is a mark left with a strike or a blow. Think about a typewriter. It's an archetypal story. It's sort of the mark left. And boy, that goes down far. And boy, that fractals out. I'm not communicating, I'm just thinking. If I'm just thinking in my head and not moving my lips, doesn't help y'all much, does it? It's part of the reason I do these videos is because it prompts thoughts in my heads. But we're playing around with images to do our story nav dead reckoning, story navigation dead reckoning. That's what we're doing. And that's why we're mapping and we're constantly mapping the inside and the outside. And we look at comic books and why are comic book characters so strange? Well, it's because they're like in our dreams, they're archetypal. They're, you know, they're, they're, they're uncluttered images. But that's part of what we're bringing and it's part of what's out there and it's part of the community. And, you know, we watch children do this, but I guess I'm more and more convinced we never stop. At least if we're healthy, we never stop. You know, we're always working on our stuff. And little children, I mean, they're learning first how to use their hands and their mouth. And then they're just watching and they're just absorbing and absorbing. And they don't even know what they're doing. They're just absorbing all of this stuff. And at some point in the future, like when they get married or have a child, they'll realize I've been imprinted by my parents. Look, that's my first draft of who I am and what I do. And that just continues on and on and on and on. And so we're always working on our stuff and we don't even know what we're doing. We just move on to larger and larger projects and projects. And we're trying to map the whole world. And as we're doing it, we're feeling the meaning. You know, children, when they're walking around watching adults, why are they doing it? Meaning is driving them. Yes, absolutely. And it'll drive them through pain. It'll drive them through pleasure. And of course, my big question is always, where does the church fit in? And so I've been talking about platforms and now I'm thinking I'm gonna add another word to platforms, which are pathways, because I've also been impressed recently how you take a fork in the road and it starts you down a road. And it's the formation of that road that is so determinative of who you've begun. Human beings start down a road and the road forms us more than the sign on the road did. And so of course, the church was one of these church, temple, palace, one of these very ancient platforms that deeply formed, but now we've got, the formation has just split and fractured. And so now we look for, of course Protestant church did that. And I would expect that the Protestant church did that because it was already happening in the people in Europe. The church had lost its grip. Maybe I'll read a little bit of that chapter that I was thinking about. The rise of Protestantism caught the Catholic church by surprise. This is not to say that Catholics lacked resolve or eloquent advocates, but rather that the Catholic leadership as a whole failed to understand the nature and extent of this new heretical threat, and therefore also failed to react quickly and effectively. From the very start in 1517, when Leo X dismisses Luther's run in with Johann Tetzel as monkish squabble between a Dominican and an Augustinian, the response from the very top was torpid. By the time Leo got around to excommunicating Luther in 1519, it was too late. Luther had already secured the political support that would enable him to survive and thrive. And at the Diet of Worms in 1521, the Imperial battle against the new heretics was already lost before it began. With Elector Frederick the Wise and other princes on his side, Luther could thumb his nose at the young Emperor Charles V and get away with it. And you see here that, of course, the world had already changed. It was too late, at least for the Catholics at that point in terms of what their goals were. No matter how loudly or how eloquently they condemned him, those who opposed Luther on paper or face to face were unable to stop him. Cardinal Tomás de Villa, better known as, I want to say Cajetan, which is more of a Spanish, Cajetan, which is kind of anglicized, was the first to grapple with Luther at the Diet of Augsburg in October 1518. And the first to denounce him with authority. But Cajetan could do nothing to stop the firestorm that was already sweeping through parts of Germany. The eminent Cardinal would never give up the fight, but all of his attempts were aimed high, and aimed too high at the theological stratosphere rather than the man or the woman on the street. Cajetan would compose detailed Latin refutations of Lutheran theology concerning the primacy of the Pope, 1521, the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist, 1525, the sacrificial dimension of the mass, 1531, and the cooperation between human will and grace, 1535. But these learned treaties could not diminish Luther's popularity, why the platform had already gone out. Cajetan seemed to have a grip on what made Luther popular, and he displayed a flexibility that later polemicists would lack. But at the very same time, he also demonstrated a cluelessness about what it would take to resolve the religious crisis caused by Luther. In 1530, for example, he suggested to Pope Clement VII that the Lutherans could be brought back into the Catholic fold with merely two concessions, clerical marriage and allowing the laity to receive both the bread and the wine and communion. And as I noted before, the Swiss Reformation had already far outstripped Luther in many ways, especially by 1530. Others immediately joined Cajetan on the battlefield, but they too kept their aim too high. John Eck, Erronimus, Emser, Joe, and a whole bunch of others, I can't read all their names. And as other leaders emerged in the Protestant camp, these Catholic polemicists took them on too. But Luther and his brethren would ridicule their Catholic opponents with impunity, a result of the protection they received from secular authorities and of their access to the printers and the publishers. Moreover, when the Catholics entered the fray at the personal level, as Cochleus did when he wrote a biography of Luther, their focus tended to be on the theological errors of the Protestants they opposed rather than on the issues more accessible to the laity. In other words, Catholic apologists sought to undercut the integrity of Protestantism at a high intellectual level, but pointing to, by pointing to its most apparent fundamental flaws, novelty and consistency and plurality. If the leading Protestants contradicted themselves and disagreed with one another, argued Catholic apologists, how could they possibly lay claim to the truth? And how could these newcomers dismiss centuries of traditions as error? But again, everyone else was just dead reckoning, using the story verse, massively compressing everything, recalibrating, remapping, and this was happening at an enormous scale. And so by the time the, I mean the church, the Catholic church shows itself to be just too established, too old, not in touch, and of course the reformers, they didn't have all the advantages that the Roman Catholic church had. So what advantages they had, they used, but happy for them. Those were the advantages du jour. And yeah, this is what's happening. So again, my quest continues to be for the church. Where does the church fit in? How do we navigate this? How do I as a pastor continue to figure out what the gospel is, figure out what the Christian life should look like today, figure out how to articulate these things, figure out how to talk to regular people, figure out how to posture myself in the far bigger world. It seems no better goal. Anyway, so there's Sunday leftovers for you. Leave a comment, let me know what you think.