https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=0qJQHvN7PE4

 And if you say something that you don't want out there, then we don't put it out. Yeah. Or I edit it out. But I'm a bad editor. So you grew up as a Christian. Yeah. So my parents are Christians and still together. And I've got three younger brothers and they're Christians and they're all married now. And so, yeah, I grew up in a Christian family, always went to church, Christian school. And yeah, for the first 15 years, I was at, I went to my parents church, which was a little tiny open brethren. So sort of fairly conservative, but not ultra conservative, but fairly conservative, probably small in that there's probably about 50 people. And then when I was about 15, the charismatic sort of Toronto blessing sort of swept through the world. Yeah. And as a shy sort of, you know, not our introverted young boy, you know, it was just very, the whole, you know, speaking in tongues and stuff was just, it was just the last thing that I could, you know, I didn't want to go up for an altar call. And so I found it very challenging. And so I went and found a conservative church in the city. And it was a Presbyterian church. And so I went to a conservative Presbyterian church for about 15 years. And then I moved to a Christian reform church for about 18 months. And then I ended up back at my parents church. And that's, that's where I've been since. So it's, it's, it's been a journey out and then back. But yeah, my, my parents churches is a lot more mainstream now. So the, the, I guess the Pentecostal wave swept through. And because the church wasn't prepared to go super Pentecostal, you know, the people who wanted that kind of thing have, have moved on. And it's back down to, you know, it swelled up to 150 people. And then it's down to back down to 50. But yeah, it's, it's a sensible little church, you know, they put a lot of effort into the Bible preaching and high participation. So one of the things which is good about the open reverend is, you know, they encourage people to participate, to volunteer, to be involved. And, you know, so that's, that's, that's good. I think most of the time, you know, occasionally you get, you know, when you invite people to participate, sometimes you get funny things happen. But most of the time, 90% of the time, it's, it's good and helpful. I find so you live in a rural area or an urban area? Well, Tasmania, the state that I live in is technically the whole state is pretty much rural. Like we've only got, so we're about a third of the size of England, but we only have about 500,000 people. So, so, and you know, the two, the capital city and the other city, I think about half the population of Tassie, Tasmania is in those two cities. So, you know, you only have to go for about 20 minutes and you're out in the bush. And, um, you know, it's, it's quite, you know, a third of the, of the state is wilderness. So, okay. Um, yeah, it's, it's, it's, you know, a beautiful state, lots of natural beauty. Um, and, um, you know, I, I grew up sort of on a, a five, a six acre block out in the, up in the hills. So, you know, spend a lot of time out in the bush, out in the creek and, you know, just running around and yeah. So I've sort of grew up in that kind of environment. Sounds like a great place to grow up. Yeah. Yeah. Looking back, you know, we had, we had a lot of freedom and to just go out and explore. And our, my parents were very, um, you know, allowed us to do that. And, um, which was a great blessing. So, how'd you first hear about Jordan Peterson? Yeah. Um, a friend posted it on my Facebook wall and, um, one of his videos and I was sort of like, oh, okay. And so, you know, I checked it out and I was like, hmm, this guy's quite interesting. I think it was the Queens debate where, um, it started off with his friend, lawyer friend. I can't remember his name. Um, and you know, he made a case and you go, oh, yeah, that sort of seems reasonable. And then Jordan Peterson gets up and you're like, who's this guy is, you know, this is a bit wild. And you think, man, um, you know, a little bit, you know, crazy. And, but after a few minutes you go, oh my goodness, he just absolutely demolished, um, the argument and you're left sort of just going, oh my goodness. And so, you know, after watching one of them, you go, well, who is this guy? And you sort of start, you know, searching around. And I, uh, at one stage, I was probably listening to probably over an hour a day, probably for, oh, probably for six months, I reckon. Um, you know, just going through podcasts and videos. And so it's, it's quite after I went and actually met him in Sydney. Um, so there was an event he came to over to Australia. Um, and I went along, you know, after that, I sort of, um, you know, I'm down probably more like an hour a week, um, more now. It's sort of maintenance dosage. Just keeping an eye on what he's up to. I'm really keen to, um, for the Exodus series, I guess, like I want to see him explore sort of new territory. Like, um, like, and I appreciate the fact that, you know, he needs, he needs to like going around touring and with his book and introducing a lot of people to sort of, I guess, the fundamentals of his, what, you know, he, you know, the order chaos, you know, living in between those two extremes, you know, trying to be responsible, trying to find meaning as opposed to chasing happiness, you know, all of those kinds of fundamental things, you know, it's, you know, it's excellent that that's getting out and he's able to engage people sort of almost one-on-one in those lectures. Um, and so, you know, I am, I, that's great. But as you said, and what I think it was your, you know, has Jordan, um, peaked or whatever. Um, there's a quite a few of us who are sort of just, just wait until he, you know, gets out and explores some, some new, new territory. Um, so yeah, that's sort of, sort of where I'm at. And, you know, keeping an eye on your videos to see if he's breaking new territory and, um, it's a good way of keeping the finger on the pulse. Um, I watch for you. Yeah, it's great. Yeah. And I appreciate it. So, so as a, so what do you do for a living? Yeah, I look, I'm an IT manager, um, which my, my, my, it's not my passion. It's not, you know, my heart's not in it. In, you know, I, I do it because it's something which I find, you know, it's something that just comes naturally. It's sort of like, you know, I have always been fairly good with computers. And so whilst I was doing my university degree, I, you know, I was, you know, also working part time, um, sort of doing computer consultancy and the people I was consulting with, um, wanted me more and more hours and eventually they just employed me full time. And so it sort of, it was something I sort of just, you know, that's where I ended up as opposed to, um, something I was sort of aiming for. Um, so at the moment, it's more tent making that, you know, I work in IT so that I can, you know, spend time blogging and reading and, um, you know, doing other things, which, which I find more meaningful. Okay. So, so in March, you did write a blog. Yeah. That got some, that got some attention. Got my attention. I found it. That was sort of the peak of, of, of, of, that was your peak. Oh, it was funny actually, cause I had, um, I went up to Sydney, um, for the Jordan Peterson, um, lecture. And when I like, I go back a little bit before I went up there, I'd been sort of engaging with Jordan Peterson. I'd written a few blog posts on him. Um, the eternity, um, newspaper, which is Australia's largest Christian newspaper kind of organization, uh, media organization. They had written a piece on Jordan Peterson about masculinity and stuff. And I just felt it really missed the mark on a number of points. And so I'd written some, I'd gone through sort of, you know, line by line and giving them feedback about where I thought they'd misunderstood and stuff. And I didn't get any response back from it. And I was like, uh, oh well, you know, I tried. Um, but when I landed, um, in Sydney, I got a message from the eternity newspaper saying, Oh, look, are you going to the Jordan Peterson event? And I was like, of course. And they said, Oh, well, could you write a piece about that? And so I was like, Oh, okay. Sure. Obviously that'd be awesome. Um, and so I, you know, I had very short time to, to write it. And so I started cause you know, I'd have a meetings and stuff organized when I was in Sydney. Um, so it was sort of like, you know, squeezed it in. Um, and uh, yeah, that, that's sort of how that came to be. Um, they sort of wanted to know, you know, should Christians actually take any notice of Jordan Peterson, um, as well as, you know, a bit of a feedback on, on how the actual, um, event went. Um, so yeah. Um, and the added complication was whilst I was in, I was in Sydney for three days and um, my lung collapsed, like I didn't realize at the time, but um, my lung collapsed. And so I was sort of in insignificant pain as I was trying to write this, this article. I was like, this opportunity, I can't let this opportunity go. Um, but you know, one of half my lung, my left lung, I think it was, yeah, no, my right, my right lung had collapsed and I had, I didn't realize this. I was just, you know, in had significant pain, but I was sort of, you know, traveling across, walking across Sydney and I'd have to stop every hundred meters because it was just, you know, to just, I was like, Oh, this is really inconvenient. So I took some painkillers and went to eternity newspaper and said, you know, you know, I was trying to work out exactly what kind of article they wanted. And so I ended up writing most of the article in, in pain, which was sort of this real strange kind of contrast between, you know, this wonderful opportunity to write and also this sort of, you know, doing it in, in, in a state of, you know, in, yeah, in pain basically. And so it was very bizarre. And so when Jordan Peterson actually tweeted my article, I was in hospital at the time trying to engage of all these comments on the, on the Twitter from my hospital bed. And it was, it was just, it was, it was surreal because it was sort of like, Oh, it was this, this contrast between sort of the five minutes of fame and also, you know, being in hospital. And so it was just, it was completely surreal. It was a surreal 10 days of just nuts. Like it was very crazy. So, but yeah, that's, that's how that sort of, yeah, there came to be that, that article just out of nowhere, just, you know, appeared this opportunity. And, and I, and, and I was also lucky when I was fortunate when I was at the Jordan Pearson event, I, the microphone, one of the microphones was right next to my shoulder. So when question time came, you know, I literally stood up, took one step and, you know, I got to ask the third question and, you know, he only got through about five questions that night. So it was sort of very providential that I happened to be next to a microphone. So I got three minutes of talking to Jordan Pearson, which was, again, surreal kind of experience. So have your thoughts changed since March when you wrote the piece? I still, I still think he's, I still think, I still think he's, he's, he's on a journey. Like, I don't think he's fully, I don't think he's fully worked out how to do grace. I think grace is still something he's still sort of trying to figure out. Like, so I think, I think he's realised, like the prodigal son, like that, I find that illustration very helpful in that, you know, he's realised that chasing hedonism, chasing, you know, what speedy and what is sort of, you know, chasing happiness. Instead of what? Yeah. Is, you know, so just chasing after sort of happiness is not the solution. And he, he, he's got an inkling of, you know, that God's out there, but he's not entirely sure who God is. And, you know, so he's looking for God, like he's trying to find his way home and he's still sort of on that path. So, you know, obviously lots of very helpful things to say, you know, because he's, you know, he's already travelled a long way along that journey. But I still think, you know, he hasn't really experienced that kind of, you know, the grace, the forgiveness, the embrace, if you, if you like, of God. I'm still quite optimistic that he'll, if he keeps reading and studying the Bible and keeps engaging with Christians, like I'm sort of optimistic that, well, you know, he's pursuing the truth, he's trying to find what is true. And so, you know, God is the God of truth. So for me, it feels like the current trajectory is, it's just a matter of time. You know, it's just, if he keeps, you know, chasing this and doesn't get overwhelmed by celebrity status, then, you know, I feel that, you know, he will, he, you know, God will honour that pursuit of him. I kind of feel like, so, you know, it's hard, you know, hard to say with things. It could be five, it could be 10, you know, 10 years, you know, you don't, it's just, it's really hard to know. You know, he certainly, he's not, he's not just rushing into things. He's not just sort of going, Oh, well, you know, I'm just going to take this big leap of faith and just say that God's real. And, you know, until he kind of feels that he's found him, he's not going to just pretend that he's found him. He's very open and honest about all that, which is good. You know, he's bringing, he's bringing people on that journey of, of trying to find God. And I think that's one of the things which is so appealing is that he speaks, you know, he speaks what he, he's very honest. He's very transparent and you know, he's not just trying to say what people want him to say. He's trying to say what he believes is true. And you know, so that's, you know, that's one of the reasons he's so fascinating, I guess. So part of, so part of the videos I've been doing lately, I mean, when you say, he believes that God is real. In what sense do you mean real? When you say that? Yeah, look, I think, so I think as he said in, in your one, that was one of the ones I, one of the reasons I wanted to talk to you because the God number one and God number two, so God number one, you know, he obviously thinks that there's some sort of transcendence, some sort of, you know, if you like power out there, some sort of, you know, creator kind of, you know, some sort of force, you know, he believes in some sort of divinity, some sort of transcendence, some sort of, but in terms of which personal, you know, if it's a personal deity, you know, in terms of God, as in Jesus, the Trinity, you know, in God, number one, I think he's got an inkling that there's something there, but he's just not sure and not confident and sort of, I guess like the prodigal son had a vague inkling that his father was, you know, would at least hire him as a servant, as a slave, you know, so he had some sort of, you know, inkling that his father wasn't, you know, a tyrant, but you know, you couldn't say that the prodigal son, when he was in the pig pen, had a good understanding of the father. Like he didn't, you know, he was like, I know that, you know, there's some, you know, the father's out there and he's, he's not a complete tyrant. Maybe I'll sneak in and, you know, kind of thing. So I think Jordan P is certainly inkling that it's sort of like, he can't let it go. Like he can't just go, Oh, well obviously, you know, there's no God. No, he can't, he can't say that. But at the same time he doesn't, you know, so it's sort of this sort of, I think, yeah, he sort of, I think he's got an inkling that there's something out there. He's just not sure what, and that's sort of my feeling that, and that's why he can't, he can't sort of let it go. He just keeps sort of, it's sort of tugging at him. And yeah, so that's sort of where I think sort of he's at. You know, when I, when I use God number, it's terribly hard to talk about this stuff with precision, communicate this stuff because everyone has, this is one thing you learn as a pastor over a long time that if you say, what happens as a pastor is if you keep saying the words that everyone is conditioned to hearing, nobody hears anything. And it's true. And all then, all then what happens in church is that people come and they hear all the words they're used to hearing, and they get a sense of comfort and peace and stability that we're hearing all the right words and we're healing all the same answers to all the same questions. So everything is okay. But, but when I talk about God kind of sense number one, it's not even necessarily so much the, that's, that's a God I often in my earlier videos would put in quotation marks in the sense that this is this, it's really a, it's really a question about ontology between God sense number one and God sense number two, God sense number one could be pantheism, but, but again, now one of the things that I think when secular people kind of like the idea of pantheism, it's because they're comfortable with, they're comfortable with materiality, but they can see that there are other aspects to things like math or relationships or some of those things. So, so when I listened to Peterson talk about God in, in the God sense number one, it's, it's usually the, the God that plays in terms of our relationships back and forth that, that, so when, so let's imagine, so let's, let's imagine a materialistic, materialistic conception of the world, but Peterson says, well, we learn to sacrifice. Well, what does that mean? Well, we learn to, um, delay gratification and then we watch to those who delayed gratification succeed. Now that was expressed in the act of sacrifice, but the key, the key move happened psychologically, and then ourselves watching each other learn that psychologically that then became God, but it's a, it's a psychologically functioning God. And the line that the, the, those, on those like Sam Harris really want to draw is that there isn't, there isn't another non-human agent who can actually move a pen. Or that can actually, so if you read CS Lewis's miracles, that can actually, you know, CS Lewis has this great illustration where he has a drawer and there are, he knows that there are like five pennies in there. And when he, when he opens the drawer again, there's only three pennies. And so he knows some agent moved two pennies. God number two is capable of removing pennies. God number one is not. And so this is the sense of, of Peterson that he's, he's very sure. And I think he, I think he really, I think he really bests, best Sam Harris and saying, you cannot deny God. Number one, psychologically functionally in our midst, this psychological entity has a real place in shaping humanity and has gotten into the evolutionary extreme. And, and even, even Brett Weinstein would agree with God sense. Number one, it's not sense. Number two, where a God could take pennies out of the drawer or multiply loaves and fish or turn water to wine. This is where they draw the line. And that is the God that, and CS Lewis describes that as kind of pantheism versus the hunter, the lover, the warrior. And so I think that's, that's kind of the line that Peterson says, I know there's God sense. Number one, I'm open to number two. And Sam Harris basically says, no, you shouldn't be. There's a little two minute, two minute, there's a two minute condensation of hours of video. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Then I don't know if it's clear through my videos because it's interesting, but I'm having these kinds of conversations that people talk about it. What I find is that if I'm talking to another real life human being, I'm much better capable to just kind of, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, look, I think you're right. Cause I think most people are sort of comfortable with some sort of spirituality, you know, that's sort of the, you know, it's not, not religion. You don't have to follow rules, but there's just some sort of spirituality that there's something more than just the material that there's, you know, spirituality, it's sort of this, you know, you know, you do a bit of yoga and you do a bit of this and you know, it's a bit of mindfulness, something a bit, you know, a bit of mindfulness, you know, just to make your life more rounded and more, it's yeah. And so I think a lot of people are sort of open to that, but it's, it's when you start sort of going, okay, well, I think there's actually a, a relations, you can have a relationship with a, a being who can reveal himself and interact with the world and has, has been interacting with the world and intends to continue to interact with the world and that we have hope in what he's going to do. And you know, things like that. And that's yes, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's crossing the line into, into something a lot more. Yeah. It's yeah. As you say, it's, it's not just pantheism. It's not just sort of a vague, you know, force behind the universe. It's an actual being. Yeah. Yeah. Well, and, and, and I think part of what has happened in, you know, I talked about Chuck Colson, who was an American who went to, went to, you know, went to jail because of what he did in the Nixon administration and his, and his book Born Again is really quite a gripping read. But what, what kind of seemed, it seemed to happen in that a lot of evangelical churches, God, number one, the God who is the author, yeah, God made the world, but there isn't a sense of, you know, the ancients had very much had a sense of God, number one, and different polytheists, you know, the God's acting. They weren't averse to that. But, and that's why I think Sam Harris and others, well, you know, when we say God, we don't mean number one. And, and that's where I really want to say, Oh yeah, we do mean number one. And we need mean sense. Number two, we really mean both senses. And yeah, well, at least Christian, that's where Christians are at, Christians and Muslims. And I, I think most Jews are probably at the same kind of thing. It's sort of like, you know, we, it's, it's, we believe in a, well, both, you know, we don't just believe in a entity who has no sort of influence over, you know, all of reality. We sort of mean some, we, yeah, we mean both as, as you say, you know, we don't just mean one or the other. This isn't, this isn't just a wandering God who looked down and said, Oh, wow, look at this world. There's people, I'm going to start poking around. He's the author from the beginning. He's, he's Tolkien to Frodo and. Yeah. Yeah. No, no, no. That's a helpful way of, of, of conceiving it because otherwise you end up with like God who's, you know, Father Christmas. It's sort of like, he's just another, another, another person like us, just, you know, with a few superpowers and you know, or Zeus, I guess, or, you know, one of those kinds of gods who is just a powerful human, really. Whereas we say, no, no, he, he is a being, he's got personality, but he also has a lot more like, you know, he's got all of God number one attributes as well as, as being, you know, in, in, in some way, well, we're like God, I guess, in, in sense that, you know, we are agents to some degree. Which reminds me, you're, one of the things I was quite interested about was your compatibility idea. Because look, because, you know, I obviously grew up in a, because I grew up in a Presbyterian, a conservative Presbyterian church, who were Calvinists and then, you know, the reform church was obviously Calvinist again. And so sort of, you know, I grew up in that kind of environment, although my parents, my parents read both of them are teachers. And so, you know, they read to us every night. And so, you know, we, they must've read the, you know, the Narnian series, maybe six or seven times to us over the years. And, you know, again, Tolkien. So they read all the Tolkien ones, George McDonald, you know, a number of those kinds of authors. So a lot of, you know, so I had the influence of, of, of Lewis in there as well as sort of the Calvinism thing. And so when I sort of came across compatibilism, that sort of, in, in many ways, because you said it in, I think it was your last video, you sort of say, look, the Bible tries to have it both ways. It appears like, you know, sometimes it's like, you know, we fear and trembling work out your salvation for it is God who works within you to will and to bring about his purpose, something like that. So, you know, on one hand, you know, that's pretty much some of the rises up. And on one from our perspective, you know, I'm trying to work out my salvation, you know, seriously. But at the same time God is working it. And so it's sort of like, and so the whole free willed versus determinism, like, I am not agnostic about it. It's just like, I don't see it. It feels like the Bible is promoting both at the same time that it's sort of saying, well, you, you know, you do, you know, you do need to work out your salvation with fear and trembling. You know, you've got to take this seriously and try and figure it out. But at the same time you've got to be, you know, realize that, you know, God isn't just sitting on his hands, you know, just watching, you know, waiting to see what you'll do. He, God is out there doing stuff and he's, you know, um, yeah, interacting, um, and guiding and, you know, and that God will bring about his purposes. You know, if, you know, if God wants, you know, Jordan Peterson to be saved, then Jordan Peterson will be saved. There's, there's no, you know, Jordan Peterson is not going to be out and out with him. And so, you know, we'll see us Lewis, you know, saying, you know, he said, look, I felt that, you know, I was pretty much in a wrestling match with God and God won out. And that was brilliant. He's, you know, his whole conversion was, um, you know, he was like, you know, I was reluctant. Um, but in the end, you know, it was the best choice I ever made, although, you know, God was dragging me in. And so, you know, you can tell in his conversion that he's wrestling with this thing. And he's sort of saying on the one hand, you know, I was making the choice, but on the other hand, I couldn't make any other choice. Like, I, I couldn't have, you know, it was the, it was so the evident or the, it was just overwhelming. You know, it was just sort of like, you know, this is the only rational, only rational choice I can make. You know, it's the only, um, yeah, you know, and so it's sort of, I guess, I guess that one of the ways which doesn't quite entirely work as an an hour, the chess game kind of thing where it's sort of like, even if, even if God doesn't, um, and you know, pretty much even if, even if God didn't determine, um, your moves, you know, when you play chess against God, God always wins. Like in terms of, and you know, he doesn't have to manipulate the situation. He just says, okay, let's have a game of chess and he will win. He will always win. And, and so, you know, the, the outcome, you know, God will always get the outcome that he is seeking. And even if we make three moves along the way, and so, you know, even at that extreme, you know, if you say, Oh, well, God doesn't determine things. Well, you go, well, does God determine the outcome of that chess game or not? Well, on one sense, you know what the outcome is going to be. Like, there's, there's no, no question that God's going to win or not. Um, and, but then you say, Oh, well, does that mean that God is making you do each move? And you go, well, it doesn't, not necessarily, it could be, but it, you know, it, you know what I mean? It's, it's, and so I find that sort of, I don't know, it's, it's sort of, I've heard, it's one of those things where you sort of, um, you've probably had plenty of debates about free will versus determinants, isn't it? It's sort of one of those things where you can debate it for hours and hours into the night. And, um, it's hard, you know, you kind of left with this sort of thing like, well, you can't, God can't be, God doesn't sit on his hands. So it can't be completely non-determinism, you know, that God is complete. But then it, you know, if it's complete determinism, then you're where your robots, then that doesn't kind of, you know, then it's sort of like, well, why do you say, okay, salvation with fear. And so, you know, it's a, you know, so you sort of end up in this sort of middle ground often. Um, yeah. Anyway, I, I, I, Yeah, I don't know that. I don't know that this is, there are a variety of reasons why I think I, I'm skeptical that this is something that we can actually answer. One of the issues is how, how, how does God exercise agency in this, uh, manifest image that we tell our stories within? Part of the problem is, I mean, even if you look at, you know, the, the Don Hoffman stuff that I've looked at, I mean, our, our grasp on our grasp on quote unquote reality is real good to begin with. Yeah. And so here we have consciousness and I'm experiencing this and Jordan Peterson plays the, the gorilla, you know, the gorilla walking through the basketball passing thing. And you begin to realize, you know, Oh, wow, I'm, I'm really selective at what I pay attention to. And it has to be that way because I've, I've got severely limiting processing power, especially within the fraction of my mind that is my conscious mind. So, so there's one limitation. The next limitation is memory. And the more we learn about memory, the more we learn how, how fallible it is that, you know, in many ways I, you know, we remember things that we have photographs of and it's like, well, there's a little bias and even just, you know, I'm, I'm 55 this year and I've been married to my wife for 30 years. And when we talk about, you know, now we have a fair amount of past and we have five children. So here are seven witnesses to a lot of things. And regularly I will remember things that she has no connection up. She will remember things that I have no recollection of. And what we know about memory, probably all of those memories are fairly doctored. So then we're going to try to say, well, you know, God, that then we have all these impressions and Christians, you know, obviously Christians who believe in a fair bust, God number two aspect say, well, that was Providence God working in my life and that's attached to memory. And so, you know, we, what, what that leads me to is a, is a healthy skepticism about our ability to account, even for what we are able to do, because even in looking at myself, the decisions I make are so often so predictable. And I don't experience that myself, but I experienced that with others. Yeah. I watch my kids and I watch them and I think, I are going to go there. You know, my kids, you know, when they picked college, it's like, I want them to go there, but they were going to go there. Like my, my last son, I really wanted him to go to Calvin college, which was my alma mater, my wife's alma mater. It's in Western Michigan, which is dry gray and cold most of the year. And he chooses to go to UC Santa Cruz, which is overlooking the Pacific ocean on this beautiful Redwood mountain. You know, the weather all winter long is gorgeous. It's like, you know, why do we let 18 year olds decide anything? Now here I'm bound by my culture and not wanting to be a tyrant. And so, so I've got a, I've got a healthy skepticism about our agency. Now I am not a determinist that let's say from the big bang on everything is simply developed by physics. I'm not a materialist, but I have been shaped all the time and the kind of tricks that psychologists are able to recognize. So I've got a real skepticism about what my agency actually is. And I have very little understanding of how in fact God works. So compatible is it was kind of like punting. I, I read the Bible and I fully endorsed the fact that we are responsible for our decisions and I can't help but live that way. If I'm responsible for my decisions. On the other hand, there is so much that, that I don't, I don't choose. It's all part of this stream of history that, that I am a part of. So I, and you know, I've heard Tim Keller wrestle with this a number of times on various videos and, and I like his answer. You know, people say, well, Augustine and Calvin, one of the things that, so it's so funny cause Jonathan Pagel with his, his conversation with rebel wisdom, you know, mentioned Calvinists in the sneer and I just laugh and CS Lewis has some sneers about Calvinists too. You know, they're, they're so regularly maligned, but I don't take it personally. But you know, at the same time, Calvin did not invent the double predestination. Well, that might've been his lawyer side, you know, doubling down on that, but Luther, you know, Roman Catholics, Orthodox. I mean, it's simply a function of both Old Testament narrative and, and, and Pauline epistles and, and Johanine epistles. So, you know, and the gospel of John. So, you know, the Bible wants to say God is in control and he's sovereign and we have real agency. And so that's what I tell people. And when they say, well, get detailed, I said, I can't get detailed. I can't even know what I'm doing. And you know, I know I'm responsible and I have to exercise responsibility. So, yeah, yeah. No, that's exactly, that's pretty much where, where I land. Like I can't, I can't, you know, I've heard arguments for open theism and stuff. And I just go, yeah, I look, that doesn't, you know, it, you know, it doesn't sort of ring true to me. And you know, the, the opposite sort of hard determinism, if you like, you know, that doesn't sort of, it doesn't ring true either. And so I sort of end up in this sort of middle ground going, look, I, I'm sort of open, you know, God can have as much determinism as he wants. From my, you know, honestly, it's, it's, it's up to him. From my perspective, you know, I'm going to try to make good choices in the understanding that, you know, as far as I can tell from my perspective, no, my limited perspective, you know, I've got some agency. And so to, to what degree that is, is, is a product of the environment around me, you know, what I ate for breakfast, you know, you know, what I learned yesterday, you know, millions of factors, you know, these guys, I know I'm biased, I'm influenced. But, you know, as much as I can, I'm going to try and make good choices and sort of, you know, that's sort of, sort of where I, where I end up. And I sort of, you know, I called that compatibilism. I got, some people say that that's not a strict enough definition of compatibilism, but it's sort of like, well, you know, that's sort of where I'm in the middle. Like, yeah, I can, you know, you can, people make arguments for open tears. And you go, oh yeah, you know, I can see that, you know, there's, you know, you want, you want to make sure free will isn't sort of, you know, squashed in any sense. And, and, you know, you're, you're, yeah, you know, that's sort of where I've been up in the middle. And that sort of makes sense. I also wanted to know what your, what your thoughts on synchronicity are. Like, um, is that the same as, as Providence or do you think it's, is it like the way I sort of, I don't know, I just feel, and is it, is that related to the way? So this is, thinking about your video of the dimension. So you talk about, you know, the one dimension, two dimension, three dimension, you sort of, you explore that. And so, because one of the things I've been wrestling with is how God interacts with you. Like I think it seems that he doesn't often interact with you through your five senses. So, you know, I don't often hear audible sort of, you know, a booming voice coming through to me. I don't see God walk by, at least not that I comprehend, you know, I don't smell God, I don't taste God, but at the same time, the Bible talks about, you know, taste and see that the Lord is good. You know, um, uh, you know, there's a few verses, um, I think there's one in Peter as well. Um, but there's a few sort of verses about experiencing God and sort of like, well, how do we experience God? If we're not experiencing God for our five senses, often, you know, is it something where we experience God through, you know, providential or, um, synchronistic events, you know, or do you experience God through your mind? Is that how God interacts with you through dreams or just, you know, an idea popping into your head, which seemingly out of nowhere, you know, what's, what's your thoughts on synchronicity? Do you like to use that word or do you feel that it's a bit too psychological or, uh, I, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not really sure exactly what the word means. I was reading some Jung and it popped out of my mouth and it might've been you that called me on it and said, well, I should probably say providence instead of saying providence. I felt kind of bad. I w I, again, I watched the David Fuller Jonathan Peugeot conversation and, and David had emailed me and said, what should I talk to Jonathan about? I said, ask him about Jung, see how that goes. And, and, um, I, I, my answer, you know, I haven't read near enough Jung to, to comment on it, but I do notice that for those who have been influenced by Jung, that's a word that they prefer. I, you know, again, I think the reformed word is, is providence, but how, you know, I, uh, Len van der Zee, I should probably keep the books that I grabbed here. I just redid my office off to find, off to find the OZL he's over in the CRC section. Um, Len van der Zee wrote a, he's a CRC pastor. He wrote a book about, um, basically sacramentalism and because he was wrestling with what John Calvin said about the Lord's supper and, and Calvin, you know, I think there are a lot of reformed people that are zwingly in when they come to the table. And so, and so Len earlier in his ministry was wrestling with this and, and so did a deep dive Calvin, you know, Calvin and Luther both knew the church fathers well and appealed to them often. Now, now how does God communicate with us? I, when I look at how he introduces himself to Isaiah, when he comes into the temple, they, you know, holy, holy, holy is the Lord God almighty. So, you know, holy, holy, holy is far off. The earth is full of his glory. And so, you know, and I get some of this from Lewis and Augustine, you know, if you read Augustine's confession, oh, what a book, you know, Augustine is, you know, getting into detail about, you know, lustily nursing at his mother's breast and, and, you know, God being there and, you know, working through the morality of his infant self nursing, but, but God, God comes to us through the air we breathe and through the gifts he gives us. I mean, this, this, this earth is a gift. And so, um, God, God comes to us close, you know, God comes to us through, I have a bad habit of not finishing my sentence, but only finishing them in my head. I'm following you. God comes to us through all of this stuff and through each other. And this to me gets into questions of what will, what will the next age be like? And thinking again about CS Lewis and the last battle, I think a lot of, again, people who are kind of overly looking at God aspect to say, well, I'll see, you know, God will be a glowy thing and Jesus will be there. Well, of course Jesus will be there, but God will be there. But what will be, we'd be doing in the new heavens and the new earth, God will, will be fully expressing himself through that glory as well. And so when we are, you know, in nature, we are, we are seeing, we are seeing God. Now, God is, God is wearing the clothing, the glorious clothing of his creation. But as the Belgian confession said, he's revealing himself in in book number one in that way. And so I know many people who have had, you know, who have at moments in their life heard an audible voice. If you ever want a good read by Andy Crouch, read a testimony in reverse, the one time God spoke to him and God told him what he didn't want to hear, which to me is about the most, I that when people who are more given to Pentecostalism, you know, God is always showing up in all the ways they want him to, I kind of think, there's a reason they killed Jesus. He ticked people off. And this is, you know, this is not, it's not that God is obnoxious. It's that we are stubborn rebels. And so I think that's, that's the whole question about, you know, about election two, God moves through history. And again, I like the author metaphor. Now, to what degree does when Tolkien is writing about Frodo, to what degree is Frodo separate from Tolkien? And I, I've never written fiction, but listening to fiction writers, their characters take on a life of their own. Did you see Jordan Peterson's Q and a that he did like yesterday? I think it was. Yeah. So he was talking about that, you know, characters, you know, a good author allows the character to, you know, to have a life of its own almost. So it's sort of this interaction. It's sort of almost the dialogue between, you know, Tolkien and Frodo, that Frodo sort of takes on a, some sort of agency himself, which is, you know, very bizarre, even though it's all in Tolkien's head. It's not, it's more than that. That's right. Sorry. You're saying that Dorothy said, no, I think this Dorothy Sayers is the same way. She in fact, fell so in love with one of her characters, she decided to write herself into the novel so that she could meet her character. And of course, PS Lewis and Tim Keller really lean on this because Keller is a huge Lewis fan. Yeah. So, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. No, I think that, that is, that is helpful. Yeah. That, okay. To be, to be believable, I guess the characters need to be not just, you know, if you, if you feel that the character is just being controlled by the, the author or the narrator, then it's sort of like, yeah, you know, whereas if they sort of start having a life of their own, then, um, then they're a lot more realistic. And I guess you're seeing that in a different sense with, with computer games, not that I play many computer games anymore, but I can, I've, you know, I, I observe it from, from the side, you know, you, you start to see how, you know, computer games are sort of developing a life of their own. Um, and that people are sort of, you know, one of the joys is to actually go into a story, into a world, into a believable world where things aren't just being controlled by, you know, a procedural kind of, you know, you know, the robots that you're interacting with, but these other little characters have artificial intelligence and that they do their own thing, you know, you know, independent from the original programmers. So, you know, and that that's very fascinating how they, yes, they've been programmed by a author, but they've also got their own agency, um, which is, is very interesting how that's all developing. One interesting question might be, can we surprise God? Now, now on one hand you'd say, Oh no, but on the other hand, you would think that God would be the kind of author or programmer. Those are obviously metaphors that we can attach to that could be so excellent because part of delight is surprise. And you know, you read, for example, you know, Abraham and Isaac, the sacrifice of Isaac, that story, the climax of that story is God saying, now I know, you know, the Hebrews, the Hebrew scribes, Bible project has it nailed. They are geniuses. I mean, and right there, what did God not know? We can't answer these questions, but there it is in the text. Now I know. And in, for example, I remember when I was in seminary learning Hebrew, one of the first books that we read in the Bible in Hebrew was the book of Jonah. It's got a limited vocabulary. It's a short book. And I remember just reading along and you know, you're doing kind of the wooden trans translation in your head because you don't know anything and you're reading along and you read and I read and God repented of the evil he was about to do. And it's like, what? From a tradition that majors in systematic theology, what do you mean? God repented of the evil he was about to do. And, and so I think if, if God is going to delight in his creation and delight in us as his creatures. So on one hand we say, can we surprise God? No, of course not. On the other hand, could God make a world in which within proper boundaries, we can surprise him. And I would say, I bet you he can. And I bet he wants to, because again, if you read the Bible, especially the old Testament, I love the old Testament, the, you get the sense that he is delighting in us and he's crushed by our decisions. I mean, the God of, the God of the old Testament is not the unmoved mover. He is a passionate, engaged, involved God, so much so that he is offensive to many, but I find that delightful. Yeah. Yeah, totally. Yeah. No, it's, it's, it's, yeah. You know, to what degree does God, you know, create a space, you know, pulls himself back to allow, you know, some things to evolve, you know, to, to come out. We do that with our children. Yeah. Well, that's, we pull back a little when they're 18. It's like, you want to go to Santa Cruz? Maybe it'll be great. I don't know. I'm not God. So, yeah, but we pull back and, you know, these are the, the, it's, you know, in the old Testament, you can get a sense of, you know, there's hinting at the, in, in Hosea, for example, God is talking about Ephraim, his son, but the new Testament, I was in a synagogue for Bar Mitzvah and I heard the rabbi talking about God as father. And I thought you're sneaking some Jesus in there. I just know it. In Islam, you wouldn't talk that way. It's hinted at in the old Testament, but Jesus just takes that metaphor and works it. Yeah. I was just reading through John recently and he, it's, it's, it's sort of like, no, no offense. It's sort of almost like a recorded message. It's like, and just so you know, you know, I'm interacting with the father here and if you see me, you see the father, if you see the father, you know, he's just, he just on and on and on and on and on about his relationship with the father, that he's doing what the father wants. He's speaking what the father wants. He's interacting like it's just, it's just constant. It's just, it's sort of like the background sort of thing, which is going on. It's like, you can't miss it. You can't miss it. And at the same time it's in John. And of course John is probably the most debated of the gospels because Jesus is so divine in John, whereas I believe he is in all the other four too, but it's, you have to read it more carefully. But John it's full and it's rich as I am the good shepherd. I am, I am, you know, we know what that means. Yeah, for sure. For sure. Yeah. And you know, even, I think even when he was talking to Pilate, like he just keeps, he just keeps on saying it and it's just like, you can't miss it. And you know, the reaction of the, you know, the Jews around him, you know, picking up stones, they're just like, nah, you know, we understand what you mean. You know, you know, we're not, we, we get what you're putting down. Yeah. You mentioned the Bible project there. Yeah. You, do you listen to their podcasts or just their videos or both? I haven't, I haven't listened to their podcasts much. Not that I don't like it. It's just, it hasn't, I've got so much stuff to listen to now. And back when my kids were going to school locally here, I had a lot more car time and I don't have as much car time. So I'm, I can't get as through as much listening stuff. So, but I really liked it. I really liked the Bible project guys and the work that they do. It's, it's just stellar. Yeah. Yeah. No, I, I, um, I reckon I'd probably say they're probably my favorite podcast at, um, probably the last, well, they've always been in the top couple. And, um, I just, yeah, I really like the interaction between Tim and John that like, you know, Tim sort of, you know, sort of works through things methodically and John is always there asking the questions I would be asking. He goes, Oh, but what about this? And he's always sort of, uh, I, I just really liked that sort of interaction where John just asks honest questions. You know, he's like, Oh, I'm a bit uncomfortable with what you said there Tim. You know, you know, when I was growing up, you know, and yeah, I just love it. It's um, and um, interestingly enough, um, and this is one, I think I commented on one of your YouTube things, like they are doing a series on God, you know, so they've just started a podcast series on God and they're working on a video on God. And so, you know, here I am. I've been just listening to a couple of hours of, you know, talking about Elohim and, um, L and, you know, Yahweh and you know, they've just been, I've just had hours of talking of listening to their podcast that God, and then I sit down and watch a video and you're talking about God. And I'm just like, what's going on here? You know, it's just, you know, one of those moments where you're talking about God and you know, well, and the reason you're talking about God is cause you know, Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson are talking about God and obviously they're not, they're not listening to the Bible project. So, you know, it's in my mind, I'm like, why is, you know, Tim and the Bible project, you know, they're talking about God and these guys are talking about God. Everyone's talking about God in my little, you know, my little world. And, um, you know, it's, I find, you know, I call that, I don't know, either providential or synchronistic. Like it's, it's, it's a, it, you know, some people say, Oh, just a coincidence. But to me, it's like, yeah, it's, it feels a lot more than just a coincidence that, you know, that this topic is in forefront of my mind at the moment. Um, it feels like there's, there's, there's something more going on there. Um, that this topic, um, is, is sort of on the floor, if you, if you like. Well, and you know, there's, I think Christians, you know, in the church often have a sense that we often, we often feel like we're, we're one generation away from extinction. But here's the thing. This is, this is, I think the standard situation. And you know, the thing that, the thing that grabbed my attention about Jordan Peterson was there were, there seemed to be a number of, there seemed to be a number of dead ends. And some of those dead ends were kind of the, the atheist people were leaving the faith, becoming atheists, didn't seem to be coming back. Uh, another was kind of the new age exit. People were leaving the faith, going into more new age things and just kept keep going out. And so you're watching, and I live in Northern California, so we've got a lot of both of those. And so you'll watch that happen and you just think, you know, what's, well, you know, Christianity, it's going to be, it's going to do fine in Africa and Asia because it's growing like crazy there. But what about here? And then Peterson comes along and Asia, we're saying, I'm not so sure. And, and others who have been into some other things begin to say, I'm a little curious about this Bible. And to me, it just says, you know, God does what he wants. And we are, we have such, we have so little faith. We, we trust in ourselves so much more than we trust in him. And, and for me, I mean, this, I'm a pastor of a very small town, I mean this, I'm a pastor of a very small church, you know, pastor about the size church years are yours. And many of our members are older. And, you know, for a while, a few years ago I had a nice group of young younger people and it was like, Oh good, we've, I've got the replacement generation. I, I'm not going to be the caretaker of the, I'm not going to be the last one to lock the door here. And then just people got jobs and stuff. They all moved away. I was like, I am going to be the one. But at the same time, I think, you know, I ask how God talks to me, God talks to me through that and just says to me, you don't really trust me. Do you? You trust in yourself. You trust, you trust in your intelligence, you trust in your, you know, your, your, your laughable moral goodness. You trust in, you trust in yourself. You don't really trust me. And that's, that's the foundation of the Christian life and I can't get it right. So, yeah. Yeah. Well, that's something. Yeah. See, I, yeah, even we've, yeah, I trust is something is, is hard. It's, I think trust, being a trust, even trusting yourself. Like, see, I don't have a huge amount of confidence in my own ability either, if I'm honest with myself. You know, I, I think, yeah, it's, yeah, it's, it's hard to know who to trust in, in many ways. Like I don't have a huge amount of confidence in my, my own abilities. And, but at the same time, you know, I, yeah, I struggle to trust God sometimes it's, it's hard to know where he's going. And I guess it comes, you know, we live in a society which keeps saying, you know, the five senses, you know, five senses, if you can't, if you can't see it with your five sense, you know, if you can't experience it with your five senses, then it's not there. You know, that's the message we keep getting. Although, you know, when you stop to think, you go, well, if I say frog, something comes into your head, you know, and that, you know, I can't see that. I can't hear it. You know, you can't get a probe and go, oh yes, there's a frog, but you know, it's got, you know, it's real in the sense that, you know, we can, now that we're talking about frog, we can interact with that. We can talk about, well, if there's two frogs and suddenly in your mind, you've got something and you can interact with them and you know, you've got this virtual thing happening in your head. And so there's, you know, when you stop and actually sort of contemplate, you go, well, actually, and then, you know, there's emotions and love and other, you know, you've got the mind, other non-material things. And so, you know, when you actually stop, but there's, yeah, you always, you know, it's, it's hard because you, it's this continual sort of wrestle where you're getting one message sort of saying, well, you know, God can't exist because you haven't, you know, you haven't seen him today, you know, and, but on the other hand, when you actually stop to go, well, Christian's actually think that there's, you know, more than just what you can physically see. And so you've got this constant sort of back and forth, I guess. Which I think that's very true. And for actually this whole Jordan Peterson project for me has been very good for that. Before that I was, I'd read CS Lewis's miracles about twice a year because when I, when I'd find myself sliding down again, we're, we're, we believe in groups and you're immersed in a, you're immersed in a culture that's shaping you in a certain way. And so if you want to believe, if you want to believe in a way other than the bubble you're living within, you're going to have to find others to live with. And sometimes the best you can do is a dead person via a book. And so for me, CS Lewis was someone that I would almost constantly read because if I didn't, I would find when I'd start to get materialistic, well, suddenly a lot of my life decisions look really bad. You know, I, I, you know, I could have made a lot more money being an engineer. And if I had made more money, I could have had better vacations and nicer cars and I wouldn't have to deal with all these homeless people and mentally ill people. And I wouldn't have to do any of that. And so when I want to, when I want to inhabit Jesus world, I need to, I need to live in Jesus world. And that means, you know, continuing to be immersed, not just in terms of devotions and the Bible, but also with other Christians and, and Christians like CS Lewis and, yeah. So that's, I, people will ask me, I just got another note today from someone who's saying, you know, my church, my church is very unhelpful to me. Do I really need a church? And I, I always want to say, I say, you, you cannot be a Christian alone. You will not last. God gives us the church and you might need to find another church, but you need a church if you're going to actually endure. Yeah. Yeah. No, I've, I've always, well, yeah, fortunately, you know, my parents took me to church and I, I could see the benefit of, of, of being in a Christian community and, you know, being encouraged by going to church and interacting with other Christians. Yeah, I think that's essential. Like, you know, if you, if you just go it alone, it's, it's very, very hard. You know, you're almost, you know, very, very difficult just to sort of go it alone. You know, we're part of a meant to be part of a body and part of a, you know, church also gives you the opportunity to, you know, benefit other people. So it's sort of a two way street. It's, it's, and, you know, and by serving others, then that actually helps shape you as well. It's, it's, it's a, mutually beneficial thing. Even though, you know, at times it's, it's hard. It's, it's, it's not, it's not always easy to do. People are a mess. Yeah. Yeah. You put that's same with marriage and same with family, same with church. People are a mess. Relationships are hard. They have to hard work. They are. Yeah. Yeah, totally. Yeah. We've been going about an hour. I don't know if you have any, any, any last questions that you just got to get in. Yeah. And I will, yeah. I, after watching, I probably watched probably a dozen of your videos now, I think. And so, you know, I just, yeah, I thought it'd be good to, to, to have to talk to you because, you know, you're, I'm interested in, in, in your reflections on, on, on, on God and, and how we interact with God. And also I've been interested in the way you've been following Jordan Peterson and stuff. And so it's been, been helpful. And so I thought, you know, before you get too popular, I better, you know, connect. And, yeah, no, it's, it's been, it's been good. This could, this could, this could all go away. Very fickle place. Now I, and I, you know, I, I mean when my first videos, I was very serious when I told people, I could stop making videos about Jordan Peterson tomorrow. If I kind of get the sense that I've kind of gotten to the bottom of it, then I'll probably get interested in something else and move on. Will I do YouTube's of it? I don't know. I never did this before, but I was, I was interested listening to the question and answer that he released yesterday, listening to the timing of his biblical series when he was in Sacramento, he said November and I assumed, okay, maybe that's November 2018, but listening to what he said, it sounded like, you know, fall, 2019. And I thought, that's going to be hard. Cause I'll tell you, with all the people I talked to listening to them, there are a lot of people that they've heard all of this stuff before and they're just waiting for Exodus. And it's like, dude, don't try and make us wait another year. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I was disappointed to hear that he pushed the Exodus series back. Um, it's yeah, that, that was, that was disappointing. Like I was, I was hoping that it was going to be sooner than later. Um, and you know, I think, yeah, okay. I guess he feels he's on a good thing at the moment with his, with his book tour. And so, you know, that's been, you know, getting a lot of positive feedback from that, I guess. Um, you know, it's something obviously he loves interacting those lectures. He, you know, he really enjoys it, but it, I don't think he, um, he says that he's reading all the time, which is great, but I think the actual challenge of the biblical series, I think was something which, you know, it was stretching him like, you know, doing Genesis was stretching him. Um, and I think that was actually really good and healthy. Um, and so yeah, I'd like to see him stretched again with, with, with X, well, you know, we've got to get through the whole Bible. He needs, otherwise I'm not going to get to see the New Testament. Does he know what's ahead of him? Coming up and numbers and Deuteronomy and you have the prophets. Oh, so he really needs to get cracking. Um, and you know, just, just knock it up the priority and just sort of be working on it. But yeah, I think you're right. And I think, you know, with these lectures that he's doing, so I saw him when he was in Sacramento and sounds like he's coming back to Australia. I may be coming, I'm talking to a guy, may come to Australia myself, which I've never been to Australia. Love to get out there, but, but you know, so he came to Sacramento and that was awesome, but I think you're right. The Sam Harris stuff, I think was good. He's, if he just keeps doing the, the book, the book series, I think, I don't know, I don't, I don't know where this will all go. He'll give me lots of time to catch up on my commentary series, but I think, I think a lot of the hardcore people will kind of riff. They won't know what to do. Cause cause a lot of them have been treading water for a while now. Yeah. Yeah. Look, I have been probably since March. So, you know, you know, quite a few months now, um, you know, that he's fortunately, you know, he's released, I haven't watched it yet, but you know, he released the BBC one where he interacts with, but you know, again, he's not going to be stretched on a BBC interview. Like he's not. So, you know, he gets a little bit stretched, you know, when he say with Russell Brand or, um, you know, he or Jonathan Pajot, and there's a few people who, who could stretch him a little bit, but you know, this is, he's only getting stretched a little bit in those kinds of interviews. And even with Sam Harris and stuff, it's, it's, it's when he has to try to make sense of, I think the biblical lecture series really that's when he, um, is being stretched the most. And so I think, yeah, anyway, yeah, it's, yeah, I think it's, it's, it's beneficial for him. Um, and, and, and subsequently everyone else, um, to, to continue on with the biblical lecture series. Cause I think that, that is really important that that's, that's, yeah. And I think a lot of his, I think, yeah, I think a lot of people have become interested in him because of the Genesis. You know, I think his Genesis first one introduction to God video, I still think, I think it's still that's one of the most highly watched videos out of all his videos. And I think that says something. I think it's, it's saying, people are actually interested in, in what you're doing here. Um, yeah, you know, you, you know, the, your 12 rules for life got, you know, um, you know, number one and, you know, great. It's awesome. Great. But yeah, I think that's, that's one level. I think the, the, the biblical lecture series is, is another level of, of, and it's a different thing, which I think is, yeah, a lot of, I think quite a few, uh, particularly, yeah, a lot of Christians and even non-Christians, you know, he's filling out lecture theaters with a whole range of people, which is bizarre. Um, but I think there's, there's a hole there. There's a missing, um, yeah, missing sort of thing, which he's uniquely filling in, in that, um, yeah. So anyway, it'll be interesting to see whether, whether he, he sticks to his schedule or cause he's, he's, he's now going to write the second book. Um, yeah, 12 more rules. Um, and so that's going to take his head space for four months. Oh yeah. I got 613 from the Torah. So, you know, got a lot of Bible and a lot of rules to go. That's the thing. I, I reckon some of the good bits of 12 rules for life came out of his biblical lecture series. Like, you know, some of the bits in there actually came out of the, and so to be honest, I wouldn't be writing his second book until he's done his Exodus series. Like I'd do it the other way around. I do the Exodus series and then do your second book because you're going to learn some things in that Exodus series, which will be fresh and you know, into your second book will actually enrich that second book a lot. So if, if I was him, I'd be doing it the other way around. I'd be doing lecture Exodus series first and then the book. And then that, that will actually make that book a lot more interesting. I agree. One of the things you learn as a preacher, you know, I've been in this church over 20 years now, you, you use the depth of the Bible to, to be able to keep going. And I think, you know, that's what, I mean, even 15, 15 talks on Genesis, he just touched the surface on a lot of things. And you know, Exodus, the first half of Exodus up to, you know, chapter, chapter 25, you start getting into the, the law and the tabernacle and all of those things. So, and there's a lot of really interesting material that he should be, should have a lot of fun with in Exodus. And he touched on it a little bit with his Easter stuff, but I think you're dead on right. If he, I don't know what happens to whatever, you know, and me as someone who's doing the meetups and we're, we're going to have meetup 12. And it's, I don't know, he's, he's, I, I agree with you a hundred percent. He should, I think he should, I think he should look at these biblical series as a staple, even if he only did, you know, six a year in, you know, one every other month in 2018 that would keep him fresh. So, you know, what's he, what's he going to do now for conversations? He had his little sparring with, with, uh, Harris and those videos are late and coming. And many of us who have listened to the bootlegs, I'll go through them again, but I've, you know, I think gotten this, the things out of them. I don't know. I don't know. I don't, I think you're right. I don't think Harris, it's not the right kind of pushing. Hmm. Maybe we're both Christians. So maybe this, maybe our bias in this. I don't know. Yeah. Well, see, that's the thing with the Bible project. Um, when, when in particularly the podcast, the podcast really pick it up, you know, they'll talk for hours and hours and hours and hours about, you know, they talked for hours and hours and hours and hours about exile, you know, just one, one theme, theme of exile in the Bible. They, they, they would have done half a dozen hour, you know, there's six hours just talking about the exile and they're going to do a series on the, on God, which will be, you know, again, hours and hours and hours. And it's sort of like, Jordan Peterson, you should be listening to the Bible project podcast, just to get an idea of just how deep, deep you can dig in these things. Yes. You know, the Bible hub, you know, yeah, that's good, but that's, that's not, that's not, that's not, there are better commentaries. There are, it goes deeper than that. Like, yeah, exactly. Fraction of what there is. We, yeah, like, oh no, I didn't Bible hub. Nothing against Bible hub, but at this level, although you know, all fairness, um, I can't forget his name right now, but you know, he has read some good people and he's, and I know through this, he's, he's, he's gotten a lot more sources. And I, but I remember when he was doing the bit of the Genesis thing, I'm thinking like, yeah, you're going to talk about the Bible, huh? And you're going to exhaust that. I mean, and you didn't even go into Abraham. Oh, there's just, there's just so much. Yeah. No, just listening to the Bible project. I just go, man, I wish Jordan Pearson would listen to some of this because there's, there's, he could just bring out even more stuff. Like there's just the depth. Yes. He's, he's, there's just even more. Basically as you say, it's, it's almost, well, it probably is. And he got a sort of inkling of that, of the depth, you know, he says, you know, it's, it's sort of inexhaustible, um, the Bible, but you sort of go, okay, now that you've noticed that it's inexhaustible, you know, dive deeper, you know, get exhausting now. Come on. Yeah. Yeah. So, you know, go, go further, you know, read more, more commentaries, read more. And, um, you know, there's, there's, there's, there's even more to the, you know, Cain and Abel story, you know, yes, you bought it, you know, you bought out a lot of good stuff, but you know, again, you're still scratching the surface, you know, you know, go deeper, go further. Um, and, um, and the more, the more we wait for Exodus, the higher the anticipation, the almost certainty of disappointment. Um, but we'll, we'll, you know, and, and again, we don't know, we don't know what's going to happen with Peterson in terms of what more, so some, one of the guys in my meetup, he listens to, he works in IT and he listens to university lectures just all the time. And so he started listening to Peterson in 2013 and so he, so at the last meetup, somebody asked him, so is, so are you hearing new stuff out of Peterson? And he's kind of like, um, he says, I can't talk about the theological stuff cause I don't have an ear for that. But in terms of the psychological stuff and the mythology stuff, it's still maps of meaning. And just like you say, he needs something to push him. And if he wants to have a big heavy rock to push uphill, I'll try the Bible. Try it. Uh, that's big enough and heavy enough for anyone. So, yeah, totally, totally. Well, you know, I've got a bit of hope in the fact that, um, he still is interacting a fair bit with Jonathan pageau. Like that to me is a, that's a positive sign that he's still, um, you know, not wanting to put a huge burden on Jonathan pageau of the hopes of mankind, but, um, you know, it's, um, you know, it, that, that, that is good that he's, cause you know, Jonathan pageau will, will push him a bit, but you know, he needs to take it even more seriously. Um, you know, if you, um, I think at least, but anyway, um, I would, I would hopefully, like I had, I had a whole list of, of, um, of things, which, oh, all these questions, which quite a few we, we touched on, but you know, they're, yeah, at some stage, I know you're going on vacation or going on holiday, which sounds good. Um, hopefully at some stage down the track, um, you know, we can have another, another chat. Um, sounds good. Yeah. No, cause I love talking. I love, um, you know, I'm passionate about theology, um, particularly how it interacts with everyday life as opposed to just abstract theology. Like, um, you know, I, I'm interested in how, yeah, it actually, it actually rubber hitting the road kind of, um, that that's very great interest, how it actually influences the way you live and stuff. Um, so yeah, there's lots more, lots more that we can talk about. Um, things, one of the things I'm thinking about doing is doing sort of online meetups. There'll probably be maybe four of us cause you don't want too many. And then, and then that way, cause the, my, my in person meetup here in Sacramento, we just had 25 last Sunday, uh, 12 new people. Wow. Which means that we've probably had another 20 people who have been at least once, many of them multiple times. So I'm working to try and figure out how to manage that and help some other people in some other cities in Sacramento start meetups. But I, because there's a real, there's a real need to be able to talk about this with someone. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What we need to do to thinking to grow. Yeah. And making sense of it and sort of trying to work out what you actually think about it. You know, as one of the things John Peas says, you know, by talking, you actually thinking, and I think that's very true. It's you know, when you're having a conversation with somebody, you sort of, you're figuring out what you actually think about it. Um, and yeah, so yeah, I think talking is very helpful. Um, excellent. Well, thank you very much for your time. I appreciate that. Well, thank you. It's good to talk in person. Well, almost in person. Almost in person. Well, maybe, maybe if I, I'd love to see Tasmania someday. So who knows? Maybe I'll get to Tasmania someday. It's even just the name. I know for a lot of Americans, a lot of people in the world, California, once you live here for 20 years, it's no longer quite so exotic, but Tasmania. Yeah. Yeah. No, look, we'd, we'd love to have you. It'd be, um, it'd be fantastic to, uh, if you can get it out here, it'd be, it'd be good. All right. Excellent. Thank you. Alex. You too. You enjoy, you enjoy, let's see today. You enjoy Wednesday. I'll, I'll, I'll be at Wednesday tomorrow. You'll catch up eventually. Eventually. Yeah, cool. All right. See you then. Take care. Bye.