https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=gtvPfylvWbY

 Thank you for welcoming me here this evening. This is a wonderful opportunity for me to share some ideas with you and to have a discussion. My format for tonight, and if you want to rearrange where you're sitting, you can do it now or maybe at the first time. I'm going to talk for a little bit and then I'm going to have you probably break down into little groups of two or three, discuss it a little bit, and then after a minute or two, bring ideas and questions and thoughts then into the group. And we'll process that a little bit and then we'll go on to the next section. And we're going to do that a few times. Go ahead and put the first slide up. Did this thing go to sleep? No? Oh, here we are. Where I want to start is I want to talk about the church and environmental change. And when I say environmental, I don't mean ecological. I mean changing social and cultural environments. I grew up in Patterson, New Jersey, and I was born in 63. I started kindergarten in 68 and I went to Eastern Christian. And when I was growing up in New Jersey, there was a, New Jersey was one of the most established, vibrant Christian reformed colonies in North America. It had always been a big receiving place from the Netherlands. There were a good number of churches, 12, 14, 15 large, thriving Christian reformed churches. My class was about 100 Christian reformed kids my age. And especially when I started kindergarten, there were a number of feeder schools and then a junior high and high school all in the North Jersey area. After I graduated from Eastern Christian in 81, went to Calvin College, Calvin Seminary, became a missionary in the Dominican Republic, because I grew up in Jersey. That was one of the places where I did a lot of deputation. I came back and I realized how many people were no longer there in northern New Jersey. And that was in the 90s. Now what happened in the 80s in northern New Jersey was property values went through the roof. A lot of people my age who went through junior high and high school couldn't unless they, unless they inherited a home, had difficulty buying a home and staying in the area. A lot of people my age moved out to Pennsylvania, a bunch stayed in Grand Rapids after going to Calvin College, stayed in Michigan, went into different places. And the overall number of people in the Christian reformed church in the North Jersey area declined significantly from the 60s and 70s to the 80s, 90s, and that has continued today. When I was in high school, Midland Park Christian Reformed Church in Midland Park, how many of you know Marty Van Andel? Yeah, Marty goes to Living Stones. And Marty grew up in Midland Park, went to Midland Park Christian Reformed Church. And when I was in high school, that was the big church to go to. The kids would go there on Sunday evenings because you could see the other kids there. And that was an enormous church. And you know, hundreds of families, today the church has dozens of families. And it's like, what happened? And so I've been lately been running some numbers. And my thesis is that, especially in some of the coastal cities that are really world class cities, New York area, San Francisco Bay Area, where you guys are, Los Angeles, the Christian Reformed Church has not had an easy time in these places. So I was a little curious. I thought we have an interesting experiment here in our classes. I thought I would run the numbers from the yearbook from some of the different areas. Now in the Bay Area, I only looked at Palo Alto, San Jose, Walnut Creek, Hayward, and Alameda. I didn't count Golden Gate because their social cultural context as a Chinese immigrant church who continues to receive Chinese immigrants, they have services in English, Mandarin, and Cantonese. Their experience is very different. So I didn't include them. And I compared the numbers from the Bay Area CRCs with CRCs in the Central Valley. And I didn't have all of them. I didn't have a full yearbook collection, but I tried to get them about 10 years apart. And you can see in all cases, the churches growing through the 60s, through the 70s, and then even into the 80s, numbers tended to stay high. But after the early 90s, numbers started to fall, especially in the Bay Area. The peak of at least the yearbooks I had was 1237 in the yearbook in terms of total members in those churches. I gave an average, churches an average of 247. And then from there, this continued to decline until the 2017 yearbook that had an average of 141. And given the work I'm doing with Reform Leadership Initiative, I know that that number is high for pretty much all the churches. So I looked at all the numbers and I said, is it because one church has, as an outlier and actually pretty much all of the Bay Area churches have followed this trend? Whereas I thought, okay, well, let's, isn't this just a Northern California thing? Is this a CRC thing? So I looked at the Valley churches. And the Valley churches had a peak in 91. In these years, there was a departure from some churches that went to the URC and some members that went to the URC. Took a little above, but for the most part, the Valley has remained fairly steady. Now, as you know, the Valley tends to be primarily an agricultural place, pretty common for CRCs to thrive in agricultural environments. And if you've got a fun through the yearbook, you'll notice that overall CRCs and urban areas, but especially in the world class cities, are really struggling as compared to say CRCs in the Valley. Now, there's a lot we could talk about with respect to this because the CRC has a very interesting history, a very interesting culture. But, you know, my experience in Sacramento, although that's one church and it's had a little bit of a different history because of the racial reconciliation focus it had in the 60s and 70s. But in many places, the struggle of the Christian Cork Church is that it always was a church that depended on its future in terms of educating, cataclyzing its youth and seeing the youth grow up in place to take over from the parents. And if you look generation after generation, the Christian Cork Church has been quite remarkable in how stable it's been from generation to generation in doing this. And what we've seen over the last 15, 20 years, however, is that not only in the Christian Cork Church, in fact, the Christian Cork Church is tending to do better than a lot of evangelical and definitely better than mainline churches. The churches are having a very difficult time finding younger generations to step up, step in and take over. And so part of this trend has to do with cities. Part of this trend has to do with the broader culture. So we're going to talk about some of those issues tonight. And so as our first little breakdown session, I want you to know if some of you are sitting by spouses, I'm not going to try and break you up, but it's going to get kind of boring because you all know your own stories and maybe you do anyway. But I want you to take a minute and talk a little bit about your life in the CRC. Did you grow up CRC? Were you raised? A colony is usually kind of a deeper well. And so what the valley has kind of turned into a CRC colony. Full complement of Christian schools, retirement facilities. You can usually spot a colony by its other institutions beyond the church. CRC outposts kind of like Sacramento tend to be, well, here's one or maybe a couple little CRCs clustered, but you don't have the Christian schools. You don't have the Holland home. You don't have some of these other things. Some of you listening in might say this is all kind of strange. I didn't grow up CRC. This is the only CRC I knew. So that's your experience. And my question for you would be what drew you to it? Were you raised in a Christian home or were you a convert? And then just kind of a few minutes on what changes in your environment are you struggling with, especially with respect to attracting and keeping youth. So why don't you take a couple minutes, do a little discussion, maybe two or three minutes, kind of hit a few points. You don't have to talk about all of it. And then after talking a couple minutes amongst yourselves, see if there's anything anyone wants to share to the broader group. What about your way home? Are you going to join us? Don't be afraid to move your chairs. You can always move them back. It's nice about moving little chairs. Are you really? Oh yeah. What's your name? Brooks. Oh, it was a draw. Okay, wonderful. Where we are. Wonderful. Okay, I know that you could probably talk for another 10 or 15 minutes easily, but I want us to keep moving. Now, what are some of the things that came up in your group? Some of the observations you had? What are some of the things that bubbled up for you all? Thinking about these questions. What kinds of things have changed? I was over here in one story here. You said this church used to have 85 families? 60s and 70s. Lots of kids. Yeah, lots of kids. And where are those kids? How many kids who grew up in this church are now adult members of this church? One. Another. In my church in Sacramento, there are three. One of them is my son, so he really shouldn't count. But, you know, two. And it's a small church, but hundreds of people have been through that church over the years. And I know that many of the children of the current members of the old core of the church that are now aging, their children still live in Sacramento. Some might go to other churches. Some don't go to any church at all. And you have to say, well, this isn't like the Christian Reformed Church has been before. You know, often you go to the Valley churches and often you'll see many more of the kids still in church. They grew up in the beacons and elders and this kind of thing is processed. But you get into urban areas and you're finding things are changing. Things have changed. They changed and we didn't see it. Any other observations you want to make? It's not that all of our children are walking away from the church. But they are particularly, I think any of them are particularly, one to two non-native groups. And you have a parent who reminds you of the easiest thing to do. You're taking the cake and you work the thing and you're finding a congregation somewhere for your daughter. But I wonder if some of that is due to letting go of the kind of the feeling of distinctive in a way that makes the environment less useful to hold onto. That's a good wondering. That's a good question. Good question. And the two issues might not be disconnected because if you are saying growing up, so my mother grew up in White and Massachusetts and one of the smaller colony areas and someone here is from White and My mother grew up in White and Massachusetts. You know, my cousins, not all of them go to church. Most of them do. But because it's kind of a blue collar, ruralish community, there's a fair amount of social cohesion and pressure to kind of keep everyone in the fold. And so that particular church is part of your identity. And so there are a lot of subtle things to this. Let's let's look at some megatrends now. Anybody know what the peak of church attendance in the United States was? 50s and 60s. Any idea why? There's lots of reasons why, but one of the things that you might know is the big emphasis of the 50s and 60s was the Cold War. You know, when we put in God we trust on our coins. Eisenhower. And you might think, Eisenhower? A lot of times people imagine that the US church attendance has been just kind of a long gradual slide throughout modernity. And that's definitely not the case. A lot of ups and downs, you know, the great awakenings, a lot of interesting things happening. But church attendance at their fullest in the 50s and 60s and since that point continued to go down. And what we've seen in the last 10 years is a sharper decline. And there's a lot of speculation, whereas culturally believing in God felt like a social asset to resisting and fighting communism. Whereas after the end of the Cold War, the greatest threat seemed to be religious fundamentalism, which starts to change how people feel about some of these things. I want to talk, I want to say a few things about progressivism in Western democracies. Most Americans don't pay a lot of attention to history, but the progressive movement is actually something that's been pretty strong in the United States for a very long time. Abolition was obviously a big movement moving, heading into the Civil War. And then with the Civil War emerging from it, women's suffrage, big at the end of the 19th century. If you read history books, you'll hear about the progressive movement as this thing at the end of the 19th century. Now there are other issues that are connected with that. Often today in our culture, you'll hear about abolition, civil rights, women's rights, LGBT rights, as kind of this is the litany of how these things go. But if you look at the long history of progressivism in Western democracies and the United States, there are other issues that were very much involved and at play in this issue, the temperance movement. An incredibly important part of the progressive movement, very much joined to abolition and suffrage. Getting alcohol out of the society was seen as a central issue for combating violence against women, childhood poverty and disorder and laziness amongst men. And this obviously reached its peak with the prohibition age. And if you have any understanding how hard it is to pass a constitutional amendment, they actually did it. But then the story of prohibition, it didn't quite result in what they thought it would. It did very much decrease the levels of drinking in America, especially from whiskey. But today, if you were to mention temperance as a progressive issue, people would laugh at you. Legalizing pop is considered a progressive issue. And you think, well, how does that stand with respect to temperaments, eugenics? I remember the first time I read Abraham Piper's stone lectures and I thought, smell a little bit of white supremacy in old Abraham Piper. Now, I'm very attuned to that. I grew up in Patterson, New Jersey. My father was a pastor of a racial reconciliation church. And so, you know, what's going on with this? Well, if you were an intellectual at the end of the 19th century and beginning of the 20th century, even one who was in very many ways trying to resist and fight modernism, ideas of racial superiority were pretty common following Darwin. And those really don't kind of get rung out of our culture until Hitler. And you see what Hitler did with the Jews and other peoples. And then suddenly, you know, eugenics, we're just not going to talk about that because that's racist. But this progressivist movement has been happening in our culture now for well over 100 years. And really, there's kind of a pause in the middle of it. The progressivism takes a huge hit with World War I because whereas before we thought all this science and power and technology was helpful to us, and then in World War I we learned, yeah, really helpful to help us kill one another. And then you have the period between the wars. Many would argue that World War I and World War II are really the same war with one big pause in the middle in terms of how it started, at least in terms of Germany. And a very interesting book by a secular atheist Israeli, Yuval Harari, Humal Day who's following another book, Sapien, he argues that really in the middle of the 20th century in this period, we saw three humanist dreams kind of work their way out. The Nazi movement was kind of an idea of progressive racial evolution. Communism was basically ideas about social evolution and class struggle. And really the group that came out on top of that were Western democracies that had much more, that had some interesting, different ideas. And that's in fact where we're located. A really interesting illustration of this is the United Community in upstate New York in this burned over area after the Great Awakening. A really interesting book written by one of the, her descendants were part of the United Community. And it's a fascinating book about progressivism. Here is this community that is merging all kinds of ideas about religion and spirituality and gender and sex. And if you read the story of this community, you'll discover so many of the issues that are being debated now that feel like they're so new now. They were trying all kinds of new things in this kind of crazy, united community with their complex marriage. Women were working very similar jobs as men, ideas of sexual liberation and sexual freedom. And then all that with science and the industrial age. In fact, they had a process of their own eugenics they called stupaculture, where they're trying to breed the best human beings they can find, all with a very religious and spiritual idea about how this all connects with the Bible and the kingdom of God. You read it today and it's like, on one hand it's like all of these same issues that we're dealing with now, but in very different arrangements than what would be considered now. And then in fact in upstate New York in this burned over community, burned over areas, there are a number of utopian communities that were trying out different things. And so this progressivism actually has been a very long term trend that we in our culture have been dealing with. What we've seen in the last 20 years is what I call a matrix of doubt. And I want to just highlight four different skeptics. John Sook is probably a name that many of you will know, former editor of the Banner, former Christian reform minister. A number of years ago wrote a book called Not Sure. And John was actually my landlord when I was in seminary. He lived upstairs, I lived downstairs, and I'm still in contact with him. He blogs and we're Facebook friends and we chat back and forth. But he describes himself kind of as a weak theist and he pastors a mainline liberal church in Canada. And it's fascinating to me to hear basically what he's given up and how that has shaped his ministry. Bart Campolo, some of you remember Tony Campolo. When I was in college, he was a big name evangelist. And I remember him coming to Calvin College and terrific speaker, Eastern Baptist, intellectual author, evangelist, all of these things. His son very much started following in his footsteps until his son had doubts. And his son came to the point of basically giving up on the Christian faith completely. And his son is actually an atheist chaplain in an Eastern University. And has a group of 50 to 75 atheists who explore their non-belief and mostly ethics. This guy right here, probably the least known of the bunch, Ryan Bell, was a Seventh-day Adventist pastor who decided to have his year without God. Blogged about it. Towards the end of his year, he wrote a very interesting piece where he basically said, You know, I can appreciate all of the things that Christianity has brought into Western civilization, but I think it's been a lagging indicator of progress. And Rachel Hell Evans, if you're very much acquainted with the blogosphere, grew up a professor's daughter at a Christian college in Dayton, Tennessee, which was the place of the Scopes monkey trial, grew up to write a book, and has become kind of an internet celebrity on her pathway out of Christian fundamentalism. And now is kind of landing Episcopalian, kind of in that mainline sense. But what kind of holds all of these people together, and other people I know that don't have big names that you might recognize, is basically the assumption that Western progressivism is a better deliverer of shalom and justice and goodness to the world. And so this business about the Bible, Jesus is a good example, but for the most part, the church and all of this Christianity that all four of them were raised in really has to be left behind for them to be moral people who can live with themselves. Now, they have some pretty good evidence in their corner. And again, I use Harari. He writes fun books. His history could be a little fast and loose, but to get a big overview, we have some good stuff in it. He makes the observation that Western, the kind of the mixture of Western democracy and capitalism and scientific achievement have in human history done a better job at pushing back and subduing three perennial enemies of humanity. Famine, famine, war and plague. And that now we live, if you're living in a developed area of the world, we have unprecedented food security. We have long stretches where we don't have wars and plague. We have dramatically few plagues. We don't worry that the plague is going to come to Palo Alto, and so we're all going to have to move out to avoid the plague. Pretty amazing achievement. Yes. What does it say? That's right. So there's all the fears about, you know, what's going to happen when the next one hits, you know, 1919 and the Spanish flu was a big one, but we haven't had a pandemic. This one, which is less obvious, the exchange of pleasure, or really should be the other way around the exchange of we take pleasure at the sacrifice of meaning. Happiness is experienced as autonomy and the opportunity to satisfy experiential personal desires. If I have a need, I have a certain degree of entitlement to have it met. This is deep in our culture. And well, so go to church if you want to. If you have a need for that, so be it. But nobody has a right to tell you not to meet your needs, unless maybe it will hurt someone else. Individualism, the best we can hope for is meaningful for me. Meaningful for me. Meaning isn't communally shared. It's individually pursued. Let's have another little break out session. And I've again gone through these doubts pretty quickly. And my question for you is this. Do these doubts about the church's ability to deliver on shalom? That's that Hebrew word of well-being. Deliver on shalom impacts how we feel about inviting friends or coworkers to church. For example, maybe you work somewhere and you have coworkers that you work with and they have full, busy lives. They find their families meaningful. They find their work meaningful. They have their, you know, just driving up the street here in the church. There's people out on bikes and doing fun things on a Sunday evening. And they might think, why would you go to church on a Sunday night and talk about this kind of thing? Isn't it gorgeous out there right now? And you say, well, I like doing this. And they say, oh, OK, I can understand you liking that. But at the same time, Monday morning, they'll get up and go to work, whether they feel like it or not, won't they? So how do these connect with these doubts? And can you connect with the fact that for a lot of people, especially at the younger end, but not only, they basically look at their lives and say, what would church really add to me to life? And if I don't find something, if I don't find a payout in it, why should I do it? So why don't you break out, talk about that for a few minutes and let's hear what you hear what you hear what you say. Either one. OK. I guess the answer to identify with it, you hear people saying this. Mm hmm. You're selling them things that they're why would I want that? Why would I get up on Sunday morning and sing songs and meet people and listen to some guy talk and have a snack? You know, anyone else? Yeah, go ahead. You don't seem stiff to me. Yeah. Yep. And they're more. Yeah. Compared to groups like them. Yeah. Yeah. Good. Anything else? Yeah. Right. Yeah. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.