https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=zUVvjqWCVjE

 Good evening or better said, good morning, Paul. Yeah, good morning. Hey, here's a name I can say. Just like all the Yankee Dutch around here and Yankee Frisians. Ha ha ha ha ha ha. Nice to meet you. What do you prefer, Martin or what do you prefer? Well, to make it easier on my English professor, Martin is fine. Okay. Ha ha ha ha. Well, thanks for finding a slot. And Walters is actually, there's a friend of mine who is an accomplished theologian in Canada and Al Walters. And so actually I'm on with him and CRC Voices thing. So what fun to see your name. Why don't we begin by you telling me a little bit about yourself. Very well. Well, as I mentioned in my application, I'm from Frisia. I'm 24 years old. Well, at this moment I'm still studying at the University of Groningen, which is one province over. I did a bachelor's in classics with a major interest in history, ancient history. And after that I did a master's, but I transitioned to the history department of the theology and religious studies. There I did a master's on early Christianity. And I did, well, I haven't officially completed it yet because if you complete the thesis, then you have to pay extra money if you want to do another master's. But I almost finished a thesis on a monotonyism. And now I was, well, last year applied to the research master of religion studies and I got accepted for which I'm very, very, very thankful. And well, that's mostly contemporary stuff. You're a professional student. Well, more so like one half mother's basement, one half very, very arduous student, yes. Well, what do you want to do with all this education? All this education and old stuff. Hopefully I can find a use for it, well, everywhere, but well, this education has a little bit of, it has become more difficult to find a decent career in this stuff than it has been. Like most of my peers who studied classics well opt for becoming a teacher more or less in well, high school or middle school education, one of both. And I myself also tried that for a little time and I'm like, yes, I can see myself doing that, but it's not my first choice. Okay, okay, okay. What is your first choice? I'm not entirely sure yet. The research master is, the next step would be a PhD and that depends a little bit, I think on the, if I get, or if I find any interesting for internships in the, well, later on in this year and further on in the program. It's like, well, if you can find interested the right person and expand your network, then of course there are a lot of options, but I've not entirely figured it out yet. Okay, okay, okay. Well, and religiously you've grown up in the, in a church that is in some ways our cousins in the Christian Reformed Church in North America. Yes, indeed. Although here in the Netherlands, Netherlands, or no, Christian Reformed is a little bit different from Christian Reformed in the Americas. Yeah, yeah. Well, once they started coming to America, once you get a different thread, the evolution, I mean, they start changing in different ways subject to different forces and factors. So how was it for you growing up in a conservative Reformed Church in the Netherlands? Well, at first, of course, you do not really notice it because it's just so normal. It's like, how Tom Holland says it, like you're a fish seeing water, like, of course. I must say I've enjoyed it a lot, actually, at least the first, yeah, the first period. Well, how do I say this? Because I also went, like church and school were combined. Well, combined, there was a lot of ecclesial influence in the primary school that I went to. And like the first six years were like, well, the most golden years of my life, basically. Sure, sure. I enjoyed it very much. Was it in a rural area or? Yes, yes, I live in the most rural part of Frisia, well, almost the most rural part of Frisia. Interesting. And dairy, dairy stuff? Well, not so much for me, but there's a lot of dairy stuff. Yeah, a few months ago, I went on my bike to my brother who lives, well, 15 kilometers further on. And well, when I was driving back home and I took another route, I found a dairy sign with a fender clay on it. So I just couldn't help but snap a picture. Really? Oh, you have to send it to me. Yeah, I'll see if I can find it. But I was like, okay, I have to step off my bike now because I've been following this fender clay person, of course, for over three years. And I just, well. Is it K-L-E-I there? Is that what it was? I think there was like one or two letters difference. Okay, yeah. It has been a while, but at least there was a cow. On the sign, I believe. That's fascinating because of course, so my great grandfather, when he was 18, his father put him on the boat from Rotterdam, got out in Ellis Island, went through immigration, went to Western Michigan. And then once he was settled in Western Michigan, his father, his mother, and a couple of sisters then came over. But my great grandfather, I don't know what my great grandfather did, but my great grandfather painted houses. And he settled in, had some children, and then his first wife died and he married his, he married his, what was sort of his sister-in-law. And she helped raise the kids. But of course, in terms of the Christian Reformed Church in North America, it was a tiny group of offskiding Christians that left. And they became a lot of the Christian Reformed Church in North America until the end of the Second World War when you had, of course, Kuiper and those who broke off with Kuiper. And then more came over after the war. And that's sort of what's made the Christian Reformed Church in North America. But of course, having been in the country for 150 years plus gets very American. But it's very uncommon to run into anyone that spells their name like I do, all comes from my great grandfather because Ellis Island changed the letters. So then when we did genealogy and went back, we found all these van der Kly's in the Netherlands and then discovered that there are Jews. And it's like, and then that was a whole revelation to our family and a revelation that only happened about 10 years ago, because we didn't know anything about it. I think they went to Western Michigan and just sort of blended in with the rest of the Dutch, the Yankee Dutch immigrants. And so anyway, I shouldn't bore you with my family history, but yeah, if you find that picture, send it to me because I'd be curious to see it. I've never been to Europe, but I very much do want to go. And if I do go, I very much wanna go to some of these places. So I'm just hoping COVID will pass and I'll get a chance to get to Europe and we'll probably do some meetups and stuff. Well, hopefully so, yeah. Then I could also meet up with all the other Dutch guests you've had on here. Yeah, I'm surprised you haven't met them. I mean, the Netherlands isn't that big. I mean, Joop and Dennis, they're around. And I'm looking at, I think Ferdy right now, he's in the room. So there's a whole bunch of them in the Netherlands. Yeah, it's just, you know, Freesia is just the slightest bit further off and a little bit less well connected to like the main public transit hubs. So I wanna get this from you because I, so the Friesian, so that my father's side was Jewish and went to America. My mother's side were Friesians. I mean, and these were real Friesians. They went to, they went to Whitensville, Massachusetts with the cows because Mr. Whiten, his cows all died up off in a flu. And so of course, everybody knows that the best cows in the world, best dairy cows come from Friesland. So he imported the cows and the workers came with the cows. And that's how on my mother's side, I, you know, that's how that came. But there's all, oh, I always hear about this tension between the Dutch and the Friesian. Hang on for a second. There's someone at the door. I'll be right back. I don't have a hard stop with you so we can have a little more time. Hang on. Hey, how are you? Pretty good. Good. Any tree damage? No. Okay. No. You got some time or are you busy? I'm talking to a guy in the Netherlands right now. Do that. It'll show. No, it's not Joe, it's another guy, another rando. Okay, cool. But very cool. But maybe we should sit down again sometime. Yeah, I would like to. Okay. I've got a couple of questions. Okay. Yeah. All right. See you, Raj. Sorry about that. So, you're a very, very central class tradition. Yeah. And, well, there was of course, a lot of the debate on the black Pete. Swarp Pete. Swarp Pete, yeah, yeah, yeah. A lot of Friesians got quite, well, the Friesians are people of principle and if they really, if push comes to shove, then they will come into action and this time they just blocked the entire highway that would block protesters from protesting in the Dockum, where, well, Sinterklaas would come. So, and there was a lot of, well, people were talking about it for quite some time. Well, and on this side of the Atlantic and in this part of the Christian Reformed Church, the Frisians are known for being especially principled and sometimes especially stubborn about their principles. That's their reputation. That seems to maybe be something consistent with our ancestry, so. Yeah, I can most surely recognize it in both of my family trees. So, yes, yes, very much so. Well, thank you for indulging me because I, again, I've never been to the Netherlands. I very much want to go. I've got actually a lot of stories about the Frisian stuff because another story, my grandfather, he, most of his churches were in the United States. He took one church into Canada and it was after the, at the end, it was after the First World War. And so there were Dutch and Frisians who were emigrating to Canada after the war. And the Dutch and the Frisians did not get along with each other in the church. Now, again, my grandfather, he was, you know, his, so his father was this Jewish immigrant. And he, and so in the house, my grandfather was fluent in both Dutch and Frisian. But the Frisians who were emigrating to the church were speaking Frisian with each other, you know, kind of complaining about my grandfather, assuming he didn't understand what they were saying. And my grandfather was a very patient, gentle man. And he listened to this for a while and just kind of bided his time until one day when he heard some of a group of them speaking Frisian, talking about him, he just stepped into their midst and began talking back to them in complete perfect fluent Frisian and which their eyes got big. And that was sort of enough of that. So, you know, there's all this history and all these little stories that I have from my aunt who passed away now. So I can't check them with her because my father didn't go to Canada because he was already heading to college when my grandfather went to Canada. So it's just these, I have these stories in the back of my mind. And I just want to get external confirmation of the, at least, you know, half of my genetic contributors. So, but I've pestered you too long with all of my own personal things. What would you like to talk about? Well, I have a lot actually. Like, for one, I know that you are quite interested into people's, well, personal story. I am. And of course, a little bit of Jordan Peterson will not go amiss, I think. That's true too. And well, and I know you're, well, basically I'm an open book to you because, well, I've watched you for three years now and I'm like, you are very good at asking questions. And just all this dialectic is not, at least I'm one of the people who really appreciates it. So. Oh, thank you. So I, of course, I've made a few notes if, well. Well, let's start here. How did you find Jordan Peterson and why were you interested in him? Well, I think like most people, I found Jordan Peterson on YouTube. And well, basically I've heard a friend of mine mention him before, but that was like, oh, there's, you know, on the other media stuff, there were these, yeah, those, the political, well, yeah, the political bits that came into my purview, but I was not very much interested into that. And the friend of mine, oh, it's interesting. You should look into it. And I was like, nah, nah, I'm not just not interested in that kind of stuff. So I, well, not for me, thank you very much. Well, then after a while, I came across his lectures on Genesis and well, one thing lead to another, you know. After that, I think there was a little, a few months between it, between the Google and the YouTube algorithm serving up your video on the prolegomena and all that. And I started watching and well, one revelation after another became apparent to me that you were Christian Reformed and that you're a freezian. I think that played a significant role actually in my interest in these kinds of things. But also because I was struggling through my own meaning crisis basically. So, and I thought it a very good opportunity to basically reconnect with my Christian Reformed roots because I've, well, it almost had seemed, it seemed almost to me like a distant dream basically. And I did not know what to do with it. And then how you integrated it with all of the Jordan Peterson stuff. And then, well, moving on from your commentary stuff to your sermons and how you integrate. Well, knowing what you said about all the, or basically what you said about Jordan Peterson stuff and how that would come up in your sermons. And then, you know, this structure of misery, deliverance and gratitude. It's like, yeah, well, it hit me and I was like, yeah, I can do something or it speaks to me in a good way. And also the Heidelberg Categorism, like I've said that one for a while, a long time ago. And now it's like, well, why would I discard all of it if on one or two percents of it that I might not agree with? So why throw out the baby with the bath water basically. Yeah. And well, yeah, I've watched you for three years. Ironically, one year ago, I've also tried to get a slot around this time because well, well, next Sunday is my birthday. And last year I thought, well, maybe I could try and well, but well, this year actually it's- Well, happy birthday. Yeah, I still have to wait a few days, but thank you all the same. And yeah, I think it was like a little bit of a semi sounding boards basically for what I myself was thinking about, for what I was reading, for my own interests and like my interests are too broad, like really too broad. My mentor also says so, but well, he excuses me because he himself is also a scatter brain and these kinds of things. So like my interests are in antiquity, in philosophy, theology, religion, it's just all over the place basically. Yeah. But I could connect to a lot of points that you were making and it was also so that you can sometimes watch the video and sometimes put it in the background and then just you go doing other stuff, reading or playing or whatever. So it was good company in very many situations. So I think that has led to me almost consuming. It is of course an approximation, but I think just over half your outputs on YouTube, I think. That's quite a few hours. Yeah, I've put in quite a few hours. It's not slowing down. No, I noticed. Yeah, and you of course were also a little bit of a portal to me to all these other kinds of people. Well, you and Jordan Peterson, of course, like John Verfeke, Jonathan Piccio, those are two like the main outliers, but also, well, I think Brad Weinstein, I've just been following I think for over the last year, or at least his own podcast. Yeah. So what are your thoughts about his work? I'm a little curious, because his, you know, I don't know. I mean, he seems more American political centered, but part of my surprise has been Americans don't follow politics anywhere else in the world, but the rest of the world sure follows American politics. Yes, yes. Well, I've basically been asking myself the question, why am I following Brad Weinstein? What is it in what I see on his podcast that appeals to me? Because of course, you know, I know him from the Vancouver talks, and the same with Douglas Murray. I think that for the political stuff, I would prefer Douglas Murray over Brad Weinstein. I think also because, well, he's a little bit also closer to the Tom Holland thing. Brad Weinstein, I think it's like, oh, he's a biologist. And well, he is, well, atheist-ish. So I found it helpful to find someone outside of my echo chamber basically to tell me stuff about, well, biology or his opinion or his viewpoint basically. Having something to contrast with my own viewpoint or supplement it. And well, yeah, I think that it serves primarily that function for me. Like, well, American politics, okay, I consume a little bit of it to stay in the loop because I'm not willing to watch, well, put effort into watching other sources of American politics. And like, well, this one is as good as, well, perhaps slightly better than any. So, and of course there are just funny interactions on that podcast also. Also these Christians, well, one of them just said, well, he said basically the same as I did just now, like, thank you for being a person outside of my echo chamber that helps me further along. So I could very much find myself in that comment. And then another comment that was a lot of more spiritual and I agreed with that comment also, but it tried to smuggle in the Holy Spirit and all that kind of stuff. They were like, what are we supposed to do with this comment? Like, thank you. We do not entirely agree with all this spiritual talk, but the funny thing is I thought, well, this person was basically saying the exact same thing as the person just now, because I thought just was a little bit more explicit with Christian terminology basically. Yep, yep, yep, yep. So, oh, this is, I mean, does anybody else listen to this stuff? I mean, obviously you've kind of found Peterson through a friend. You just have a little group of friends who listen to this kind of thing or? A very small group of friends. Yeah. It also has to do with my, well, rural positioning, like just the population here is low and also the times here, at least a few years back, of course, things are going faster now, but Frisia or the rural part of Frisia really did lag behind the rest of the Netherlands in things of, I think it still does in things of culture and interests and all that kind of thing. And I've just ended up in a little bit of a difficult position where like all my Christian friends are absolutely or were absolutely not interested into this kind of thing and found it to pagan, of course, to no fame, to, well, not Christian. While all the people I know at the university are like, well, what is this? Like, no, no. So how are the rural conservative churches doing compared to what's happening around the university? I find that a very difficult question because I just, maybe I can go back to my primary school. I think I was like seven years old when my parents switched from the Christian Reformed Church to Evangelical Baptist Church. And well, I went to church, so from that time onwards, I went to a more, well, I think I attended both, of course, mostly the Evangelical Church, but I still attended also the Reformed School. So you also had to attend that church at certain moments. Okay. And so how are they doing around the university? The university, well, I am the first person that I know of along with a niece of mine from my primary school that has gotten into university, basically. Like, I do not know people from where I just now, or well, just now, where I went to school with who also went to university. And I'm also like the first person along with my niece who is like a few days older than me, who has from our family that has, well, chosen to go to university basically. Interesting. So it's mostly farmers, people who are working with their hands? Yeah, farmers or craftsmen, builders, that kind of stuff. And also, of course, the dairy cows are also still present. Yeah, yeah. Well, so is there a real sense of class stratification going on then in the culture around you? I think not intentionally, but just descriptively. Hmm. I, just all the information I have is rather anecdotal, so. Oh yeah, well, but that's, I mean, I like that. Just because it's anecdotal doesn't mean it isn't true. It's just true on a certain scale. Yes. Well, on the scale of my personal life, there most definitely is. Yeah. Like, my, yes, just my experience with the university is the first I have basically heard of it. Like any connection with my, where I come from basically. Yeah, yeah. Well, and you know, for me too, so I'm in Sacramento, which is a city, obviously it's the state capital. An hour south of here is Ripon, and Ripon, California is sort of the epicenter of the Christian Reformed Church in Northern California. And there are big churches there, and they have some dairies there, and the immigrants there I think went there to do dairy, but they very quickly saw that growing almonds, ammons as they call them, was more profitable than milking cows. And you know what, you don't have to get up at horrible hours in the morning to milk the ammons. So a lot of the Dutchman switched from dairy to nut trees. And, but in the Christian Reformed Church in the United States, part of the tensions within the church very much have to do with those who are educated, working professional jobs, and those who are blue collar dairy, agriculture, trades, and even in New Jersey when I grew up, you could really sense that, that even though North Jersey where I, which had had dairies, you know, New York just kept, you know, flowing out, and no dairyman who has, you know, a few dozen acres and a real estate developer comes by and is ready to put a fat check in front of him for all that land that he used to have cows on, no, no Frisian or Dutchman is gonna say, no thanks, I'll keep my dairy, thank you very much. They're very happy to say, I don't wanna get up in the morning and milk those darn cows. So, you know, there's a lot of layers to all of this and it impacts the churches and people's lives. And yeah, so I'm, but I know obviously, I mean, what Europe has, you know, Europe is very old compared to places I live in the United States. But I'm curious about how these cultures and how this stuff ripples in terms of the churches. So, because it's still very much a live thing in the Christian firm church in the United States and all the tensions within it, the real tensions in a lot of ways are urban versus rural. And they have theological masks that they wear, but a lot of them remain urban versus rural. And even in the United States with all this culture war stuff, a lot of it continues to be urban versus rural. And you can be a rural person within an urban area. And then the other class markers will often be education. You know, do you work with your hands or do you work with your brain? It's kind of the, it's having an earth, two worlds mythology. So, and you, and what you just said about you and your niece, I mean, that goes along with that. Yeah, I identify a lot with what you just said. Like I go to the city for my education, but I do not feel at home there whatsoever. That's also been the reason like, why I've not moved out just to the city. No, I'm just not a city person. Yeah. I just, yeah, I really do not feel at home. Yeah, yeah. I completely believe that. I completely believe that. And, you know, a lot of what happened to those immigrants who moved to the United States and then to Canada, I mean, those who could, I mean, it was the ambition of many of those immigrants to get a farm. Many of them moved first as farm laborers and then they tried to sort of work their way up to getting a farm. Those who landed in North Jersey, you know, there were some little cows and dairy going on around there, but many of them, like even in my, even in Whitensville, Massachusetts, they came over with the cows, but what are their children going to do? Well, here's the Whiten machine works. There's only so many farm jobs and there's always this demand in the machine shop. So my grandfather, you know, was a machinist and he worked in a machine. That's what he did his whole career. He never, you know, even though his father came over with the cows, he grew up working in the machine shop. And then his youngest daughter, that was my mother, you know, she was the first in her family then to go to college and she goes to college and she meets another person at college and you can see how the, you know, how the community sort of separates with respect to college and then college educated people, political ideas, ideas about all the cultural stuff, separate from the agricultural people and all of those other things and the differences just compound. And then in the United States, you'll get a church where, you know, those are where the conflict lines are drawn. Yeah. Yeah, I can also see that over here. And also the difference between the permanence of occupation, like my father worked at the same factory for like 40 years or so, and that's just, that does not happen much anymore. Like, okay, the generation will probably, but if I look at my brother, yes, well, he works quite a few years, but like a few, like three, four years later, he's still, he has now moved on basically to another place, so. Yeah. Yeah, you very much get the sense of a world that is going away and you get the sense of the loss of that world and the loss of the beauty and the glory from that world. And as you say, permanence is a big aspect of that because, you know, many people, generation after generation, there was, you know, these things stayed the same. And, you know, even the church where my mother attends in Whiten'sville, I went there as a boy because that was where we went to church when we'd go and visit our relatives and vacation up in that area. But, you know, just Boston, just like New York, Boston continued to grow. And so everything around becomes sort of a suburb or a perimeter city and those things that are lost, very few dairy farms in Whiten'sville, Massachusetts anymore. So that's the process of modernization in some ways. Yeah, and of course for my generation, and I think for me especially, it's just very difficult to find your own way in the world if you do not have either roots or just a clear vision of where you're heading basically. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh, I can imagine that. And so, well, you're studying classics. I mean, that would be at least, that would be a path to the ministry. Are you thinking about ministry or teaching or still, I mean, you said you didn't know what your plan A was. So. Well, there have been a few people who suggested the ministry or preaching, of course, especially because I'm one of the people interested in classics. So there are a lot of, well, I think in the last three years, there have also been like three pastors that were, well, wouldn't you consider perhaps, you know, theology? And well, of course I've considered it and I've taken a few theology classes in my, you know, the free space of the program. Yeah. But I think, well, yes, somehow theology has been a little bit, yeah. No, I've not found really my own interests within theology. Although my historical interests are theology related, of course, early church and epitristics and, well, monotonyism is also, of course, is a subject that's related. Yeah, why monotonyism? Why did that strike your fancy? Well, I think that I have to give a little bit of a crash course in the, crash course in my ecclesial journey, basically. Okay. Well, like I mentioned when I was like seven and eight, well, my parents became, I named evangelical, but the first thing I learned watching your channel is like all these words of denominations mean a lot different than what I might have in my head. Sure. Like for me, Pentecostal was basically people who believe in miracles. And then I watched your channel. Well, I believe in, well, of course, I'm just using general terms, but, oh, I also believe in miracles, but I'm still reformed. That doesn't mean I, you know. Yeah. I had to adjust my own view of these terms a little bit. But yeah, basically, so evangelical and that's also where basically, where my own meaning crisis very early on started. I think some person here a while ago had a similar experience that like at the age of eight, that you have this just real, or for me, it was a very intensive meaning crisis. Like I was confronted with these ideas of, well, finitude and infinitude, and I just could not see a way out basically. It's like either one or the other and both are quite terrifying. I just cannot see a solution. And that was at times, at some times because in the evangelical church, they were at the time, and still are to a certain extent occupied with apocalyptic thinking. And well, of course, there were these movies left behind and another few that just, well, were catalysts for that development in my thinking basically. So I was rather young and I was already, well, afflicted I would say with these kinds of crises. Like how am I going to live with this? And why isn't the rest of the world making a big deal out of this? And I think that has had a lingering impact on me and resulted in me having the feeling that I was just living in an entirely different world than the other people surrounding me. And well, just one and a half year ago, I've found a little bit of an answer in the fact or facts, the realization that there might have autism all along. So that might have influenced the development of my cognitive abilities. Like some abilities were developed very rapidly while others took more time. And my parents were like, well, when we are away, he watches the Lord of the Rings, so why not these apocalyptic movies? For me, they were radically different, of course, because Lord of the Rings is easily fiction, but what they are now showing me on the screen with these apocalyptic movies, this is reality. This is going to happen. And well, all the effects that entailed. But in primary school, I was rather popular and also very social, and I had a sensitivity for authority. I appreciated authority and I was eager almost to submit to it. And that was especially, at least in hindsight, that was exceptional because, well, I was a strange duck in class, basically, because at this reformed school, there were two kinds of reformed, of course, that were not always getting along, and I was just stuck in the middle, but I could get along with everyone. So that was a rather interesting phenomenon. But in the last year of primary school, just tensions became too hot and things were not going that well over there. So there was an exodus of one group that went over to another school, well, in Dockham, basically. And that just set my world upside down, but I was still able to recover from it because, well, a good friend of mine was also coming along and I could basically build up new relations still while maintaining some of the old, because like I said, I was able to get along with, well, almost anyone. But there was already, just before Christmas, I believe. So I had like six months left on primary education before I had to go to, well, secondary education. And that was also, in that time also, in this evangelical church, there were a lot of subgroups, of course. And that's where also my parents became associated, or they associated with more Pentecostal types. Although in hindsight, again, I'm very hesitant to describe the presence of Pentecostalism in free, yeah. I wrote a paper on it a while ago. And yeah, can you call it Pentecostalism? We call it charismatic, that's what we would often call it here if it's not necessarily Pentecostal, but it's within a different tradition, so. Yes, yes, yeah. And there was also a lot of charismatic renewal here. Well, we stay within our own group, but we also adopt these practices. It made quite an impact on me, of course, because if you see miracles happening around you, left, front, and center, it's like, well, again, is this supposed to be normal? Okay. Okay. A little bit of dissonance. Yeah, dissonance is, I think, a theme that is, well, present throughout a lot of my experience. And also this rigoristic things like, well, sometimes emphasis on fasting or these kinds of things. And although at this time, my sense of authority was a little bit damaged because of this, of some of the experiences I had, not so much that I, I separated, I think I made a distinction between the authority or the reverence due to people with authority and what I thought of the persons themselves. There was a clear split between this because, well, due to some of the events that transpired. And also I had a little bit of the experience that Tom Holland had like, well, you're saying this, but if I connect the dots, then they become a little bit difficult to really believe as such. Yeah. I'm a little bit, Okay. You're doing well, keep going. Then I will keep going. Well, I just then at that point, well, that half a year just flew by, basically I had a good time. I built new contacts and that went well. But after transitioning to secondary education, I almost immediately lost all of it because I just did not went to the same high school, basically as the rest of everyone. Like everyone went to Christian secondary education and I went to, well, the name Christian was on it and they did something with religion, like having day openings and such. But it was very secularized. And like only one person from my primary school, all the way back, which I've known him for quite a long time, he went with me. But I think due to my overzealousness in studying, he was not keen on, well, continuing our friendship. So that was a little bit difficult in the first part of secondary education. At the same time, things at home were a little bit difficult. My mother had left the Reformed Church because of some, well, psychological, she couldn't handle everything that they were imposing on her. There was a lot of friction and well, it wasn't pretty basically. And while she got mental problems that was quite a difficult time. And also for me and my brother, he is five and a half years older than me, so he's 30 now. Yeah, that's also the time that I found it very difficult to take church seriously, basically. It was more of an impediment in my life than an addition, although I was very, very, very religious in my own right. Like, yeah, the personal devotion basically was very much present, but I was not able to find anything solid in the evangelical church. Like, there was no room for me to develop myself. And basically this was due to the fact that my Bible knowledge was far past well, than my peers basically, because at my primary school, we had to, well, on our report cards, there was, hey, did you, every week you have to sing a psalm basically, and then you get a grade on it and that will get on your report card. And also tell back the Bible stories, like at one day a Bible story is told and the next day, then you have to retell it basically. Yep, yep. And there was this booklet, Namen and Phyton, so names and facts all about the Bible, and then every Friday you got a test on all that. And I know that those were very lengthy sentences that you had to write over from that book because it was very long, and I was very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very, like why did Abraham have to leave his home and set upon his journey? And that was like one sentence that was over like three or four, well, well, it was a very, very long sentence. And then you were, and then you just got tests on that. And I was very, I found those always very fun and I was very motivated to, I liked those 100% grades coming basically. So that was my dopamine. But moving ahead, so yes, my Bible knowledge exceeded that of my peers basically. And like, where am I going to learn more or advance or, is there something, and I just felt more of a mascot at these Bible study groups of teenagers. And I was like, what am I doing here? And then of course they ask a question, hey, you know the answer, so, well, class, more or less. But I, yeah, there was just no, well, mobility is maybe not the right word, but yeah, I got stuck in my development. And again, this theme of dissonance like between the evangelical and the reforms. And I just was not old enough yet before we switched churches to really have the deep roots in the reformed church while I did have the, well, a little bit of the culture instilled in me and the values and such. Yeah, yeah. But yeah, so that was at middle school, but I was, there was really the moment that I began feeling like a pariah, I think, just, yeah. Basically an exile, just I did not have the idea that I had a home somewhere. And yeah, I've been wondering for quite some time years in that regard. And that was also the time that my, well, my social life attitude changed. Like I've become, I became a lot more introverted. And now the question is, was I introverted all the way along or was this something that changed over time? Yeah. Well, because at the start, I was still just leading or co-leading a guild, well, computer games and all that. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I don't know if you know it, but yeah. At that point, I still had the feeling like, well, I can lead people and I feel motivated. Although, like I said, those, I had bouts of that meaning crisis, like these almost panic attacks that I had to get under control in social situations, either school or church or wherever. And that slowly declined over two to three years. Although it did not affect my personal devotion that much. Like, but it was almost due to some kind of, pride, I think, and almost this Puff Love effect. Like I'm going almost this Messiah complex. I will lead people. Well, well, I will get education and tell people how things are. Okay. Yeah. And there was also, I think, a time that, that resentment crept in and I knew about it. Like, you just see it's there festering in the corner. And then you're like, well, I can't, I do not feel as if I can do a lot about it, but I will need to, well, keep an eye on it. And, you know, not let it get out of hand. Like, else it will corrupt more than is good. Yeah. There was also the time that I began praying to God. Like this honest prayer, like, please, please go and break my pride and make me humble. One thing I've noticed throughout the years, if there's almost one prayer that God will most definitely answer than it is prayers like that. Very true. You pray for, pray for patience too. God answers that one too. Yes. Well, and one of the things I think that got me through this period was, like I said, I just was not involved in church that much while I had to go because of my parents, because you know, and that was, that is also something that is deeply within Friesian culture. I, to me, and that was something that my grand, one of my grandfather asked every time, like, are you going to church? Basically that's like the linchpin of, are you still going to church? Right. They say in Friesia, from the, is he not full church? Like, church, churchy. Oh, I don't know any Friesian. My mother knew, my mother could understand Friesian because her mother would say things that the Friesians would use the language for a secret code, but that's what my mother knew some, but I don't know any. So, that's fascinating. This is so interesting to me. Yeah. Well, and, and, and the thing that got me through, and that was also something that I was, if Paul Fennicle is saying this about, well, you know, well, what he thinks of evangelical church practice. Well, I think there was a little bit of a difference because I would call it Christian rock music, but I think it would be rock music made by Christians, basically that appeals to me a lot into this during this time. And I also recall this, well, the time that you talked to a Dutch theologian and his son, and he also named a few Christian bands, I think it was a Switchfoot or something. Well, for me, it was also Switchfoot, but I have primarily that were like bands like Reliant K, House of Heroes, and Falling Up. I do not know if you know those, but I just throw it out there for perhaps the potential. Oh, now they'll stick in my mind. I've heard of Reliant K, but the others I haven't heard of. Yeah, the singer of Reliant K has had, there was this rumor about him and Katy Perry and all that. But I think that were just the episodes that also were eventually translated into his music. And that, well, at least it resonated with me a lot. And also, Falling Up, yeah, it's a little bit on the nose, although the music they create is more in the sense they are not writing hymns as much as in this more in the same vein as Tolkien was writing while doing some more like science fiction and then just incorporates all the Christian motives and themes. And there was also the time that I began just looking for God in almost any media whatsoever, any book. And as I got to the second half of secondary education, I came into contact with Socrates, of course, and that was like, if there's one person that is a big inspiration for me, then it's of course Socrates. Interesting. Also that's where my course, my love with classical languages began. And that's also, I think it contributed to the reason why I still believe, because I've also, earlier this week, I rewatched your conversations with Vav. And of course, I've also recently saw your conversation with Sally and also all these themes that resonated with me, all this uncertainty, this darkness, and well, things can go wrong at any point. And also like these doubts in the back of your mind and all these aspects, like I do not want to, and in my case, both saw the seeds of fear and the seeds of doubt in other people. So those were conversations that really resonated with me. But yeah, why do I believe? Well, I think I'm a little bit old fashioned or even pre-modern because modernity had a difficult time really getting through to me because I was living in an enchanted world and how are you going to basically convince me that I'm not living in an disenchanted world? And your arguments might be right, but you do not speak with authority. That was something that people, I think people will find that rather difficult to understand because our mentality is rather, well, if you're rational, then you are willing to hear different arguments. And if those arguments are convicting, then you, well, here's the is-ought connection, of course, then you ought to change your own opinion. And I was like, well, you might speak very well and you speak, but yeah, I was very apprehensive of a sophism basically. Like you can tell a pretty argument, but I'm not going to take it or I'm not going to take it over just without or just on the grounds of that. And also because I was studying classics, all the rhetoric also is something like Cicero and Augustine. Those were themes that were, yeah. They made their home into my life basically. Like this rhetorical argument and the aesthetic argument. And also of the languages themselves basically. When I read Latin or Greek, it's just, yeah, it's very difficult to explain. It conveys rational knowledge, of course, but it also conveys aesthetic knowledge. And that's just beyond words like rhythm, word placement, word function, particles we do not have in our language, the middle voice that just like, why do we not have middle voice as such? Yeah, we can give words, we can translate it, but really these senses. And there's also something of course I like from your servants, like when you have time to go into those things. Yeah. That also came down to me, like linking it to the conversations I just named, like this Pascal idea. There's always enough light, there's always enough shadow. And the relation between rationality and the world, the spirit of finesse and the spirit. All these things, I'm just rattling a little bit of the themes that I found most salient throughout all of those hours that I have been watching you. And of course, John Vervecky with his notions of self-deception. And because that was also something always in my mind when at the moment that's modernity, like you get to study evolution at school and you're beginning to become trained to be critical towards things and to analyze. That was also the moment that, okay, there are miracles happening, supposed it's miracles of course happening all around me, but how do I know that I'm not deceiving myself? And of course, when charismatic people begin to become personal and of course, the alleged times that they go pray for you, for when is this guy going to fall over basically? Well, of course that didn't happen with me, but that did not convince me that, of course that miracles weren't true because I was there sitting at least to my mind at least, well, I'm trying to not get deceived here. I want, and in this Socratic fashion, I want my searches for truth and truth is the highest ideal I'm aiming for. And not so much in the sense that of course, and that's also your argument of simplicity, like the simple lives of faith, it's not so much this success, but rather the honesty with which you're living, which I thought was also embodied by Socrates and perhaps to a lesser extent by, yeah, well, this whole Plato-Socrates discussion is not something that I want to burn my hands on. Yeah, let's not go there. We won't be able to resolve that one quite now. But yeah, also my Calvinist route of self-examination is something that I inherited, I think a lot. So I was, yeah, and because I score very high in neuroticism and conscientiousness and this idea of self-deception while on the hand, well, this is what I experience slash perceive. Yeah, yeah. You know, this, yeah, and taking into account both all the known unknowns and the unknown unknowns. And if there's something I think I can say I've become a master of knowing that I do not know a lot. Also that of course will sound quite pretentious because you know, that's the Socratic creed though, basically I know that I do not know a lot. Well, I think that this is the time that I wanted to ask you a question because you've mentioned a few times that you wanted more historians in the IDW. Yes, indeed. I love, well, let me just first say that I love what you just did there and how you, I mean, there are different ways to talk about a life and there are different ways to talk about, to share yourself. And I think that was very honest and very transparent and gave me a real sense for how your individual story and your parents' story and your situation and yourself and your love of classics and your continual, your continual hunger for God, how it all comes together. And so thank you for that. I really enjoyed that. I really appreciate that. So you go ahead and ask the question. Well, it's more in the sense of, you mentioned a few times that you wanted more historians in on these discussions. Yes, I do. What do you think historians can contribute? And well, I think you've discussed this question a few times, but maybe a little bit of a rehash will not do much harm. No, I don't think it'll hurt at all. Well, this is part of the, I say that partly because of, I think the significant contribution of Tom Holland in this, even though when I had my conversation with Tom Holland, I asked him, what do you know about Jordan Peterson? Nothing. Oh, okay. Well, all right. Well, now we're coming in fresh then. But part of, I think what Peterson really contributed was obviously a very broad integrated approach that had philosophy and psychology. And obviously embedded in there was a fair amount of history, but it wasn't looking at history as such. And when Holland came in, now we're looking at history as such, which is really not just a question of development of thought, which psychology will track. History has such attempts to integrate, I think more non-thought events into the process. And so, what Tom Holland, and his particular puzzle that he's working on, which is, he very clearly exposed a bias in modernity. And now when we're talking about history, just like almost Protestantism is unavoidable, modernity is unavoidable. And so when you look at Tom Holland, on one hand, he approaches history very much as a modernist. When you listen to him, he'll say, well, what really happened? And when you make a statement like that, you're making sort of a physicalist statement because what really happened in the physical arrangement of things? That's a very modernist statement. But Holland has, in addition to that, the very unusual preoccupation with the fact that, hey, wait a minute, if you read the Iliad or the Odyssey, or if you read Herodotus, the gods are in and out of the story all the time. And what modernists with their preoccupation of what really happened and the processes are skewing the story in a particular way. Peterson is, these labels are always tricky, Peterson is in many ways, I mean, Peterson is an integrator. But he is still, when he keeps talking about, I'm approaching this psychologically, he's approaching it as a modernist in many ways. But Peterson has, in addition to that, the sensitivity and the awareness that modernity has its blind spots. And so, Peterson gets that from Jung. Peterson is more postmodern than a lot of, just like in a sense, Sally, with Sally's conversation, being a Protestant is nearly inevitable at this point, even for Catholics. Being a postmodern is nearly inevitable at this point, because once you recognize the validity of certain kinds of deconstruction, you have to account for it. And Lewis does that, and I think Peterson does that well. But now we add a historian into the mix. And so Tom Holland both needs to satisfy what really happened question, which is parallel to Peterson's satisfaction of this scientific psychological perspective. But like Peterson, Holland's unwillingness to just disregard the obvious omnipresence of what modernists call religion as an integral aspect of the story and the seeing of the story and the perception of the ancient world sort of makes him parallel to Peterson in that. And significant to Peterson is also Nietzsche, and Nietzsche was a classicist. Yes, yes. And also I found quite compelling. Yeah, and I think that's a very important point. Quite compelling. Yes, so, and as modernity is receding, and what happens when, let's use a metaphor of water filling up, you have the high water mark of modernity, and as it recedes, well guess what? A lot of stuff from previous paradigms, the ancient, the classical, the reformational, a lot of that stuff was covered up by modernity, but a lot of what was covered up are these communities that you and I have been a part of, that were in many ways, they were perhaps reformational, which is early modern-ish. The reformation is sort of this weird transition between the medieval and the modern, but it doesn't fully go into there. And now your story, Montanism, miracles, and then Charismatic Renewal, and your parents' story, and your experience with, I mean, you've right there got a hedge against modernity, and so then as it recedes, it's like, hey, guess what? We never actually went anywhere. We sort of got covered up, and people looked beyond us, and we sort of went into a closet with all of this stuff, but now that post-modernity is sort of exploding all the boxes, well, hey, guess what? We can play those same post-modern tricks right back at them, which in many ways is a lot of what Peterson, and to a degree, what Tom Holland is doing within a modernistic frame. So that's why, and while Peterson is often dealing with history, he's dealing with history as a psychologist. And there's this weird intermingling between psychology and philosophy. So philosophy is sort of like this mother of all disciplines. And so Peterson is very much in that realm, but he's not, and so he's using the discipline of the modern discipline of a social science. Holland is bringing in the modern discipline of a historian, and that is, Peterson wants to look at processes, psychological processes, and look through that window. Holland is looking through the modern window of processes that include much more than just sort of evolution of thought, which philosophy and psychology tend to have a bias towards. So that's why I think having more historians who can say, who would never get away with what Sam Harris tried to get away with Peterson when he says, well, just get rid of all the God talk. We can keep the music and the buildings. And Peterson's like, you can't be serious. You really can't be serious with a statement like that. I mean, that just, and of course, no historian would make that statement because the historian is not just looking at written texts that try to relay ideas. They are looking at the buildings, and they're looking at the wars, and they're looking at the political structures. And so they're integrating far more into their development of a process. So that's why we need more historians in the IDW, because, and then I listened to, so Brett Weinstein, you know, he's a biologist. And so I'm happy for the presence of a biologist. I learned a lot of stuff from him, but he's also really bad on history. And so he's not, you know, and so there's certain blind sides to, we've all got our blind sides. You can't help it. None of us can see the whole. So again, I find, you know, we seem to have journalists around like Douglas Murray. We've got, you know, an economist, physicist, mathematician like Eric Weinstein. We've got a biologist like Brett Weinstein. We've got a psychologist like Jordan Peterson, but where are the historians? And so to have Tom Holland sort of emerge completely innocent of this whole IDW thing, that to me says, oh, there's, IDW is a manifestation of a far larger historical thing that's going through, because Holland is not, Holland is not growing out of there. He's growing out of this. And of course, at the same time, you and I also with a little bit more understanding of, well, Kuiper, Doivre, Bovink, you know, you can't read Kuiper and Bovink and not see this wrestling with modernity. But of course in the, you know, a century ago, but they're wrestling with modernity still from, you know, in Kuiper's story, his, you know, he, you know, by at least part of the, how his story is often pitched to people within the Christian reform tradition on my side of the Atlantic, that, you know, he was deeply steeped in the modernistic, you know, training of ministry and theology, and then discovers the piety of a, you know, of some of the people in the rural area where he had to go for his first church, because generally speaking, your first church is often out in some hinterland where people like, and what that did for Kuiper was, well, now he couldn't just turn away from her faith. It was sort of like you and your miracles. Oh, okay. Tell me miracles don't happen again, please, because you're not gonna convince me of that. I've seen too much, and that's making your frame look very small. Yeah, and red, of course, because when I began reading the Tertullian and the Irenaeus, and like the, you know, the infamous chapter of Augustine, like book 22 chapter, chapter eight or so, then yeah, what are you going to do? Like they recorded this stuff. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. And you can just dismiss the ancient world and say, they're all liars or deluded. And it's like, you're the one that is making arguments from physicalism and empiricism. People are moved by miracles because they see them. Now, nowhere, and Christians have always known that we can see things wrong. It's not that we, I mean, all the way back in the gospels, well, Jesus does miracles because he works with the power of Beelzebub. I mean, people have never lacked for ways of discounting and discrediting the unusual and the miraculous. So that's not new. So yeah, that's, but suddenly the change in the world, the church of modernism is revealed to and exposed to be just like everything else, its own little church. And I know how to deal with little churches. I've been jumping in and out of little churches all my life. So little bubbles of knowledge of little communities that form around certain ideals and shared perspectives, that's nothing unusual if you've grown up in a religious tradition or had a tradition like you have in your life. Yeah, you see it and you begin to understand how these things work. And so modernists aren't so scary. They're just like all the little people in the tiny little conservative church who think they're the center of the world. It's like, okay, modernists, well, you've got a lot of power right now, but the way this world goes, it'll pass. It always does. And you don't scare me. Well, especially because I had a very smart, very smart modernist friend. One of my few friends of secondary education. And then just he turned over of course to the simulation. So it just wasn't of course the moment I was like, okay. That's right. Theism for atheists. The simulation theory. I don't believe in God, but there was a divine program. I won't call him, there was a programmer who programmed all this. Okay. What would an ancient call such a relationship? So, well, we should land the plane here, but Martin, this has been a delight. Yeah. And unless you got one other thing, I don't have to go this very moment, but I do have some other, a couple of commitments coming up down the road. Yeah, I think I will just have like, maybe just to skip over, do not have to go in depth over them. So I just have named them. I got to talk to Paul authentically and at least the three things that struck me most from his years of YouTube career. You know? Yeah. Yes. Now, one of them is of course, to just say one thing more about Peterson. One thing I found compelling was his, of course, well, his account of Genesis, but also the combination with like this dragon of chaos. And that was like, okay, I can now just almost project this line from Socrates to, well, I do not know if you can, I can throw in Augustine for good measure, but mostly Calvin and then Nietzsche and then Peterson, just this line of the dragon of chaos and especially the name Abyss and also the Latin term of Abyss. Like I've just went into the humanist side of Calvin for my studies and just, I just, am I reading Calvin or am I reading Peterson? Well, one or both. And also this overlap between Calvin, Nietzsche and Peterson. And that is also of course informed by all the things I've just heard you talk about through, well, throughout and your commentary on Peterson. So that was the thing I noticed. And the element of the Old Testament like Peterson is, well, this is not propaganda. Propaganda would look more, most difficult, more differently. And, oh yeah, Augustine, I mentioned, because he has this commentary on Psalm 41, I believe, deep cries out to the Abyss, cries out to the Abyss or something. Yeah, that's what, that was why I thought of that. Like, and he compares like both God and people as Abyss basically. So there's all this multiple layers of interpreting that term and also this idea of speaking into the void. Interesting. I'd never put those things together. That's really cool. Yeah, well, people are compression machinery basically. And if there's something I am, then I synthesize a lot. Like that is my scatterbrain. It's like I take all these elements from all over the place from antiquity to almost Asian anime and I combine it within my own framework basically. And yeah, what I want to say is like, yeah, music, like I've just listened to this band called Lord Huron and how they speak about the void. Like they have a void themed CD. And well, I'm just listening. Is Calvin speaking here? Is Peterson speaking here? Like am I bullshitting myself to put in another for vacay thing? Yeah. That was something that spoke to me. Of course, the God number one took on the God number two things and think lastly of all this discarded image that you, I saw a video on it from yours but I do not know if it's just recent or a little bit of a while ago. But I talked about it a while ago and I'm back on it now. So I just, in fact, I just yesterday I recorded a video where I read the epilogue of the discarded image because I'm working on, you know, Machu Pajos, the language of creation. And these books really, these two books really do go together because Pajos is trying to work through what Lewis was working through. So very interesting. Yeah. Also this, also because you mentioned this earlier like this appreciation of all models, like there's no model to rule them all. Also not the postmodern model. Yeah. So, yeah. And, oh yeah, I had one quote written down like nature gives most of her evidence in answer to the questions we ask her. I think that was somewhere in that. That's Lewis. That's Lewis. Yeah. And I had to think immediately about the story Right from here. Because Pajos also made a similar statement in one of his most recent videos. Yeah. We grabbed the facts to fit the model and like from what position are you actually speaking from like, what is your position? Yeah. The special thing. And this is the very last thing that I wanted to mention. I think that, yeah. Yeah. Rationality. To me, it is not something that we are, we are not rational, but it's more something, well, I think this is a platonic idea that we participate in or that we inhabit if we go to Johanine language, like stay in my logos, if you want, if you believe, like stay in my structure of reality. And that is something that is informing my current interest for study. Like I want to delve into Latinity, like Tom Holland mentioned Alquin, and then his, the person after him, deals on rationality and translates the ideas of reason, again, because the Greek tradition has been lost at this point in Europe and re-translates this idea of logos back into Latinity. That's something I want to do for my studies in the, well, in the time ahead, the development of this concept of ratio. Very cool. Wow, this is awesome. I think this is so exciting. Do you blog or what do you, I mean, what are you doing with all this stuff that you're churning out? I mean, you're throwing it at your professors, but are you sharing it with the world at home? I do not have a lot of, no, not yet, and I should perhaps, but I just not have had enough encouragement. Like I do not have many people around me that I can just throw words at basically, just recently, and this was what I also mentioned just recently, a year ago, I came across this very one-off person that was affiliated with the vineyard, like the only vineyard person in all of Risia, basically. That's not an understatement. And with him, I have been able to talk about these things a little bit, but. Oh, good. But not in the same category as with you, because you have a lot of, well, my interests and what you are talking about on your channel align mostly. So I really wanted to take this opportunity to just throw a lot of words at you also. So, but I know you're also keen on doing that. So I thought, wow, he can take it. He's from New Jersey, right? He can take a little bit of a juggling. Absolutely. This has been so much fun. And I know I do want to encourage you to, one of the greatest gifts that we've gotten in this has been people defined each other. And there are, I do want to encourage you to blog or to make videos and to work out some of this stuff in a way that other people can find it. Because I was, before I started making videos, I was a Lewis nerd and I was interested in things and sort of, I mean, it was Peterson that gave me the idea that I could talk about this on the internet and someone would listen. I didn't have any idea how many people would listen. I thought that there'd be, there's lots of channels out there with two, 300 people and the video might get 50 or a hundred views, but, and then they might get five or 10 or 15 comments, but it just helps people find each other. And because, iron sharpens iron. I mean, I really hadn't, it wasn't until you, when you started putting Socrates, Augustine, Calvin, Nietzsche, Peterson, I've done, how much Calvin is built into me that I don't know about. I mean, that's, I'm sure there's plenty that I'm unaware and I haven't been reading Calvin in all of this, but now you, I just wish, I do want to encourage you. I'm glad you're studying classics. I'm glad you're learning Latin and Greek. We have a Canadian Frisian girl on Amique who's been on the channel a couple of times. She's on the Discord server. She's studying classics now and she's learning Latin and really enjoying it. And, if I had to do it all, would I not study history? No, I'd still study history. There's way too much stuff out there to study and it's way, way too interesting. And I just don't have anywhere near enough time and people are also interesting to me. And so, that sort of comes together in my channel where, if it was just the books, that wouldn't hold my attention, but it's the people in the books and it's the new ideas and it's the integration with politics and with the now and with the church and with everything else. It's the integration of all things that interests me. And so, no, so I'd encourage you to find ways of not being alone in your fascination with this stuff. And even if hardly anybody reads it or listens to it, just get it out there because it's sort of like fishing. If people approach this stuff, if people fish like the way they approach this stuff, they'd never catch anything. They throw it in the water, they leave it for 10 seconds, they throw it outside, nothing happened, I'm off. And it's like, throw it in the water and leave it out there for a decade. And again, Jordan Peterson wrote Maps of Meaning in 1999. I mean, it sat for nearly 20 years until just everything was right for the explosion that happened. And so, Augustine was the Bishop of Hippo. He wasn't the Bishop of Rome, he was the Bishop of Hippo. And so, yeah, do your work and figure out ways to share it so that you can be found. And again, it might not be a big finding, but we can only talk to each other like one or two people at a time anyway. So that's all we need. So anyway, just wanna encourage you. Well, thank you. And yeah, keep up your studies, maybe get a PhD if that's what goes best. You never know, you never know with this stuff. And you're right to look at it and say, academia in classics right now, hardly a path to fame and fortune, but it's obviously a love of yours and a talent of yours. So keep at it, keep at it. And also keep, I appreciate your hunger for God and how that is integrated in all of this. So yeah, I do wanna encourage you. Yeah, thank you. And you know, later on like over in six months or so. Yeah, yeah, or at least by your next birthday. So I'm glad you're glad to Randall Slott and I'm glad I got a, you know, I love, because you know, part of the difficulty is I keep talking to the same people around me. And the people around me is like, well, why can't we have more conversations? It's like, well, we can, but I wanna keep, I wanna keep new people coming into the conversation and new people coming into the dialogue. So I will share this video with you and you can let me know if it's okay for me to share it or not, and then we'll take it from there. Yeah. Okay, Martin, well, you have, I don't know what time is it by you? Almost a quarter for 10 in the evening. Okay, so your day is about done. But so I hope that you have a pleasant rest this evening and may God bless you with your continued wanderings and journey in this. Yeah, thank you. All right, take care, Martin. Take care. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.