https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Nm7qk4pNpOg

 Thank you so much for joining us, Paul. Oh, it's my pleasure. This sounds like fun. Uh, I've been enjoying getting to know you a little more over the last few weeks. It was, it was interesting because first I noticed that Nolan had reached out to us and he then mentioned that he had also reached out to you and done a podcast with you and we released the video with Nolan, the first one around the same time you released your first video with Nolan. Now we've done two video or a video with Nolan and you've done two and Nolan's coming back on next week and then we had Mark on and then Mark went on your channel the same day. We're just going round and round and round. We've become a circuit. I know. So we said we got to talk to Paul as soon as possible. So well, I don't know. I've got a problem with me is I'm just always nosy. I've just kind of a ton of questions. So I, I know that there was the guy who had the channel and then you guys took it over and I'm just curious about that, but we don't have to talk about you guys. I mean, if you have any questions for me, I'm happy to answer them too. Yeah. Let's just explore the whole conversation. Mercury. Do you want to take a stab at that? So how this happened? Okay. Yeah. So I don't know, Paul, had you, uh, were you familiar with the channel back when Andrew ran it? I had seen three or four of his videos. I was, I was quite curious about it, but you know, I've, there's only so many videos you can watch. So I, I'd watched a few of his videos, but I hadn't paid close attention. I was, I too was fascinated by the whole experiment. And so for me, I came across the first one of his videos was his, uh, interview with Jordan Peterson. So I came across that and, um, at that point, I was much more cut off, much more still hermitish where I used, um, like I'd had internet for near years, but I didn't use YouTube, like social media. It was, I wasn't even subscribing to channels at that point beyond a couple, you know, like personal things. Um, but I got this inner voice. Like God told me to subscribe to Andrew and show him that bit of support. And, um, it came with sort of a, you're going to be doing things for Andrew. And I thought like, you know, how is it I'm going to help him? And it was just, don't worry, just subscribe for now. And then honestly, at first I didn't watch much of this stuff because he was doing a lot about diet and exercise and those just weren't things I was interested in. He had the occasional more philosophic stuff that I was interested in. But then one day I saw, um, he had magic in the title of one video with the K and I've been, um, yeah, I'm a magician magic with a K for me. That's closest to a label I'll take cause it's so varied anyway. Like it's, um, and just my angel told me, like, see, we told you, like, watch that, take a look at it. And Andrew had made the connection between Alan Moore's work and, um, Jordan Peterson's in that video. And I also had seen the connection between their works. And, um, so I was told by my angel, just, you know, reach out to Andrew, he's need someone to talk to about this. Um, and cause he spoke very little about the more esoteric stuff on this channel. And I thought I was going to actually, you know, we have our sub personalities. One of my sub personalities really hoped I wouldn't hear back from maybe all I have to do is send the message. But I heard back from him and he wanted to talk and we just hit it off and we started talking on a regular basis. And he was asking me a lot of advice about his channel as well. And, um, that just led to him wanting to have me on the channel. Um, and actually I saw Peterson speak live before I did my first podcast with Andrew. And I brought it up to Peterson and just wanted to make sure cause he gets a lot of shit for his fans. I offered that I would never bring up his name online if I did it. So it was not to discredit him, but maybe the go ahead. And I ended up doing a couple podcasts with Andrew that led to Ryan reaching out and saying he also wanted to talk to me. And, um, so I started talking privately with Ryan, a fair, you know, every so often ended a couple podcasts there. And then when Andrew is ready to give up the channel, um, it's just, he was tired of having his private life out in public. Yeah. He'd make good progress. And so like, I don't want to reveal his personal details, but progress in a lot of the things he was trying to. And he had about eight months before he gave us the channel. He'd tried a few times to just give the channel to me. And I just kept deflecting it and telling him to make sure he was sure. Um, but when he was finally certain he wanted to give over the channel, instead of trying to just give it to me, he reached out to both me and Ryan and asked us, he thought that we would make a good team to take over for him. And that's how we got started. And that was about two months ago. Okay. Okay. Well, that's really helpful. Thanks for that background. Yeah. I can understand, you know, cause when I saw his project start, I thought, see, as a pastor, you're, you're used to living with a persona because you have the persona of a pastor. You also have your private life. And so as a pastor, you get used to dealing with that. Now YouTube is even more intrusive and you have a channel then that takes off with thousands of people watching. That's especially if you're, you're, you're deciding you're going to be transparent and vulnerable about the, uh, less, um, the less Instagram ish places of your life over the long haul. I'm not, I'm not at all surprised. He said, you know, I, I need to step back and be a private citizen. That's very reasonable. I agree with that. Yeah. A hundred percent. And we've taken the channel in a little bit of a different direction. I mean, while we're still, we're definitely still including the vulnerability aspect. Um, but there's a little more of a helping others coming into it. So we're, we actually, you're the only other YouTuber we know of that does this, but having audience guests on, um, you know, I don't know anyone else who's doing that. And that's been a really powerful, rewarding thing. And, uh, I told Mercury yesterday, I was like, you know, there's kind of a pastoral aspect to what you're doing, Mercury. You're talking people through their problems. Um, you know, you and Paul share that in common. So we're, you know, we're really trying to do something that's for the good. We're trying, you know, we think that Pete, this whole movement around Peterson is generating a deeper discussion regardless of where you align in that discussion. And a lot of people who want to work on themselves intellectually, personally, psychologically, spiritually. And, um, so we're trying to blend, like sometimes I'll come on and say, Hey, I'm having a tough day. This is what I'm going through. Or other times I'll say, Hey, this is what I want to teach today. This is what I have to offer today. This is what I'm contemplating. And so far that's been a tricky balance, but a really rewarding one. Good, good. Yeah. When I, when we started the meetups here, one of the things that we've continued to wrestle with has been the, it's funny when, so before I did any of this stuff, I was, I'm a pastor, I worked in church planting, which is starting new churches, recruiting church planters. You always notice when you start a church, the church planter, the pastor of that new church, the church reflects that pastor, the strengths and the weaknesses. And when we started a meetup here, some of the people had been watching my videos. And so we spend a lot of time doing the kind of conversation that I do on my sort of monologue videos or commentary videos. But a number came into the group and said, you know, I'd really love this group to be a place that we can work on ourselves in this context. And I, I see that need. And of course, groups have been helpful for many people for that kind of thing, 12 step groups, you know, all sorts of different groups, because we do, we really do facilitate and process in community. I think that that's really the only way we can actually achieve permanent growth often. And so that's one of the things that our meetup, we haven't really worked out in terms of how, because the group very much got started more with the commentary, monologue, theoretical, intellectual conversation I do on my stuff, and we really haven't gotten done well with, okay, how are you doing this week? What do you need encouragement on? Where do you need to be checked or held account? What do you need to be held accountable to? That's, in my experience as a pastor, there needs to be a pretty strong, there needs to be a pretty strong relationship already established for those kinds of difficult conversations to really be stable and productive over a long term. Sustainability. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's so fast. It seems like something is just happening though. You know what I mean? Like the, like the fact that we're doing this audience guest thing and Nolan has been on, like, is that what's happening here? Is that community taking shape? Do you think? It's a totally new thing because this medium is new. And I do think what we're doing is really at the heart of what YouTube could be where even though, yes, it is a, we do have personas, it is an artificial environment. It has many of the weaknesses that other social media platforms have. People need to talk and especially for someone like Nolan, who obviously has limitations in terms of getting out and being with people, it makes perfect sense. So one of the things that, and I completely backed into this as on my channel, I mean, my whole channel was backing into in many ways. I never planned any of this, but the, I started having conversations, people began approaching me, writing me emails, wanting to talk, and I was doing a number of these things just offline. And I, these conversations, I thought were so, so, they were so good. And I thought so many other people could benefit from that. I began asking people, can we record these? Can we share these? And then that would gain momentum. And I could see in the comment section that some semblance of community was forming. And I found that with the conversational aspect that heightened it because obviously to see someone's face and to hear them speak gives you a much higher resolution view of the person. So it's, I backed into it, but it's been wonderful. Also with YouTube, the advantage you have here compared to like the way things would have been in the past for a pastor is that our brains respond to our screens the same way that they respond to people directly. And so when you watch a show on a regular basis, you respond to seeing those actors, the way you respond to seeing loved ones. And so the way people can watch you on a regular basis, the reaction they have just to your face after a certain amount of time is that, ah, it's an old friend. There's something far more personal here than you would imagine. You'd imagine the screen creates a distance, but as opposed to somebody reading the works of C.S. Lewis, while they'll get the words from him, they don't feel like they're meeting a friend when they see his book. So you've got an intimacy with anyone who's been watching your videos. There's an established intimacy there that allows you to connect in a way that you couldn't just through preaching. Yeah. Well, that's a similar thing that does happen in churches because preachers do share themselves in certain kind of preachers, share themselves with their sermons. And so again, one of the things that I noted as a pastor was that many of the things as a pastor I was used to in a church context really communicated quite well over to YouTube with some obviously obvious differences and disadvantages too, because there is in terms of us being face to face. If the three of us were in a room, and again, the resolution just, you know, now suddenly we have much better sense of each other and all of those things. Oh, so yeah, I meant you do have that with your regular congregation, but I meant in the past if you wanted to travel, you could go to a place, but it would just be your words. There wouldn't be that connection or if you were writing, it's the spreading the message beyond your church. Makes it much more personal in that farther reach than it would be if you were just writing or the ways they would have done it in the past. Oh, yes. Yes. And I do agree with everything you said about people needing community and then the conversation and dialogue to work out their thoughts. Although that is not true for me. That's one thing that like I've heard Peterson say as well. And for a lot of this shit, I'm the exception to the rule. And oh, just in case you don't know, like I'm bipolar and like very polar. And the way I've come to this is after my second cycle, I went off into isolation and I spent, I had two years of no phone, no internet, no vehicle. My parents dropped off my supplies and I was just a lunatic hermit. And I put myself together in isolation. And I still spend the vast amount or I spend a lot of time alone still. I am married, but my wife has lives on a farm just over there. And it's because I need my time alone. So it's almost like when a family split up and the kids spend some nights at dad's, except also mom spend some nights at dad's. But for me, I found, no, just get away from the world for a couple years, you'll find God, you'll notice your sub personalities in your own with any psychiatrist. You'll realize the importance of honesty. And I see the value of someone going off and just finding enlightenment or just going off and connecting to Christ, you know, in a cave and living simply, they don't need to teach. They don't need to anything for that to be good. I went off into isolation. And in fact, you know, earlier on when every personal revelation feels universal. I remember at one point thinking, Oh, I've solved it. Everyone just needs to spend one year alone. Everyone just needs to take one year instead of a college just in your early 20s, go off, spend one year alone and everything's going to be fine. But as I've reconnected, and I've learned more from Peterson and like what you were saying and observing others, I've realized no, most people go mad in isolation. So this is kind of like the snake pit where they used to think you lower an insane person into a snake pit. And what drives someone else insane will balance them. For me, the isolation balanced me. And also, I do realize with everyone else is a fair amount of persona to what you are on YouTube with me, not at all. And I have no plan whatsoever. And so far, every live stream, every conversation has been it's like stepping off a cliff. I haven't prepared for every anything I've always an early on like my first one with Andrew, after all this time alone, there's a lot of anxiety about going on with him. But I just cleared my mind trusted that the Holy Spirit had guided it this far. And then I would just know what to say. Everything for me is just reacting to the present moment, honestly, and trusting something good will come of this. You know, I liken it to Mercury's the shaman of the group who lives on the outskirts of society. So I think that that's an interesting metaphor. And I'm glad that you're self aware to think of it in a way that you know, you're the exception to the rule rather than the actual rule. Yeah, or what Pazzo would say in his wording, I live off on the edge of the map, or it says here there be dragons. Yeah, Pazzo might represent me with a dog head. Yeah. Yeah. But one of the things I wanted to bring up to Paul is I was watching your video this morning. And the one that was uploaded early on this morning. And one of the things that struck me is this guy has a voracious intellectual appetite. I that could be my own projection, but that's true. You have a huge intellectual appetite. And so what's so unique about this movement, though, and whatever it is that we're a part of what you're doing, what we're doing, I'm sorting myself out is we're meeting that middle zone between the intellect and the authentic human transformation or the personal growth. And your channel outlines that perfectly because you'll do an analysis of something, then you'll talk to an audience guest, and then you'll do another analysis. And you're striking this interesting balance. And I noticed that the listeners seem to appreciate that balance. They seem to, and maybe some come for the personal stuff, and some come for the intellectual stuff. But there's a lot that seem to be coming for that interesting meal that's being balanced perfectly on the plate. Yeah. Yeah. I when I started this, you know, again, it was something totally new for me. And then some of my friends who know me quite well, I explained what I was doing. And they said, Oh, you're just doing what you always do. You're just doing it on YouTube. And that's true. I've always I've always had a big appetite for intellectual material. My my monologue videos and my commentary videos, they're just all neat processing and thinking out loud. That's, that's all they are in many ways, and just deciding to share it. And if others find it helpful, that's great. I started this because, like many people, what I think one of the huge gifts that Jordan Peterson has given the world is that he somehow has created spaces for people to find each other, which is something the internet does well, but to find each other to talk about the kinds of things he talks about, which is very broad. And so then when I started the in person meetup, you know, I just put on meetup.com, you know, Jordan Peterson meetup, come and talk. And that's all we do. So it is for me, obviously, also as a pastor, a balance between the the face to face personal, the life of the intellectual, and and trying to make sense of the world and that, you know, my channel basically reflects that. Yeah, it's really, it really does. I mean, from an outsider's perspective, looking in on it, that's exactly what it looks like. So the other question I have is, do you see like you say you're just doing what you love to do, you're just you're just doing what you are doing. But do you have a mission? Do you have something? Is there an outcome for this YouTube thing that you're doing that you'd like to see happen? Or are you just simply following it wherever it goes? I'm mostly following it wherever it goes. As early on, so I, I had, as you observed, I do have a voracious intellect, and part of it, as a pastor is ongoing education. In about 2006, I did a similar deep dive into Tim Keller, because what I saw in Tim Keller was someone who was effective in their environment, who I could learn from. And so I spent five, six years listening to everything that Tim Keller was preaching, reading everything he would write, blogging about it, I didn't have a YouTube channel. And then in, in, in 2017, I discovered Jordan Peterson. And again, I saw someone, especially when I saw he was doing the biblical lectures, and the response he was getting it from, getting from it, I said, there's a ton I need to learn from this guy. So I just started going about what I had done with the Tim Keller search in terms of reading everything, listening to everything. But at some point, I said, there's something I need to learn from YouTube, because YouTube is is an essential part of the Jordan Peterson story. And so then I thought, well, I'll make a video, and I made a video. And I figured I'd get one or 200 subscribers, and, you know, five or 10 good conversation partners. And that would be cool. And I'll continue to just learn and do what I did. And that didn't happen. You know, the next Sunday, you know, my friend shows up at church with a poster and says, I've never been to church before in my life, but I saw your video. So here I am. And I started getting emails from people and requests for conversation. So now the calling in my life is that of a pastor. And when people come to me, and you know, people come to pastors for every reason you can imagine, I don't have enough money to pay my rent, I had a fight with my wife, my kid is going astray. I mean, all this stuff gets dumped on pastors. And so suddenly, I've got dozens of people coming to me, you know, every day, two, three, four or five emails from people telling me their story. And so then as a pastor, it's like, well, what do I do with this? Well, am I going to turn my back and say, No, because you don't live in Sacramento, or come into my sanctuary on Sunday morning, I'm not going to talk to you. That's an abdication of my calling. So I've got to talk to these people. So then the question is, how can I actually fit that into my responsibilities here at my local church? And so that's this is exactly what I've been doing. Okay, so with you, it's like you had rather than really planning out the YouTube channel, it's just that you have a relationship with God that guides your actions. So you were just always doing what you felt in the moment you were being called to do. And it has led to all this where you've sort of fallen ass backwards into something that you didn't expect. Exactly. He thought his YouTube channel is going to make him famous. Maybe he thought maps of meaning was going to I think he might have expected maps of meaning to change the world. Yeah. And then, but I think after the way his TVO appearances didn't amount to much, I think he had accepted a smaller life and was just doing what he felt in the moment. And I think Peterson fell into this thing. He might have envisioned it when he was younger, writing maps of meaning. But I think he fell ass backwards into his fame. And with me, this has come from just doing what I was asked to do. Like my angel tells me to reach out. Like basically I made a deal with God that I'm just going to live simply take care of myself. And if the universe wants anything for me, it will ask. So I don't have to go looking to do anything. If someone wants something from me, they will clearly ask me for it. And that's how I fell into doing this channel. Just so to jump into the shit that Peterson will always shy away from. Is there something metaphysical going on here in your opinion? Because I see with all three of us that we didn't plan this. It was a matter of paying attention to internal guidance. And now all of a sudden here I am talking to you and asking you what's going on metaphysically that Peterson doesn't want to discuss with anyone. Oh, and I was raised Catholic. I was an altar boy. I love Christianity. I've explored many other areas, but I love Christianity. And yeah, I'm happy to jump entirely into your framework for this answer. Well, I think you're exactly right. And so I actually did a crazy things have happened to me since I started this thing. A guy writes me from Australia and says, I want you to do a conference about Jordan Peterson here in Australia. And I was like, the idea just seemed preposterous to me. He said, No, you have you really have something important to say. So well, I'll figure out the finances. You just come. And I went there and thought, well, if he's a crazy guy who doesn't really have the finances, well, then I'll go to Australia and I'll rack up a bunch of credit card debt. But so be it. Let's give it a shot. But no, he was a wonderful man. And he was true to all of his promises. And we had a wonderful conference. So the video I posted earlier this week, basically walks that out. I think I think God is using Jordan Peterson to, to call back to himself, a whole bunch of people that have gotten lost. And, and now people when I say this, other pastors and other Christians say that they start complaining about what Jordan thinks and believes and I've not none of that matters to me. You know, what's between God and Jordan Peterson, God and Jordan Peterson will sort out okay, no, that matters to me. But the effect that is having is this and I need to learn from this. And then I also saw that well, when Jordan Peterson got on that status rocket, who on earth is going to be able to talk to him? And so I know perfectly well, people find me because I'm available. And I think I praise God for that. And then people like, well, you'll have a million subscribers someday. And part of me says, I never want to have a million subscribers because then I would have to sort people according to money or status or what I can get out of them, which is how you have to sort people if you have a flood of people coming to you. Yeah, probably the only one who really managed that right was Jesus, and I'm not Jesus. So you don't have to use those sorting methods. Let him sort it. If you get to a million, just ask the Holy Spirit for the guidance. That's right. Other metrics, you're uncomfortable. So let me make sure I'm getting this straight. All right, because we've got a shaman of the amateur dark web. We've got a pastor and we've got a pastor of the amateur dark web. It's pretty amazing. Is something happening here, Paul? Are we something forming here? I don't ask God to reveal his plans to me. I just ask for my daily bread and for him to tell me what to do next. You're about 20 steps ahead of me because I'm still asking for the whole map. Show me the outline. Come on. I'm right in vibe with you, Paul. I've given up on asking about long term or where it goes. You just listen to what God's telling you to do now. And if you're always doing the right thing now, you'll look back and see you did the right thing at every moment. If you're worrying about the past and thinking about what to do in the future, at the expense of now, you'll look back and realize you fucked it all up. I think therein lies some of the wisdom that comes from having more life experience. I'm still naive enough to want to see the whole map. Oh, we all want to. Yeah, that's not a mystery. Then the question is, what would I do if I did? Andy Crouch used to be editor of Christianity Today. He has a great article that he wrote years ago called A Reverse Testimony. You can find it if you Google it. Where he, like many people, he wanted to hear God's voice. He wanted to hear God direct him. And so there's a situation where, as it is with your 20 something, should he stay with this girl or should he follow her across the country, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. And he had never in his life heard God speak. And he was sitting there praying and then God said, no. He's like, no. And then it was like, then he heard it again, no. In other words, don't do it. And he did it anyway. And it's just a perfect example of how we are. And if God tells us, we may or may not believe anyway. Our problem is obedience and trust. Those are always our problems. So give you the map, not give you the map. It won't make a difference. Beautifully put. Also, if you've got the map, you might be disappointed and be like, well, fuck, I just read the last page of the mystery. Now what's the point of reading this whole book? Like, how much more exciting was it the way we met all by accident? How much fun is it to be talking to Paul when we didn't expect it? Exactly. You had the whole map laid out ahead of you. If somebody would have told me that I was going to be talking to Paul when I first saw your Peterson video, when you talked to Peterson, I don't know. How long ago was that? That was last April. That was a year ago. I saw that video and I felt completely detached. I had my own little YouTube channel or my own little podcast where I was doing my own thing on transformation. And I just felt like I was a hundred miles away from you guys, literally. And now we're on the same call. It's weird. It's a little bit surreal. Yeah, that's life. And this whole thing for me is surreal. It's beyond bizarre for me. But follow that lamb wherever he goes. That's what you do. That's amazing. And I find the one thing Peterson's offering us is I remember when I was younger noticing that if you control the media, everyone's watching the same shows, listening to the same music, going to the same movies, going to the same movies, seeing the same news, the way it was in the 80s where TV was on, you had to see what was playing. It's much easier to control a population. And of course, like me getting into punk was recognizing that and rebelling from all the brainwashing of it. But then you proceed to the postmodern era where you realize, but if everyone's listening to something different, everyone's watching something different, we can't communicate anymore. And you realize the power of our myths and our media and our shared stories. And then you look at something like a Star Trek convention, where you can take all these isolated people like many whom don't have great social skills, not to be overly stereotypical about it, but you can take them from all over the place, put them in this one building where everyone knows everyone loves Star Trek, and all that inability to connect. You have an excuse to walk around loving people because we all love Star Trek. And so when you go to these kind of conventions, the most different people, cops and criminals, can get along at a convention like that if they all love the same sports team or love the same movie. And Peterson is providing us that. But we're also we know that if you're into Peterson, you're also trying to be honest. You're aiming to make the world a better place. And so he's giving us that convention that we've all watched the same thing. And he's giving us an excuse to love each other, because we're afraid we're lonely, and we don't talk about our feelings. And we feel isolated. We're trying to work things out. And it's vulnerable and personal. And we are scared to do it. Peterson gives us that wait, you like Peterson too? Okay, I'm really lonely. And here's the problems I'm having. And oh, my god, you're listening. I really love you. And that's what he's allowing us to use that banner to gather people and give them permission to love each other, form a connection and aim at the good. And I think your point too about the shared media, the disintegration of the shared media with the multiplication of platforms forces us to the deeper myths beneath. And whereas before, it was sufficient for the three networks, or the book, or whatever to provide the layer upon which community could develop. Now because of the multiplication of platforms, we have to look for the myths beneath and can't just live on the more temporary ones on the surface. So I think that's a really great observation. And actually, let's launch from there because we may have viewers for this who aren't familiar with you. What's the most important thing you want to say to anyone coming across you for the first time? Like, what's the most important myth for you personally? What would you most like to share? Well, I'm a Christian pastor, obviously. And so I believe in the Mother of All Myths, which is in fact, you know, found in the Bible. And what interested me about Peterson was I saw someone who didn't necessarily identify as a Christian or with a particular Christian denomination or tribe recognizing the myth beneath the civilization. And so, you know, obviously as a Christian minister, I'm a servant of Jesus Christ. That's what I've made promises to do. And I intend to keep these promises, even though I do so poorly at times. But that to me is the myth beneath the stories that we are feeding off of. And what's the most powerful thing about because not everyone who says Christ means the same thing. Yeah, like Peterson points out, we all mean something different. And I don't get the vibe off you that you've ever made a billboard that starts with God hates people who might have the wrong impression of a Christian pastor. Sure. What do you feel is the most fundamental message of Christ? Christianity begins with the resurrection of Jesus Christ. And to me, what that resurrection means is, even though this world stacks up hierarchies where we see the wealthy and the beautiful and the brilliant, every single person that God makes is this image bearer. And each of us in the resurrection of Jesus Christ have hope and a promise to reign with him in a far in a united heaven and earth, which we will go further up further up and further in. And when we're there 10,000 years bright shining as the sun, we've no less days to sing God's praise than when we first begun. So to me, the heart of Christianity is the crucifixion and resurrection and living that out. That's that's that's the heart of the gospel. That's fantastic. And for you, the the connection of heaven and earth is not metaphorical at all. Like you're looking forward to the metaphysical alteration of reality with revelation, the reunion. Yes. Well, I one of the phrases that I was known for, at least around here is the age of decay. In other words, everything you build in this earth breaks down. Whether you build a corporation, it will become corrupted. Our bodies break down. Every love will end in betrayal or death. And what the hope of the resurrection says, Paul says in First Corinthians 15, Jesus was raised to a body that didn't that doesn't decay. In other words, through our resurrection, we will not decay. I was just thinking this morning, when another one of the things points that I make often is that if you ask your question, what a human being is, or what our soul is, in many ways, it's it's sort of our story. And I was thinking this morning, I just went to the eye doctor this morning just for a checkup. And you know, my eyes are fine. And I can get away most of the time without glasses. But that day will end. I mean, you go to every time you go to the doctor, the reason people avoid going to the doctor is it's a it's a reminder of the age of decay that, you know, next year or the year after the year after when I go, I'll be just this much less healthy and this much less healthy. Now, now there are things that I can do, I could sort myself out, I can eat better, I can exercise, I can do all of that. And I might just adjust that a little bit back. And I can at the age of 57, be healthier than I was at 55. You can do that. But you're not really destroying the arc. One day it catches up to you and it catches up to all of us. And there's something inside of us, the book of Ecclesiastes says, God placed eternity in our hearts. And I think we're we're haunted by that. And so CS Lewis made the point that we all have this desire for something that we've never seen and never known. And I see that fulfilled in the resurrection. And what I see the Bible saying is that is our promise. And so then that see part of the problem with in my videos, I talked about secularism a lot. Part of the problem with secularity is if you say if all I am is going to live to 80, 90 or 100 or 70 even 80, 90 or 100, what that means is now suddenly hierarchies develop. And I might say, why should I spend time talking to Ryan and Mercury? What will I get from them? It's it begins to reorient your life in a very selfish way. But if in fact, you know, the story of the Bible is true, well then, you know, really, the the new age begins now. And so I can talk to you guys and some would say, well, there's more important people, people of higher status, people that talk to someone who has a has a YouTube channel of 100,000. And then you'll get an extra you'll get an extra 1000 or 2000 subs from that. That's how you should orient your life. Well, if I do orient my life like that, well, what does that mean? It means that Ryan and Mercury and someone that I can't get anything out of for my little short time span, you've all taken a demotion. And what we wind up doing is using each other. And here's the irony about human beings, none of us want to be used, all of us want to be loved. And so what the gospel says is in the resurrection, I now have the time and permission and luxury to love people that won't get me anything or anywhere. And to me, when I see that and recognize that and then live that out, it's just beautiful. And that this using each other all the time. But to me, that framework even of talking to someone who won't get me anywhere is if we're thinking of the journey is just being this body. If you when you honestly believe that it continues, you're no longer living for this life. You're living for the sake of your eternal soul. And instead doing your now which doesn't bring you any money or glory or doesn't give you any earthly reward is perhaps taking you exactly where you need to go. It's taking you to that final shining city. And if your goal is your status here on earth, your bank account here on earth, what your eulogy sounds like, then you will use people because that seems to be taking you to the right eulogy. But if you're aiming for the shining city on the hill, the eulogy is the beginning of the real journey. And so you won't look at people that same way. Also, I find some people can go to spirituality and definitely match for a very selfish purposes. What you're trying to do is find the energies entities or God itself. And I mean, you can do totally Christian magic, but that you're trying to connect to them so that you can tell them what you want. And I found instead and at first it sounds like one of those way your finger things like don't go to God for what you want, go to God for what he wants. But it's not a way your finger thing. It's like try it. Go to God with instead of here's what I want to just take what do you want, because he's got such better ideas than that's right. A metaphor I'd used recently was like if we use ourselves as the metaphor for God the way we're created in his image and use the animal kingdom as the metaphor for humanity and our monkey bodies. Imagine if a chimp came up to a community, a wild chimp and behaved the way we wanted a chimp to behave. It was friendly. It did tricks. It didn't throw its shit at us. We would love that chimp. And if poachers came around, the village would protect them. It's like try doing what God and the angels want us to do and wait to see how they react to that. And it's not a way your finger do it because you should. It's like hey try it. Live by what God wants you to do for a few years and wait till you see how nice he is to this little chimp. I love that story. I'm gonna use that. See pastors are thieves. When we hear a story like that, it's like oh that's a good story. I'm gonna take that in the back of my mind and I'll write that into a sermon at some point. That's my gift to you for giving us your time today. I will probably use it. Steal anything you want. So I have a really interesting question for you, Paul. To me it's interesting at least. How do you reconcile the the intellect and the deeper intuitions you have about life and where do those things intersect and where do you where have you found it difficult to bridge and what advice would you give to others who are wrestling with the same issue? I think Ian McGilchrist has an interesting framework and Peterson has followed no Gilchrist in this in terms of the the now the right brain left brain are as much conceptual as they are literal here or probably more conceptual that you know the right brain is unexplored territory and the left brain is mapped territory and in many ways the intuitions are the unexplored territory. That's how the right brain speaks to the little conscious center that is you that that is your story that you're aware of and then the left brain tends to be the intellect. It wants to okay here's all this unexplored territory let's map it. One of the things that you know I've been not only following Peterson but paying a lot of attention to John Verbeke and his work because he's doing a lot of work on this salience stuff. And it's that salience stuff is a very interesting area. Now one of the things that I say often which is integral to this is that in Christianity the god of creation is the god of redemption which means that you know that little voice that goes off in your head that could be god talking. Sometimes it's just me being an idiot. Sometimes it's you know me you know my desires or my hungers and so you know I have to work on discerning these voices and figuring out what's me and so on and so forth. But god has built himself and this is I think the point actually of the Peterson Sam Harris if you you know pay attention to what Peterson was trying to lay out in those four talks and Sam just kept stonewalling him that god has built himself into this creation. And that's what I talk about in terms of god number one. And you can get this in the book of Isaiah where an angel shows up in the temple and cries holy holy holy that's the god of heaven that's the god who is way out there. The whole earth is full of his glory so that's god number one built into us built into this world and him we live and move and have our being. And so the intellect is very much trying to take this a world that is far larger than we can ever hope to map but taking strides to accurately map it in a productive way that can be helpful to me and helpful to others. And so that's that's constantly what I'm doing and Peterson I think has you know again really given us a gift because one of the things he notes is that what you have to do is kind of lean in towards so you have your mapped territory but you always have to lean in towards the territory that isn't mapped. Yeah you have to keep doing that and that will keep showing you new vistas new opportunities and actually make you useful to the people around you and those people will reward you with subscribing or you know supporting through Patreon or coming to your church or giving you great stories about chimps and communities what have you. So keep working that keep listening to that call of Abraham so that's how I see it. That's a great analysis of that question. It seems to me as well that one of the things that Peterson writes about a maps meaning is the the luciferian tendency for the intellect to fall in love with itself and how if the intellect isn't loyal to some sort of larger abstraction of being then it just falls into this perpetual self-serving nature. So what the work that you're doing the work that Peterson's doing a lot of great people out there that involves getting the intellect on board with these larger intuitions I think is just some of the most important work being done in the world right now. And to a rationalist to a pure rationalist it just doesn't make any sense because why would you do that? What's the point of doing that? Well the rationalist says at least the modernist style rationalist that we might find with someone like Sam Harris says I want to make sure that all of my ideas are mapped accurately onto this particular framework of reality and so the framework of reality then becomes the accountability structure that the mapping is tested against. Peterson comes along and says that's fine you know that's a noble goal and it's good but the kinds of information accessible to that framework are very limited in fact they're so limited we are all using far other many other frameworks to live and we need those frameworks and so if you kind of dismiss those other frameworks and say human beings live in a box like this you're actually lying because you're not really looking at the larger world and so again I think Peterson has been tremendously helpful in you know and again what he's done is he has taken this important observations things that Peterson is right have been embedded in the humanities for generations and it's been within the humanities that we've kind of been working on these areas outside Sam Harris's little box and Peterson is saying yeah but we've been corrupting that effort too and so Peterson I think has I think he deserves the attention and the praise and adoration that he's gotten in this because he's opened up the world again for a lot of people and now there are larger see as a Christian then you begin to say well you have this other frame you have this theological framework that you're also accountable to not just to the material world but also this other framework and you have to so you keep working it and you work until you die and it's continual yeah do you do you uh I got an image while you're saying that like some of the frameworks kind of decay and fall away and then you have to rebuild another one is that is that true yeah because we're always working you know for example theology even even though someone might say let's say you're a Protestant where so you say okay so you have the Bible and you focus on the Bible the Bible doesn't change but the world keeps changing and so and usually what you're working off are your own theological frameworks well it's the age of decay these theological frameworks break down and other things come in and so you you continually have to make new ones but then you have that balance where you need to continue to listen to the old otherwise you get you you live in the little box of the now which is also a distortion but you can't let the old be you have to figure out how to manage the old and the new and so you're always doing this work and Peterson is right and that the product of this are the decisions that you make you're very adaptable you're not you're not holding on rigidly to the past it sounds like you're you're taking what's useful from the past and you're adapting it to what's necessary in the present yeah and you're sometimes you're holding rigidly to things because sometimes you should hold rigidly to things sometimes you should hold them loosely and you're gonna have to figure that out and a lot of times you'll get stuff wrong but this is this is what life this is the task of life right i gotta ask you about answer to job why is god so messed up like why is he so mean in that story and i mean no offense in saying that to god but what's up with that what why the answer to job was young take on the book of job yeah yeah that's right i'm sorry and i got that impression from young that it's like is this is kind of the unfair nature of being and then peterson even mentioned that what do you think of first of all what do you think of young's take on it and then do you make any differentiation in your take i haven't read the whole book i've read parts of it and i've read some summaries of the book i part of what we are dealing with part of what happened after day cart was a turn towards the self and at the heart of modernity has been modern age tried to balance the self with the objective post-modernity loses you know the skeptical about the objective and all you have left is the self and i think we're discovering the self is a human being as the self is too small to build a world on god has a problem in that god can't help but be himself and human beings have a problem i think this is a this is a strong theme throughout the bible part of our problem is that we want to be god and it's i don't think it's unlike the the two-year-old or the teenager that comes to their parent and says you're mean to me you don't love me now some parents aren't good parents but if the parent is a good parent and does in fact love the child the good parent will listen to that accusation that they are unloved and just look at the child and think i've fed you i've clothed you i've protected you i've treated you well you're using this accusation as a way to manipulate me but for your own sake and because of who i am i'm not going to allow a two-year-old to manipulate me because if you leave the two-year-old and two-year-old in charge of the house everyone has to suffer so god is god and that's in a sense how the book of job ends job is job is job job is in many ways and what's part of the beauty of that book he's rightfully angry yes that's right kind of a trading places scene where you know these two guys are like the eddie murphy movie where they're you know they mess up dan acroyd and eddie murphy's lives for the sake of their little bet um and at the end of it god's point to job is um do you really want to take me on do do you really think you can do you really think you can decide and stand in judgment over me and job basically answers by saying i place my hand over my mouth but part of the beauty of the bible is that the bible has many books and so that answer in job is a great answer but that doesn't undo either abraham where god stands before abraham and takes abraham's advice and it doesn't undo jacob wrestling with god all of those things are none of them are in a vacuum that's right and they're all speaking and so you have to look at the whole picture you can't just take the book of job and look at carl young's analysis of that and say well therefore you know this is the way it is you have to look at the global gestalt of the whole yeah that's beautiful i like that yeah the same way that nobody could take one video that you've made ryan that would be a big mistake together a picture of what you're like that's right well we get that a lot on youtube too where you know you see one thing someone says and then you get to characterize their whole life story and we do it i do it all the time we're just we're just such judges you know yeah yeah well in society we're very encouraged to instantly have an opinion on everything um and i actually just noticed this recently how much even in myself as disconnected from society as i was how much i had this pressure to have an opinion on everything and i'd been thinking about it myself and it's funny to watch like jimmy kimmel's lie witness news where people were given an opinion on an absolute lie is how programmed we are to have an opinion and i'd been thinking about that for a few days and one day me and my wife were watching television and forgot what kind of dog it was but she said do you like that kind of dog and i noticed my brain was going to make up whether i liked it or not but i had no opinion and i decided to try and i just said i have no opinion on that and my wife let that go she just nodded like she's used to a lot of weirdness for me and so i thank her for reacting that way and i pointed out that i expect most people would say what do you mean you don't have an opinion on that dog look at it and formulate an opinion but why the fuck do we feel like we have to judge everything do you like this do you like that what do you think of the way they dress what do you think of this political opinion what do you think of this person why do we have to be judging everything can't we just we're so afraid of not knowing i think at least that's what dr stockin always tells me human beings are so afraid of not having answers yeah and that's what we were talking about with the map of me wanting to see the map and exactly and that's the blessing that lunacy gave me have a couple total psychotic breaks end up in a mental institution and you'll realize you don't know what the fuck's going on and you have to get used to i don't know that was like the blessing insanity gave me does it knock me the fuck down and all right no i don't know what's going on i'm going to be open-minded and just pay attention to what i can perceive but yeah we're very uncomfortable with i don't know and the problem is that's everything yeah yeah yeah no that's right that's right we know so we know so little yeah we really are it's just how we are we're so pretentious and and that's that's part of why i like the end of the book of job where you know god says uh where were you when i you know where were you when i cast the stars in the sky were you there were you telling me where they should go um oh a little a little center of the universe um you know and and that's why i think jordan peterson's admonition to clean your room is so is so apropos because it's like all right little little center of the universe why don't you first just start by you know keeping your own house in order but before you indulge us all in your pretense of managing our lives and you know as a as a pastor of a church you see that all the time the number one prayer request which is often unspoken is lord manage someone else's life the way i want it done and or lord manage the universe the way i think it should be managed right and god at this point looks at us as a two-year-old and says i love you but you're too right yeah well it's so interesting about prayer i i got sober through 12 step programs a bit um and you're probably well aware that that involves making contact with a higher power and there's a lot of christian influence on the origin of alcoholics anonymous and so forth but one of the things i learned in my sobriety that i still hold dearly is when you pray i'll speak in an i statement instead but when i pray i also need to listen like i can't just like throw out all these statements all the time like give it this that that this and then i like cover my ears and walk away i never i never bother to like listen for an answer and i think that's why peterson's teaching about go sit on your bed and ask a question and if you just listen and answer will miraculously appear and he says it doesn't really matter if it comes from somewhere inside of you or if you want to think of it as god because something's happening there something's coming back and i've found that with prayer that um even i might get an answer if i'm asking the wrong question like i'll get that feeling like no you're asking the wrong question ask it this way and then like i can change the way i'm asking that or i can i can ask for something different and it's just like if we can learn to have a conversation with whatever the spirit is or whatever god is or whatever the angels are then i feel like we're constantly in that hegelian dialectic where we where we say something then it says something then we reach a synthesis and we continue to build on that process but if we don't do that we're stultifying ourselves and then we're complaining oh i didn't get an answer you know i didn't get this i didn't get that it's just such an it just seems to be such an archaic way to relate to prayer and prayer is such an underrated form of what you would call it a form of meditation or a form of spiritual practice it's it's so underappreciated the power of it in my life at least has just been profound and i don't even use it enough i should be kicking myself it's like i know how powerful it is for me and then why am i not doing it all the time john calvin says prayer is our chief work which is humbling as a pastor because i look at how much time i spend fretting over you know whatever it is i'm worrying about managing instead of just instead of beginning with prayer that's a that's a constant it's a constant issue for myself and for many christians yeah and in from a psychological lens and a petersonian lens at the very minimum you're developing the right attitude to life through prayer like you know how peterson likes to look at things from a pragmatist perspective a lot at the very minimum that's what you're doing and then like we could get into all sorts of metaphysical speculations about that one of the things you talked to mark about when you had him on the same day we did is how mercury was talking about how peterson walks right up to the edge of the metaphysical and then turns around and i think maybe as a wrap-up question i'm wondering like what why do you think he does that first of all is it a status thing and would you like to see him or what is there any way that you'd like to see him improve on that like as a as a fan as a listener as somebody who likes his work is there something that you see in that or do you think he's doing his work just the right way he should be doing well every time peterson prefaces his comments about the bible or theology with he's speaking he's speaking about this psychologically what he is signaling is is what i call a form of natural theology he is he is trying to map out he's trying to do science and that's a legitimate endeavor and he also better than most appreciates the limits of science and so what he's trying to do especially when he was talking to david nasser in some of those conversations at liberty university he's looking for the edges of science and you'll hear him use that use that language again and again that he'll you know he's he's reaching the edges of what he can know and that's exactly right there are ed there are limits to what we can the knowledge we establish and demonstrate with those tools i think he also has an interesting he also has an interesting habit of and this is this is pretty typical for a modernist framework an interesting habit of saying that the what goes beyond that is private which okay you know you can you can do that that's legitimate you know this fact we started this conversation talking about you know not everyone should be on youtube exposing everything to live as the truman show is not something i would recommend to the vast majority of people i think i i have hope you know we saw some teasers of his conversation with bishop barron i think i think i think in many ways jordan peterson is the truman show and many many people are watching him and wondering how's this going to end is he going to is he you know where's he going what's so interesting is that we're so interested in okay so you got all the science stuff but what's beyond it jordan you know what do you really believe in terms of the unification of heaven and earth what do you really believe in terms of the resurrection what do you really believe in terms of god why are we so curious about this it's and i i'm i'm there with the rest of us watching the truman show watching the jordan show and saying okay but i i don't need to you know i have what he has offered us through his youtube through his writing through just how he's interacted in the world has given me a huge gift jordan peterson does not owe me anything and so i this is god's world and jordan and god you know god will deal with jordan jordan will deal with god as they will it's just fun watching and to whatever degree i get to play a role in it i'm happy so you said a great example of humility i love that and um i have one thing i'd like to wrap up on um so everything ryan said about prayer is fantastic and i do think the most important part of prayer for the average person and for the majority of the time is the listening side of it um but there's also that other side to prayer that i was even sort of denigrating earlier um the asking for and the metaphysical magical side of it um as a pastor uh do you believe in that ability like for prayer to actually manifest something um so in other words do you have any superpowers with that and if you do i would love to finish on a prayer um but always be very careful when we're asking i would love to finish if you would do a prayer that we are guided properly the three of us that we recognize the importance of what's going on right now and that the three of us are asking for guidance um so that we can do his will rather than ours and that we are able to hear him clearly i i very much believe that god answers prayer and the world changes because of it i have seen way too much as a pastor and before that a missionary in a different culture i the the the assertion the assertion that that's just a bunch of who your projection i've seen way too much to believe that just it's just as silly to me so i i do believe i do believe god answers our prayer but again so you have abraham you know you have abraham you know uh bidding god down in terms of how many people he needs to save sodom and job you've got both of those visions and so our prayers never bind god but just as jesus said our prayers we jesus taught us to call jesus is alone in to call god father he teaches us to call god father and to and to understand that he on one hand he's our wise father and so when we ask for stupid stuff uh he's like you know a wise father to a teenager asking for stupid stupid stuff it's like no no on the other hand he's a gracious father and and sometimes we'll ask for stupid stupid stuff and god will say okay what'd you ask for but i um i very much believe that god hears us and in god's wisdom and and everything that he knows he answers our prayers in the best way um in the best way that that can be answered so and i'd be happy to i'm always happy to pray with people so yeah we'd love to um close it up with that if you're open to it and i don't is there any such thing as adopting a pastor or a pastor can i be my pastor too can i i've already adopted mercury can i adopt you as well absolutely i can be your pastor not a problem someone said in the comment section is the pastor of the internet it's like oh first they put me with the intellectual dark web now the pastor of the whole internet oh heavens but i'll happily pray for the three of us all right fantastic lord i thank you so much for this opportunity it's been such a joy to talk to ryan and mercury and i've i've been you know i deeply appreciated hearing a bit of their stories um both the the stories of the stories of becoming sober and and the stories of of of mercury dealing with his bipolar and lord you are great and we are small and you are kind and generous and we are selfish and so i pray lord that you would guide our paths and guide our steps and uh when we're being idiots um you know grab our coats and and when we're when we're doing something good um you know give us an attaboy and i pray lord that through this whole jordan peterson thing that that many men and women and families and businesses and countries and societies would find life and joy and healing and wisdom and lord i believe in the restoration of heaven and earth and i believe that the end of the this this chapter in human history will be a good one and so i pray lord that you would give us your spirit that you would give us a taste of your joy that you would give us hearts of obedience and that you would make all things new so hear my prayer in the name of jesus amen amen thank you very much um thank you guys catch so i'm gonna have to hop off all right no problem thank you both so much paul it's just such a pleasure meeting you you're you're uh you're a hidden gem actually not so hidden anymore but um thank you yeah thanks paul i love you this was fantastic and anytime you want to talk again we're always here awesome thank you much see you bye bye bye