https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=clXHiVTcOYs

 In your circles, Paul, do folks talk about Rekour's concept of the second naivete? No. Have you heard of this concept? No. Might be worth looking into. He sort of talks about, like, you have a naivete as a child, right? And then you spend much of your childhood blowing up that naivete that you had inherited, I guess. Yeah. And then you have to kind of put it all back together again. And now, I'm no Rekour specialist, but the phrase has always stuck with me because I find myself in that sort of situation, right? Especially being on the other side of modernity and modernism. And I know that modernism means a bunch of different things in a couple of different contexts. And that's probably important to maintain those distinctions. But modernism, of course, in the church tradition is pretty clear. And on the other side of modernism now, it's done its thing. It's wrecked everything, right? And so the version of this in Catholic circles, and I don't know if this happens in Protestant circles, but you go on the Sunday in which they're talking about the miracle of the loaves and the fishes or the feeding of the 5,000. And invariably, you're going to get some version of like, well, well, kids, you know, the real miracle is a miracle of sharing, right? And I'm just not original me. Other people have talked and joked about that. And it's like in the movie Millions. It's right there. Right. Right. And it's so dumb. And yet, you know, that just kind of, you know, and this is what I'm going to get snide about, you know, okay, boomer, right. And, you know, but that's so done. Like the fruit of that church is death. Like it doesn't exist anymore. Right. And so that's why I'm, as this sort of weird Gen Xer, I've inherited modernity, right? See, I haven't inherited tradition in the same way because I'm purely postconciliar. And I've inherited a heap of ashes. You know, so what am I supposed to give to my kids? Like I'm not going to give, you know, to my kids, well, the real miracle is one of sharing. You know, it's like, no, because that's not true. Like that, like me bleeding on the page is like, you know, it's not making sense to me. And part of it is anger, Paul. I mean, I'm angry that, I mean, look at, if you look at my journey that I've been through, I don't really get too much into it because I didn't want to bore the readers. But, you know, I'm a product of Catholic education all the way, you know, through high school and eventually in college again, but high school. And like, I knew nothing. I knew absolutely nothing. You know, not only was it true that I basically didn't know scripture, but I didn't even know any, there was no catechism. You know, it was basically Jesus loves you, which is like, you know, I'm not going to lie. But it was basically Jesus loves you, which is good, right? But like, that's it. It was MTD. Through and through, before it had a title, it was MTD. And so any knowledge that I have of my inheritance is I've scrounged for it on my own, you know, in the libraries and in the nooks and crannies of, you know, And so you've got a completely drained out intellectual inheritance. And if you're liturgically minded, you know, if you've ever seen a modern mass and a traditional mass, it's like, is this the same? How can this be the same church? Right. And that's the kind of thing that I avoided thinking about for years and years and years like, yeah, fine. My local suburban parish is a clown show dumpster fire, but at least the church has got like the thing and I can look at documents and it could be weird and all of that. And now like you're like, wait, it's all a clown show. It's all, you know. Wow. Wow. Wow. That's going to be a clip.