https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=syGr3-tzLRE

 Looks like I'm live now. This is a new experiment that Rick wanted me to try. Rick said, oh, we should do more live streams because we did the live streams last week on YouTube. I don't even know for sure if this thing is going out there. I should probably check it. I'd have to figure out how to check that in OBS. If someone's actually watching this, put something in the chat so I know that it's actually going out. I guess I can check the YouTube channel itself. I'm using OBS today and we usually use Vimex to do our live streams. So content live. Yeah, we are live. Are we live though? I can't really tell. Let's see. YouTube. Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's working. I can check the YouTube channel itself. All right. Well, let's give this a try then. I was watching the Clay Rutledge video and I actually thought this was quite a good one. Obviously, everybody's tastes varies in terms of what they like and what they don't like. So this one was much more up my alley than a bunch of the other ones that he's been doing. All right, I'm going to turn this on. We'll see if the audio goes through. If it doesn't let me know. Which is people tend to be nostalgic when they're around others. You get together with family members and you talk about memories, especially in the context of loss. You go to a funeral or what do you do? You're sad, of course, but then you talk about memories you shared with that person. And oftentimes people are laughing and trying to honor that person's life, but also trying to connect over the meaningful memories you had together. So a lot of this tells me. Now, part of what's gone on in this conversation is Rutledge and Peterson have sort of been comparing notes. And Rutledge has been on Paul and Leitner's podcast before. And Rutledge has done a lot of work in recognizing that when people give up religion, they don't. Basically, stay away from what I call upper register ideas. They start, in fact, people who give up on religion believe in higher rates and things like astrology and aliens and a bunch of, let's say, folk, contemporary folk science fiction mythologies. I don't mean mythologies pejoratively compared to people who, let's say, have a religion. It's it's like the religious people's upper register is filled with the religious symbolism and ideas. And when people give that up, other things come in to fill the register. Peterson's been making a lot of points about when people give up on religion, what happens is that politics sort of slides up to fill that register. Then now at this point in the conversation, Rutledge is talking about nostalgia and nostalgia is basically built on a common memory. It reminds you of your affiliation with those other people, too, which would be a great thing to have happen when you're experiencing a significant loss. Yeah, absolutely. So I do think that, you know, Peterson, there's talking there, they were earlier in the video talking about loss and emotions and how a lot of these things are basically compensatory for people. People buffer loss, people buffer pain with meaning. And especially in this area of nostalgia, I, as a Christian minister, often do funerals. Funerals can be. Nostalgia isn't exactly the word for what you want to hit when you're doing a funeral. You definitely want to hit collective memory. People definitely look at look for shared memories. If you have people come up and eulogize, people come up and eulogize the person who has died. They're going over memory and they're going over things that are sort of like nostalgia. Nostalgia sort of has a negative connotation in our context, but it's it's tremendously powerful and it's tremendously necessary. There's the there's some more research to do in that area. And like I said, we're just kind of getting started into how to act. How do people actually share nostalgia and might it serve even beyond the individual and beyond like the more interpersonal relationships? We're also interested in nostalgia at the cultural level because there are there are ways that we might pass down traditions and rituals intergenerationally that connect. So I might have a lot of things that are different in my life and the experiences I've had at the time period in which I grew up than somebody 20, 30, 40 years older than me. But to the extent that there are things that are passed down in the family or in the community that can connect me to that person, that might help with intergenerational community life. Or with social cohesion period. Right, absolutely. If we're strangers to one another and then we can identify elements of our past experiences that we share, maybe like shared love of a particular band or something like that, then we're identifying areas of commonality and perhaps decreasing our distrust of one another. I mean, Robert Putnam has demonstrated that, you know, communities tend to be more generous politically when they view those in the community as importantly similar to them. And so you can imagine that going through the search for a shared past and identifying commonalities might be also a way of generating a shared history across time as part of what unifies people together. And I would say that this is a big part of nationalism. The same kinds of things that bond a family together with stories about dad and mom are not dissimilar to what bonds a nation together in terms of a shared story or a shared mythology about their past. I'm again, I'm this is I sort of put myself in commentary mode when I did this, and I usually record this and post it. And I had about what time is it now? I had about 45 minutes to play with. And so I thought, well, I'll just see if I can I'll just see if I can live stream this because I thought about sitting down and and doing a little bit of commentary. So I can see the chat room and I'm all by myself. I don't have Rick here sort of vetting things for me. So if you do have a question while I'm talking or you want to interact, go ahead and put something in the chat room and hopefully I won't be too distracted by the chat room that I can't think and read and do all of these things at once. So again, this this point that Peterson and Rutledge are making, I think is vital because I think it gets to the. The way that mythos and shared story create community among us and mobilize us to, in fact, be able to work together and be together. Productively. Yeah, absolutely. So this is what we call collective nostalgia, what you just articulated, which is I might, you know, I might have never met somebody who lives across the country. But to the extent that, you know, that we have as Americans that there is something that we've that that we identify with, like even music, like you said, or or or a movie. If you remember when I don't think they were particularly good movies, but when the new Star Wars movies came out, people were really excited about them because there was, you know, there was this collective nostalgia of we all remember. When we were watching the original Star Wars movies, and that was kind of like a quintessential late 70s, early 1980s American thing to do that we could bond over. And yeah, it's part of it's part of experiencing a shared myth. It's not trivial. I mean, it's true in one sense, but it's not trivial at all in another. I mean, we don't exactly know what it is that bonds people together in a community, family, a community, a nation, any of those things. And the idea that it's shared positive memories is, well, that's got to be part of it. Yeah, yeah, I actually talked to a screenwriter. I'm seeing some questions there that don't have anything to do with this video, which is, which is interesting for me. So my take on the prayer and poem, those those two questions are actually going to be pretty good for tomorrow's question and answer. So tomorrow's question and answer is going to be on the Discord as usual, but I told Rick he can cut and paste questions in from the live stream too. Just very briefly on the prayer and poem. I think he's rolling out a series. I mean, the two videos that he released on two days had similar backgrounds. One obviously was was the prayer, which was sort of a prayer. I could do a little theological. Conta do a little theological exploration of that prayer. But then the second comment, the second video was definitely of a much more political nature. So I'm kind of head. I'm kind of waiting to assess those until I see more. Content coming through get a little bit more perspective it because these are not the kinds of videos he usually puts out. So that's my question of that. Holy Spirit, God number two. Holy Spirit is both God number one and God number two. God number one and God number two are agent arena, transcendent, imminent, general, special. So the the God number one and God number two do not map onto the Trinity in terms of three persons. All three persons are God number one and God number two. So that's just a quick answer to that. Every time we acknowledge how important narrative or story is to our sense making definitely true. We take just a little more shine off the story. That's true too. So if you can't make it through Ian McGill, Chris's big book, not bigger than his other books, the master in the emissary. He does have an essay where he basically makes exactly that point rod where he's going to be the master in the emissary. He says every time we explain something. And I think I would say every time we explain something, we sort of bring it down to the lower register and this sort of gets into that. Um, sort of gets into that Jonathan Sachs clip that I played in a recent video where Jonathan Sachs talked about the Greeks as taking things apart and the Hebrews as pulling things together. The Greeks explain how things work. The Hebrews explain what they mean. So I think that's I think that's quite true. Or the rings movies. We saw a lot of what he's discussing. Yeah, that's true. Stories are stories are powerful, but when when they become just a story, they become less. So shoot, it was, you know, this was, this was part of what was in the Peterson Pinker conversation. When Steven Pinker made a point about things not being real, meaning things not being physical, they got demoted. I did a conversation today with Greg Henriquez where we talked about some of these issues. That'll be quite an interesting conversation when I post it next week for a lot of you. Sort of has a big twist in the middle of it. For Jordan Peterson is a prayer. Thank you. Your voice. It's like an instead of dropping acid, Terrence McKenna got saved and became a pastor. That's funny. That's funny. I'm still not quite sure what to do with these live streams. If I should, you know, Friday, I'll Friday tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. I'll be on the phone with the We'll have our usual Bridges of Meaning discourse. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the audience. I'll be on the phone with the automated most secure example of video clip streaming. I'll be on my divided and cuttlery and I'll be on the phone with the suits and I'll be on the phone with the pretty clothes, last night with the pretty suits and I'll be on sort of a watching together. You know, to do this right, I'd have to stream it. What I did right now was sort of, well, I've got a few minutes, let me jump into the computer and see if it goes. The video that I dropped this morning where I did some commentary on Griswold Grimm's commentary on me, you know, it really was about metacognition. And part of what I'm playing with with YouTube for is in fact, looking for different ways of, different ways of learning. That's sort of a standard way of saying it. Different ways of connecting our minds as it were to think together. Now people in a committee always do that. People in a church council do that. Because you've got a question that you need answered. Okay, give me the question. So back to collective nostalgia. Yeah, this is the thing. I'm gonna have to have a little, go ahead, Phlebas and put the question in there. I'll keep going with more collective nostalgia. A while back about this, and he made an interesting point. He was talking about how, because we have the way with the internet and with all these different entertainment options we have now, you know, his argument was, we might be losing some of the shared media, shared entertainment. Now people talk about this when they talk about news all the time. They say, oh, people consume different news. But to the extent that he was making even the point that we have all these like dedicated children's programs where he was talking about when he was a kid. Now, before we get to the children's programs, you know, he just kind of slipped in that comment about news. That comment about news is really critical because especially during the Trump campaign, we began to get this whole thing of, well, we've got two sets of facts. There's only one set of facts. When that broke on the national scale, we were getting into what I see as the end of modernity because what modernity was able to do is sort of get everyone on one set of facts. So modernity arises when there's a sense that the problem with this chat is I get distracted. Modernity happens when they wanted to get the story verse and the matter verse resynced. And I think a lot of what happened in the Protestant Reformation, in the Counter-Reformation, in the Enlightenment, in the Scientific Revolution was an attempt to try to resync the matter verse and the story verse. As modernity keeps going, I think the people who attempted to wield the matter verse sort of overreached and again got it disconnected with the story verse, plus the fact that what we lose is the connection to the subject. So when during the Trump campaign, you had different sets of facts, different news, a lot of this is due to different news. People are looking at same events, sometimes with two different perspectives. You cannot tell an event or select an event without interpretation. So this is a lot of what we're talking about here. And it's not just in terms of news. It's, as Rutledge was saying, a lot of the kinds of things that you're mentioning here. Did he had to watch whatever his dad was watching? And so his dad would introduce him to Western movies or whatever, and the whole family would watch the same thing. And so you had this shared cultural artistic experience that connected you. But now he's like, you know, you might, the kids might be in the back seat of the car, each with their own screens watching totally separate things and you're listening to your own thing. And the whole family isn't crowded around the TV together when one room sharing the same experiences. And so we might have very, very individualistic, very tailored media experiences that make it harder to have those socially connecting entertainment. Yeah, well, it makes it harder to communicate too, because to communicate with anyone, you have to mostly share their experience and then talk about a little bit of variation. I mean, if you're totally opaque to one another in terms of what you've experienced, there's so much to talk about that you can't even gain a toehold. And you do wonder if this incredible explosion of entertainment options, let's say, but it's far more than that. It's cultural options does produce, well, perhaps does heighten the probability of the kind of fragmentation that we seem to be experiencing right now. Yeah, well, that might be why every, so every now and then something's popular enough to where like, not everyone, but a decent chunk of people rally around it and becomes the thing everyone's talking about. So like Game of Thrones, that might be an example, where there's some kind of pro- I didn't watch Game of Thrones. Program that is either so well executed or it just delivers the goods in whatever way, whether it's a movie or television show, where enough, it becomes a cultural phenomenon. But a lot of the times it's not that, especially, I don't know if you watch like streaming, like Netflix or things like that, but like you can now kind of, you don't- I don't think Jordan takes time to watch TV, not much. My sense is he's, it's basically what his wife said, he's tremendously regimented, but he does certainly try to keep his eye on cultural factors. So as I said before, I just had a few minutes to do this and I wanted to see if it would work. And now I know it would work. So I got a couple of questions in here. And again, we're doing questions and answers tomorrow morning at 10 o'clock on the channel and on the Discord server. Okay, see I can scroll this a little bit. People on the internet these days seem very excited to cancel theologians who are also slaveholders. The other day you mentioned John Howard Yoder, yep, also Ravi Zacharias, yep, what do you do with them? Is there, is the product of their work completely contaminated by their hypocrisy? Do we not drive cars because of who Ford was? Do we care about the political statements of the Wright brothers? Do we care about the gender and race of Westinghouse when we turn on a light? I think we have to have a little maturity about that. What do your wife and your kids think of your passion for thinking and learning all of this? They know I enjoy it. It adds a little bit of income to the household and wife always likes that. Kids, I think I make them nervous. I think I make them nervous that they're going to have to live with a father who's a little bit famous and so they try to steer their friends away from this. And every now and then, people in my children's circles will bump into me online and say, is that your father? Turn it off. Don't let them, yeah, he's my father. He's kind of crazy so don't worry about the man behind the curtain. So yeah, you always have that. You always have that in the family. And my kids are all different individuals too so they'll have different thoughts on all of this. It's Jordan Peterson watches The Simpsons at 2x speed. Hey, Grizz. Yeah. Yeah, Luke's here too. So I've got to go home, eat dinner and I have a council meeting tonight. So I did want to jump on and try this. And so this is an experiment and the video did work and I can see the chats and I know that if I read them, I'll get distracted and thinking about how to do this and stay on message. I watch Adam Frended and Sitch do this and they're pretty good at it. I think it helps when you have two people in the stream. Another idea I had for this kind of thing, they should be nervous since their dad is a pastor. It's complicated in real life. Another idea that I had for doing live streams like this was to maybe do some comment on a video with a guest and that could be done. I know Rick could quite easily do that with V-Mix because one of the things that we've developed at church here is a fair amount of capacity for V-Mix. So for example, the Friday question and answers are a little bit more complex than they need to be partly because Rick has built in a lot of capacity that we're not actually using. Thank you Irving. Yeah, this is very much a beta test. So experiment is a success, I like this. Well, thank you Eric. Has anyone done the token dislike yet? Ha ha ha ha, where's my nemesis? My nemesis has to give me a thumbs down. No, don't give me the thumbs down. You gotta, Rick is very, Rick wants me to succeed. Rick wants me to succeed in some ways more than I do. I'm a little nervous about success. I was nervous when the channel got above 2000 people. So Jordan Peterson watches the classic movies from Stanley Kubrick to Walt Disney, that's true. I dislike all of Paul's videos right away, helps me focus. So you're my nemesis Luke, what about that? Yes indeed. So any other brilliant things anybody wants to say in the comments before I turn off this experiment? I think part of what's difficult about these live streams too, I helped my sister do one. My sister has a YouTube channel where she does home decor and some of those things like that. Quite different from my channel. She's not, you can't find it on Vander Clay. Her name is Anne Clay, but it's not really her name. It's the name she goes by on the internet. But greetings from West Australia. Nice to watch while having my coffee. Well, thank you, Janet. I know my friend Warren made contact with Janet and speaks very highly of you Janet said he really enjoyed his interactions with you. So thanks for that. I sent a like out of guilt that I listened to the podcast, not the YouTube, well, thanks. A lot of people don't recognize the podcast continues to grow too. The podcast version of this is about a third the size of the YouTube version. Podcasting doesn't have as much analytics as I get from the YouTube channel. So primary houses to hope that's right. That's who she is. Appreciate these later in the evening live streams. It depends where you are. I hope you do more of these. Well, I'm thinking about it. Now that I know I can do it, most of the time I'm all by myself here in this building and Rick comes in on Friday morning and we do the question and answer together. So part of what I decided to do when I started this experiment in YouTube was this is just a corner in my office. And I wanted to set up a tiny little studio to have everything set up so that when I have an idea for a video, I can sit down, I can do it, I can post it and I'm done because I knew if I edited video, you would receive no videos. So I'm not saying that I can't edit video. It's just I don't want to edit video. So now I'm behind reading your comments. See, this is the problem with a comment thread is that I want to read them all. I'm used to Paul at 1.5X. He sounds mentally handicapped at normal speed. Well, thank you, Luke. Ha ha ha ha. That's a nice warm sloppy kiss of love by my friend Luke right there. David Bentley Hart. I quite consciously avoid doing dialogues with high status people. Maybe it's insecurity. With David Bentley Hart, if he and I were gonna talk about something, I would have to read his book first. I just would because otherwise, you're not only at a disadvantage with your guests, you're at a disadvantage with the audience because the entire book is out there in terms of public knowledge. So if I haven't established that I'll talk to just about anybody, you haven't been paying attention. So yeah, I'd be happy to talk to David Bentley Hart, but I'd want to read his book first. He's like NT Wright. He just writes so much that it's sort of hard. You feel like you're dipping your toe in an ocean when you're dealing with David Bentley Hart. I want examples of how Jesus was God as environment. Oh, he's very much God as environment now. I'm not gonna go into that. I'm not gonna go into that. Think about how people gather around the name of Jesus now. Think about two people coming and meeting each other and what they have in common is Jesus. Think about entire groups of people who come together and say, well, you're a Minyan, I'm Calvinist, you're believing women in office, I don't, you're affirming in gay relationships, I'm not, but we all have Jesus in common. Right there, it's Jesus. Right there, it's Jesus as environment. It's Jesus as arena. Holy Spirit, go to a Pentecostal meeting. Look at the Toronto blessing. A little flecks of gold coming down. It's Holy Spirit as arena. Yeah, it goes back and forth. How are the krill? I speak for the krill. I speak for the krill. Those whales, genocidal whales. Gosh, this is really bad because I already don't have that good a governor on my filter and answering random questions like this live. This is the kind of thing disasters are made of. Thoughts on the Jersey voting situation haven't paid any attention to it. Where did I know? I see I lost my place. See, this is why the super chats make sense because the super chats, then they hold them longer and you get your money's worth with your work. And you get your money's worth with your little free, with your little free texting here. Where was I? Where was I? David Bentley Hart. How are the krill? Thoughts on New Jersey voting. Hey, there's Andrea. Now there's a super chat. I shouldn't have said anything. That's Rick's like, no, Paul, if we do lives, you'll get more money. And it's like, I've got, I've got, this drives my wife crazy. I've got issues with wealth and success. Okay. There's a little Anabaptist in me or a little Dutch Calvinist in me way down deep. Oh, Andrea would definitely do a live stream. You'd be my live stream guest. Well, thank you, Andrea. You know, the video conversation that we did, that did very well on my channel. I was, that thing shot right up when we did it. Banks get in line. Luke says, I know Luke. The problem is me and you, Luke, in a live stream, we're both way too ADHD. And people only want to hear about panentheism and personalism so much. Sorry, Luke. That's the way it is. Let's see, who else? Next week before Quartet release, Quartet release tomorrow morning, tomorrow morning. So Rick asked me, why do I release a video on Friday mornings when we're going to do the live stream at 10? I do look at analytics and I do care somewhat about them. Live streams, my live streams don't get a lot of views compared to a lot of the other views. And for the sake of the channel, I'm trying to sort of even out my Google analytics between weekdays and weekends. You'll notice that the middle of the week, I usually release commentary videos and monologue videos. Those always get the biggest responses. And weekends, I've been releasing the Rando's Conversations. Rando's Conversations get somewhere between a thousand and 2,500 views pretty much. Unless I talk to someone with more status like John Vervecky, then I'll get more views. So I'm just trying to level out the traffic on the channel to something a little more even. Why does that make sense? I don't know, but I'm just managing my own inner mood lobster through the Google analytics. So Quartet release tomorrow morning. Hi friend, hi. See, here's the problem, you're not just talking. Oh, here's Mark, two people, criticism stream, perfect. Yeah, Mark, if there's someone that uses more words, it's me, except you do shorter videos. I have to give you that credit. Hey Andrea, if you shower to get clean, how does your towel get dirty? It's one of these enduring questions. David Bentley Hart would destroy Paul. Saying hi to each other. Elon Musk keeps trying for a Rando slide. I know, I know. You know, Elon, if you're out there, just send me an email. If Elon Musk can't get my email, he doesn't deserve to be a billionaire. All right, crunch. I just lost it. Oh, there's the super chat. See, the channel's already too freaking big. I can't keep up. I wanna treat you all as individuals like Jordan Peterson says, and here I am. And see, I've totally lost the whole vibe of the commentary. I might as well take that screen down altogether. Let's see if I can do that. See, I'm not very good at OBS either. Okay, there it is. There's the office. Now I can center myself. Now I'll just give into the fact that I'm just reading the chats and it's become the second question and answer period. Where was I? There's the question. All right. All right, everybody's saying hi to each other. This is really boring to watch, I know. Yeah, that talk with Vervecky was amazing. And I can take 50% credit for that at best. It was a dance, a beautiful dance, I thought. Sometimes, well, you know, it's like as a preacher, you get used to sermons going badly too. And then you're all by yourself laying an egg on stage. So no, that was a wonderful talk. That was a wonderful talk. You should start with something more familiar and friendly. Start what? Like Tim Keller. Mars as Musk fixation seems. Yeah, I could do Tim. I could definitely have a conversation with Tim Keller. But another issue with high status people is that, you know, I like Tim Keller. I like his work. I don't, I'm gonna put this up closer to the camera so I'm not always looking down the whole time because I'm looking at the lower stream. I don't necessarily have a lot of questions for Tim Keller. I'd ask him, how are you doing? How's your fight with cancer going? Might have questions about the politics of the PCA. Don't necessarily have a lot of questions about theology. And part of the difficulty with high status, part of the reason I talk to randos is that, if you're motivated enough to get one of those precious rando slots, you've already watched a lot of my material. By nature, the conversation already has a place to start. If I have a conversation with a high status person, chances are they don't know any of my work. I mean, even look at the Jordan Peterson, John Vervecky conversation. Jordan cannot follow John Vervecky's work. If you look at Jordan's conversations that he's been doing online, he reads the person's books, gets a series of questions, and then maybe the person he's talking to has some knowledge of Jordan. The more knowledge they have of each other, the better the conversation is going to be. Let's see, now it just took down the whole thing. But Jordan basically said that earlier in the conversation that actually for people to sort of connect, there needs to be a fair amount of commonality and then enough difference for that interest, for that difference to motivate interest. So I don't, I, now there's a lot of channels out there. Crim said I had a crush on Chris Williams. I think that's a little hilarious. A channel like Chris Williamson's channel, he interviews high status people. Rebel Wisdom interviews, nah, Rebel Wisdom's sort of playing a little different game. But I don't want to have that channel. There's, Chris Williamson can devote himself to doing those conversations. He has a bigger channel than mine. I don't feel a need to interview the kinds of people that Chris Williamson or Rebel Wisdom interview. There are people now and then who I want to talk to, maybe for fan boy reasons, you know, like Tom Holland or, yeah, if Jordan calls, I'll talk to him. Maybe I'll talk to Elon Musk if he wants to talk. There's some people, there's some high status people out there I'd like to talk to, but that's where I'm at with that. So, Busy B, when will you do more lectures on C.S. Lewis's work? Oh, that's good. Yeah, yeah. My list of what I should do in my head is immensely long. If I had unlimited time, I would love to just walk through miracles or I'd love to have someone walk through the great divorce. If you read the great divorce, there's so many references that are already dated that I simply don't know. So, like Christians occupy the environment of the body of Christ. Yeah, yeah, that's right. Yeah, I've got, I'm about a quarter of the way on my conversation with Vervecky. Someone else pointed that out to me. It says, or it was Michael. Michael said, you gotta watch that commentary. And I have to have Nate on my channel. I have to have Nate on my channel. I just have to set that up. I've got jury duty coming in two weeks. That's messing with my schedule in terms of setting up convos and rando slots and everything. It's a big mess. I second David Bentley Hart. He cares about substance, not high status people you are. He probably would talk to you. He probably would, but, so I've watched some David Bentley Hart videos and I've especially watched with interest some of his conversations on small channels. And to me, seeing that says a lot about David Bentley Hart because David Bentley Hart cares about substance. David Bentley Hart is a true believer. He's trying to live what he thinks. And so when I see him on these tiny little channels, I've got an immense amount of respect for that because he's there for the conversation. He's not there for the clout, as they say on Bachelorette. I hope Rick doesn't find out about this until morning. He's done a great job. Love the self-deprecating human. Let's see, no sentences finished. That's right, Luke, you and me. What does Paul mean by the quartet? The quartet is the third lobe quartet. And that's the name that that Grizz gave to this video where I have a conversation with Grizz and Mark and Chad the alcoholic. And that comes out tomorrow, 6 a.m. I've actually got to set that up now. So we've got to land the plane on this. I'm glad I keep pushing the ideas out further, Scott. Paul has to go home. Yep, Tom Brady. Yep, Tom Brady's my fantasy football quarterback. It's been great this year. I'm doing okay. Oh man, look at this chat just keeps rolling. Yeah, talk about big nose Pinocchio. You're answering questions in there. Does Jordan Peterson speak for the lobsters? Grizz noted that the little tavern in Pinocchio had the lobster on the sign. That was good. Good rule for educational streams, 15 minutes of hanging out with Chad, then ignore them complete till the end. Oh, look at this. Ignore them complete till the end. Oh, that's a good idea. See, I don't know how to do this. Skim the chat, not keep up with it. All right. And that's exactly where the super chats go. All right, now I'm all the way to the end of it. So you'll be dismissed all pastors are. Oh my, good idea, James. What did James say? Bought a copy of crime and punishment to jury duty. I didn't get it. It's all left in. Well, James, I'll tell you, usually when I go in there as pastor, they see that that's my job and I don't get selected. You don't want a pastor. A pastor is an influencer. And so that's not who you want on the jury because they're in competition with the lawyer. All right, well, I'm already eight minutes late into this. Thank you for coming here for the trial run. Now that I know it works and it's a success, I will, maybe I'll have to figure out how to do this. I know Rick will find this and he'll say, Rick's such a nice guy to work with. Say, oh good, you tried a chat. How did that go? I think you should do more of them. Let's set some up. But I have a certain amount of allegiance to the Bridges of Meaning Discord. So, all right, now I have to figure out how to stop streaming. Here we go. Thanks for tuning in. Thanks for your feedback on the trial run. I don't know if it was a success or not, but I learned. Take care, bye bye.