https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=URjo5EcUVf0

 Hi, this is Paul and instead of a well, we will have a rough draft for Sunday on Saturday, but Thursday is Thanksgiving and I did a special video service just for the church on Thanksgiving. Attendance has been quite low during COVID, so we are not having an in-person meeting, plus we had some of our leadership was traveling to visit family and other parts of the country. So that's the reason we just did a video this year and I did a Thanksgiving meditation this Thursday, tomorrow, November 25 is American Thanksgiving Day. And so I thought I would make a version of the my meditation that I could share on my channel and along with the one that goes in with the Fuller Worship Service for the church that's on the church's channel. We are just on the cusp of Advent in the Christian calendar. Advent is the Christian New Year. The American New Year, the one celebrated by the calendar all around the world begins January 1, but the Christian New Year really begins with Advent, which is next Sunday. Now in the United States, Thanksgiving is sort of the church's New Year's Eve. This is the Thursday before Advent and in some ways the Thanksgiving service parallels and mirrors what we often do with a New Year's Eve service where we sort of sum up the last year and give thanks and pray our way into the next year. Now calendars are powerful things. We don't, many of the most common things in our lives we don't recognize the power of. Without a calendar to form you, life can become a series of chasing and avoiding until the grave finally catches up with us. The calendar is a way of disrupting this pattern of eating. It's a pattern of eating that so many of us simply live in unconsciously one day to the next. We are running away from being eaten, eaten by the powers that be in the culture, eaten by the age of decay, eaten by all of the demands in life, and we chase eating, satisfying our appetites and desires. And so in many ways what life boils down to without the disruption of a calendar is eating, consuming and being consumed. And so Thanksgiving is a good time to take stock. If you live in a traditional culture in the Northern Hemisphere, this is the time when the harvest should be in and everyone is settling down for a long cold winter. Here in California the winter isn't particularly cold and it isn't particularly long. Here in Sacramento however December, January, February are darker than the rest of the year and we all get used to all this bright California sunlight and so it's darker and foggier and I notice the change in affect in the people quite regularly every year. Thanksgiving in many ways is the beginning of that. Over the last 18 months we have been dealing with a COVID pandemic and a lot of people have been, millions of people have been infected, hundreds of thousands of people have lost their lives and it has disrupted just about everything in our society. We're so used to looking at these maps with circles and charts and waves and many people, depending especially on the kinds of jobs that they do, have experienced a lot of stress and a fair amount of withdrawal. A number of people have simply given up work. Rates of depression, anxiety and suicide have heightened during the pandemic. Most of our areas, many of our areas of most of our lives have been disrupted in small and large ways. As a church we should thank God that during this pandemic we have lost not a single member to COVID-19. We have lost Earl Marlink but he didn't die of the virus and as a church we have not gone under financially. We praise God for that. In many ways our online ministry has grown and we've continued to explore new ways of serving others online as well as new local partnerships and so we can certainly praise God for that. Now the past and the present is always a tricky dance. I talked about this for the last couple of weeks. Year after year some things get better, some things get worse, some things keep repeating or sort of staying the same. And we're another year closer to Christ's return and we're another year closer to the end of the days for each of us. The text from the lectionary will be in the lectionary now for the next few months. Prayers and petitions and intercession, Paul says at the beginning of 1st Timothy chapter 2, I urge you then first of all that petition, prayers and intercession and thanksgiving be made for all people. It's a marvelously universal appeal that we give petitions, prayers and intercession and thanksgiving for our neighbors all over. For kings and all those in authority that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness, not only for our neighbors in general, but more specifically for civil authorities. Yes, the civil authorities. Now depending on the party that you're in in the United States and the party that's in office, you may be happy or frustrated with them. But in many ways we have far less to complain about than let's say Paul of Tarsus did given the fact that he would be killed by a Roman Emperor and there would be waves of persecution against Christians by Roman Emperors. Yet Paul's admonition is that we pray for our leaders and whether we agree with them or not, whether they're our party or not and we're given direction in which to pray. We pray for them that they may, that we may live in, that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness. If they do their jobs well, then that affords the kind of life that is pleasing to God. And this is, this is rather, it seems rather pedestrian, rather common that we may live peaceful and quiet lives in all godliness and holiness. This is a very good thing. This is good and pleases God our Savior who wants all people to be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth. This past Sunday I wound up spending all day from 8 a.m. to 8.30 p.m. in church. We had the two, we had the Sunday School and the service for living stones and then the Nigerian Anglicans met with us or met in our space and they had an ordination service. Their bishop came from Houston and it was a joyful celebration. After that we had City Life Church, one of our daughter churches. They also had an ordination for a new church planter. And so the mission goes on. As I was sitting there in the three and a half hour service, yes I know some of you complain when we go an hour and 15 minutes, in the three and a half hour service of the Nigerian Anglicans, this group that are technically part of the Nigerian Anglican denomination here in North America and of course in the Christian Reformed Church, some of the early storied missionary efforts were by Johanna Wienstra out into Nigeria and to see Nigerian immigrants praising God, establishing churches, planting new churches here in North America among their people and then in fact the bishop extended me an invitation to become an Anglican. I politely declined and said I've already got a denomination, thank you, and I will stay with it. But he mentioned that the Nigerian Anglicans and North Americans, one of the most diverse Anglican elements of the Nigerian Anglican Church in the world. They've got people from all different races and all different backgrounds. And it was just a tremendous Sunday and really quite a moving and wonderful and interesting and fascinating vision of God's Church moving all around the world. And in many ways the Nigerian Anglicans, the bishop himself said, he has American citizenship, Canadian citizenship and Nigerian citizenship and because he's got Canadian citizenship, he can even travel to England without a passport. And so just in this group you see Nigerian culture, American culture and British culture all brought together in one people in a variety of ways. This is good and pleases God our Father who wants all people to be saved and come to a knowledge of the truth. And it's amazing how we are able to embody that truth in these different cultures and in these different churches. It was a powerful and moving thing. For there is one God and one mediator between God and mankind, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself as a ransom for all people. This has now been witnessed to at the proper time. And for this purpose I was appointed a herald and an apostle. I am telling the truth. I am not lying and a true and faithful teacher of the Gentiles. Advent is the Christian New Year. This is in some ways the beginning, the end of our one year anticipating the beginning of the next. The American New Year starts in a month or so. Therefore, I tell you, do not worry about your life. This is the time to pause and give thanks in an age of tremendous anxiety and concern about politics, about illness, about finance, about climate, about all sorts of things. Part of Thanksgiving is trust. And the lectionary chooses the gospel reading from the Sermon on the Mount. Therefore, I tell you, do not worry about your life. This is a command from Jesus. What you will eat or about your body, what you will wear, is life not more than food and the body more than clothes? Look at the birds of the air. They do not sow or reap or store away in barns. And yet your heavenly father feeds them. Are you not much more valuable than they? Can any one of you by worrying at a single hour to your life? And why do you worry about clothes? See how the flowers of the field grow. They do not labor or spin. Yet I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor was dressed like one of these. If that is how God clothes the grass of the field, which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the fire, will he not much more clothe you, you of little faith? So do not worry saying what shall we eat or what shall we drink or what shall we wear? For the pagans run after these things and your heavenly father knows that you need them. This should put us in a posture of thanksgiving for the things that we have received. And trust for that his provision will continue to extend to us. But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness and all these things will be given to you as well. Therefore, do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own. Let's pray. Lord, at this time of pause in the year, when here in North America the season is changing, we're heading into winter, we're heading into Advent, we're heading into a time, well for us, a holiday season which is busy, full of light and joy, but then the months of darkness which will follow. We pray, Lord, that we would pause and first of all give thanks. To thank you for seeing us through a new year. To thank you for seeing us through this pandemic so far. To thank you for seeing us through the political ups and downs, the dramas, all of the new things that have come our way that give us anxiety. We pause and thank you, Lord, for all that you have done. And we ask, Lord, that you would give us faith, that we may be able to obey the command that you gave us to not worry. To believe that all things come from your fatherly hand. Fat years and lean years, in good times and in difficult times, that all these things must work together for our good. We ask, Lord, that you would bless us. We pray, Lord, that you would uphold us. We ask that you would guide us and that we would realize the firm grip of your lovingly, of your loving grasp. Help us, Lord, to remember and to live out this thanksgiving and this gratitude in daily love to our neighbors and daily obedience to you. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, amen.