https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=YsZlABQEUIM

 Well, would you all please stand and have a Thanksgiving and join us in a few songs. Are you going to run sides, Paul? We try! Alright. Alright. Alright. One, two, three. Let's see that first. Try it. Alright. One, two, three. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. Alright. That's great. Grace and Peace be to you, from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. Greet one another. Yes, alright. Alright, everyone's here. Everyone has something to say. Alright, this next song is 432 in the software. Grace and Peace be to you, from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. To the joy of human love, Brothers, sisters, marriage, and child, Friends on earth and friends above, For all things of God and one, They shall run to you, O be free, Descending from great pain. For all things of God and one, They shall run to you, O be free, Descending from great pain. Our health is in the name of our God, who made heaven and earth, Amen. Sing to the Lord with thanksgiving, make music upon the heart. How good it is to celebrate God's presence, and sing praise throughout each day. How good it is to sing praise and give honor to our God. Our God rebuilds the peoples of earth, the wandering ones are gathered together, The broken hearted are healed, the hungry are fed, the prisoners are freed, The blind are given sight, the lonely are befriended. How good it is to sing praise and give honor to our God. All of nature sings aloud the goodness of God, clouds, rains, grass, creatures, faith, and small. Our God creates and sustains our world with his ever growing, never ending love. How good it is to sing praise and give honor to our God. Praise and peace be yours and the promise of knowledge of God and of Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen. I think we all are God, They are an indomitable saint. You are dressed in the color of the sun, You are the light of the world, You are the light of the world, No one rest in the sun, It moves its wounds in all its ways. They rub the colors of the sun, And cleanse us on our way, With countless gifts of God, And still give honor to him. All day this brown yet sky, Through all our life we pay God, Gives every joyful heart, And blessed means to change God, And keep us in his praise. And I just pray to bless, And free us from our guilt, Of this world and again. Praise and thanks to God, The Father now we pay him, The Son and Spirit now, In pain and pain and pain, And for the child of God, Who ever loved the Lord, For God's in love with him now, And shall be ever for. Shout for joy to the Lord all the earth. Worship the Lord with flags, Come before him with joyful songs, Know that the Lord is God, It is he who made us, And we are his, We are his people, The sheep of his pasture. Enter his gates with thanksgiving, And his courts with praise, Give thanks to him and praise his name, For the Lord is good, And his love endures forever, His faithfulness continues Through all generations. Praise is thy faithfulness, O God my Father, There is no shadow of Toying with me. How safe is not my love, And so great will be, That thou hast been The Lord and so to be. Praise is thy faithfulness, Praise is thy faithfulness, Morning by morning Through Thursday I see, All thy prayers I ask Thou to guide me. Praise is thy faithfulness, O God my Father, There is no shadow of Toying with me. How safe is not my love, And so great will be, That thou hast been The Lord and so to be. Praise is thy faithfulness, Praise is thy faithfulness, Through thy great grace, Mercy and love. Praise is thy faithfulness, Praise is thy faithfulness, Morning by morning Through Thursday I see, All thy prayers I ask Thou to guide me. Praise is thy faithfulness, O God my Father, There is no shadow of Toying with me. Praise is thy faithfulness, Praise is thy faithfulness, Morning by morning Through Thursday I see, All thy prayers I ask Thou to guide me. Blessings of my Incomplete desire. Praise is thy faithfulness, Praise is thy faithfulness, Morning by morning Through Thursday I see, All thy prayers I ask Thou to guide me. Praise is thy faithfulness, Morning by morning It's Thanksgiving and obviously a big part of what we're doing here is sharing what we're thankful for. And so I'd like to hear from you. What are you thankful for? Marty. I'm very excited to be here. Me too. And for all the people who are here. Amen. For all the people who not only attend, people that are the church. Amen. Amen. Nancy. I'll take one just in case. I am just overjoyed with the with the anniversary and the coming from it, friends getting back to their computers. This is more than my imagination here. Okay. For. For my children. Amen. For me it is all the same. Amen. I give all praise to God. I woke up this morning with a blessing on my mind. I woke up. Amen. And I missed my Bible study yesterday and I called my mommy. I said, Livingstone having a program? And she said yes. I said, well good because I'm coming. To get a new blessing. And I'm grateful that I met Mother Marsha and the family of Livingstone. Amen. Because I feel I am at home. Amen. Thank you, Emma. Thank you, Beth. Well, I'm definitely thankful as almost everybody on Facebook knows, no cancer, yay! Yay! Thank you. Thank you. Thank you for that and all of the other stuff that we're going through so just happy for that. And actually I feel thankful that Reggie's going to do some cooking today so I'm very excited. All right. Reggie's going to do some cooking. Yes, Mr. Luke. I'm thankful for the pilgrims who came to this country. You're thankful for the pilgrims because they came to this country? Very good. Thank you, Luke. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Luke. Amen. Amen. Marshall? I'm thankful that I'm here and then when I went to the doctor last week I had such an excellent report. I won't give you all the numbers. But it was just, it was just really incredible. It was just incredible. It was a great experience. It was a great, it was a great experience. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Thank you, thank you. Thank you. It's just really great. So I thank the Lord for that, and I thank Him for my children, my grandchildren, great grandchildren, my adopted children, and I'm just, I'm blessed. Amen, amen. Phillip? I'm thankful that you're all offering over these sacrifices here, and very people are giving to that family. Amen. Thank you, Phillip. I'm thankful to the Newfoundland Church, and my family, my friends, and my family for being here today. I'm just thankful for having been here. Thank you for being here. Amen. Thank you, Pam. Delphine? I'm thankful that you're all doing this, and it's inspired by myself, and I'm happy that you're all here. Okay. Amen, amen. Joy? You are a part of our family. Amen. Amen. Joy? You are a part of our family. Amen. Thank you, Joe. Oh, here come the whole family. Yes, Miss Lily? Amen. Okay. Amen. Thank you, Lily. She just walked in and she doesn't have to be in the hospital. Amen. Praise God for that. Yes, Journey? What do you thank her for? Yes, you do. I think you love them always. Thank you so much, Journey. Michelle? Amen. Steroids and the other, I know, you know, if we were to pile all the drugs that we, I mean it sounds kind of crazy, but it's the truth. I mean, many of us need drugs of all different kinds to help us. And we praise God for those drugs and for the doctors and for the medicine that can help us. I know some of us wouldn't be here without those. Amen. Amen. All right. Earl? Year ago, we were reading on the books, reading the book of Mormon, and we were just trying to see if we could justify the value of drugs and not just drugs. Okay. All right. Thank you. Let's come to our God in prayers. Lord, there's so much living in this room. There have been so many brushes with death in this room. Just looking around the room, Lord, I know many of the stories and there are other stories that I don't know. Or it's easy to take life for granted when you're young, when you're healthy, when things are going well. But as many of us know, Lord, this life is not promised to us. There's no way we can secure it or guarantee it. And for many of us, Lord, we can say there, but for the grace of God, go on. When we have seen tragedy. And Lord, some of our thanksgivings are common and obvious for the simple things, for the regular things, for the basic things. Some of our thanksgivings are storied because there are stories attached to them. Stories of Alzheimer's, stories of cancer, stories of heart disease, stories of lupus, stories of mental illness, stories of accidents, stories of strife at home and among the nations. And Lord, it can be easy to set out the pity pot. It can be easy to say woe is me. But we gather today, Lord, to say thank you. And to adopt this attitude of gratitude. And to recognize that all good things come from you. And when we are blessed, we are happy to know someone to say thank you to. So Lord, hear the thanksgiving of your people. Receive it. May by this thanksgiving we bless each other. And may you be blessed by our praise. So hear us now, Lord. And give us your peace. Amen. Amen. Bye, bye. If you Google gratitude and thanksgiving, you'll discover that it's pretty common knowledge, and I put this up on my blog, that you can find and check out to YouTube if you want to, all of these in the new happiness surveys. There's a very definite link between expressing gratitude and happiness. And in this link they show people who are writing down things they are grateful for. First they take a happiness test, and they write down the things they're grateful for. Then they call the people that are connected to this thing. And then they take another happiness test afterwards. And basically what they show again and again is that we are happier, we are made happy by expressing gratitude. Now we would think that, well, everybody wants happiness, and so the way to be happy, if it's scientifically proven that the way to be happy is by expressing gratitude, why don't we express gratitude more often? Simply reasonable and logical. And I'm sure there are some disciplined people out there who wake up every morning, and in fact some of you do this, I'm sure. You wake up every morning, and I'm sure the woes come flooding in, but you might stop and say, now what am I grateful for? What am I thankful for? And you start to listen. And that's good, and you'll be certainly blessed by that. But also what we want is a sense of gratitude more spontaneously, from seeing the world in a different way. Now seeing the world is actually something that takes work, because you can live in delusion, and I only want to see good and happy things, and I don't want to see negative things. And if you only watch certain channels on TV, or only read certain things, or only do certain things, you might in fact fashion yourself a world of make-believe around you, but eventually reality will impose itself. And there are others who are distorting your view of the world all the time. So it actually takes stewardship to create good filters that both see the world as it is, but also don't drive us to despair. Psalm 33 begins with an invitation to gratitude. Sing joyfully to the Lord, you righteous. It is fitting for the upright to praise him. Praise the Lord with heart. Make music to him on the tenth string lyre. Sing to him a new song. Play skillfully and shout for joy. The psalmist basically gathers the people and says, We begin by discipline to give praise to our God. We begin, whether we feel like it or not, to thank him and to enjoy him and to praise him. This is how we need to start the conversation. But the psalmist doesn't end there. In fact, he continues to try to reshape the world for us. By the word of the Lord, the heavens were made. Their starry host by the breath of his mouth. He scattered the waters of the sea into jars. He puts the deep into storehouses. Let all the earth fear the Lord. Let all the peoples of the world revere him. For he spoke and it came to be. He commanded and it stood firm. The psalmist here is giving us a picture of the power of our God, the greatness of our God. And we often recognize this if we stop, if we drive into Yosemite Valley and we see those granite peaks, we just, when we watch the storm, when we see the sea, when we watch the clouds, when we contemplate the billions and millions of stars and galaxies, we have this image of the greatness of our God. And the psalmist says, shape your world according to this God. The Lord foils the plans of the nations. He thwarts the purposes of the peoples. But the plans of the Lord stand firm forever. The purposes of his heart through all generations. Here too the psalmist makes an observation in a little country like Judah or Israel surrounded by Egypt and Babylon and Assyria and the great powers, Israel often felt yourself small. I saw a map yesterday, one of these links on Facebook that's, you know, had all of these maps. A number of countries not invaded by Britain. There was just a handful in the world. The rest of the globe at one point had been. And when you ponder world history, you see the nations have all these plans that Hitler establishes, his thousand-year rite, and the Roman Empire will stand forever. And none of it happens. The plans of the nations, they're like, whether you're a Democrat or Republican, whether you're an American or from some other country, all of the plans of the nations come to dust, no matter how well thought through, no matter how good or ambitious. The Lord foils the plans of the nations. He thwarts the purposes of the people. Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, the people he chooses for his inheritance. From the heaven, the Lord looks down and sees all mankind. From his dwelling place, he watches all who live on earth, he who forms the hearts of all, who considers everything they do. No king is saved by the size of his army. I played Risk last night with Philip and Claire and Jared, and Risk is a fun game where you have all these pieces of paper on the board of the world, and you roll dice and you go back and forth. And I often ponder when we play this game how you have all this strategy and you think all of these things will fall through and we don't know. No king is saved by the size of his army. No warrior escapes by his great strength. A horse is a vain hope for deliverance. Despite all its great strength, it cannot save the world. Despite all its great strength, it cannot save. We've been in Exodus where the Lord throws the horse and rider into the Red Sea. But the eyes of the Lord are on those who fear him, on those whose hope is in his unfailing love to deliver them from death and keep them alive and family. In some of your thanksgivings this morning, I heard that coming through. Some of you can testify that the Lord has brought you through the fire. The Lord has brought you through a difficult place, and this morning as you sit here, you say, The Lord has brought me here. He has saved me. Now, it's common today for folks to take offense at the Bible, and the Psalms are one of the most offensive parts of the Bible, to make declarations like this. How on earth can we say these kinds of things in the world as it is? Because don't we see the righteous get sick and die like everyone else? Don't we see the poor taken advantage of? Don't we see the weak crushed under the boot of the rich? Justice does not always prevail. Why let a song like this shape us? Why don't we just be grim and say, It's all evil, it's just the workings of power and of chaos and of physics, and there is no hope, there is nothing there, these are all fairy tales and lies that no one should believe? You can say that. Many do. And where will that take you? Will you still somehow express gratitude in the midst of all the misery of the world? If you read all of the Psalms, the Psalmists know pain. In fact, the most common type of Psalm is in fact a lament. A lament is a Psalm from someone who's suffering, and the Psalmists say things like, Lord, where are you? Why don't you hear me? God, listen to my call, I'm about to go under. I don't know what to do. Evil men rise up, the strong take the weak. There is no justice in the world. Lord, come quickly. The Psalmists know all of you this, yet they dare to sing this Psalm about the Lord. The Psalm ends this way. We wait in hope for the Lord. We wait in hope for the Lord. Hey sweetheart. Do you need to go to the bathroom? Okay, that's fine. We wait in hope for the Lord. He recognizes we don't have all we hope for. The world is still sometimes beautiful, sometimes grim, sometimes glorious, sometimes hard, but what we have here is a determined gratitude. We have a determined gratitude. We have a determined gratitude. What we have here is a determined gratitude. It's not simply a convenient gratitude. It's a gratitude that says, despite the pain, despite the suffering, despite the evil, despite the sickness, despite the brutality, I will not give up on this vision. We will wait in hope for the Lord. He is our help and our shield. The irony of throwing all this away is, where then is your hope? Is it in the strength of horses? Is it in the power of nations? Is it in your politics? Because we all try to find hope in something, or maybe it's just plain escape, or maybe it's in fact your hope is in death, but you can end the pain if it gets too bad. We wait in hope for the Lord, for he is our help and our shield. And if our hearts rejoice, for we trust in his holy name. How can you know happiness in the midst of suffering? How can you know joy and gratitude when things around you are a calamity? We wait in hope for the Lord. He is our help and our strength. In him our hearts rejoice, for we trust in his holy name. May your unfailing love be with us, Lord, even as we put our hope in you. The Psalmists didn't have a lot to go on. They have the memories and the stories of Sinai, of their deliverance from Egypt. We have so much more. Because what Christians believe is that in the resurrection, hope has become flesh. Jesus who took on flesh knows our suffering. He goes to the cross. He knows what it's like to die. You know, as I've been walking with Joe through his last chapters, so often he expresses the wonder, why am I still here? And just as I walk with him through this, I remind him, we don't practice dying. It's a journey that's new to all of us. But Jesus knows what it is to die, and yet he lives. We believe in justice, though it is not yet come. We trust and wait for the final deliverance, and we looked upon the resurrected flesh of Jesus, and we believe, though we die, though we're sick, though this world is full of strife, though all of our plans get shaken and undone, though the things we expected and imagined were somehow our birthrights are taken from us, we wait in hope for the Lord. And so in Christ we practice this determined gratitude to a certain belief he has overcome the world, and the world is made new in his resurrected body. Let's pray. Lord, I thank you this morning for the chance to be here, for the chance to be strengthened by each other. Whether, Lord, this has been a good week or a hard week, whether this has been an easy year or a difficult year, we come to you, Lord, this morning with a determined gratitude, and we say, Lord, we put our hope in you, we put our trust in you, and we will give you thanks for the ways that you have delivered us, and for the things we are still awaiting deliverance, Lord, we will put our hope in you. So, Lord, receive our thanks, hear our pleas, hear our prayers, and may the renovation of the world begun in Jesus' resurrected flesh come quickly towards us. Hear our prayer. In the name of Jesus, Amen. Would you stand?