https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JJE6rzJnhZg

 Hi, this is Paul. We have some announcements to make. I won't bury the lead. We have to cancel the tour and we'll talk about why and what we learned from it. I'm back in Sacramento. Job is currently stranded in Southern California in Casa Vandank and they're about to kill each other. All Job has to do to turn off the lights is tell Google and they all live in darkness. Hey, you be careful because you start talking to Google right there where you are and my lights may change. Oh, don't tempt me. You're both wearing headphones, Google. Yeah, if I say something to Google now, we know they're really listening. Okay, Google, order 50 rolls of toilet paper. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Google. She does not recognize Job's voice to order stuff into my house. The Google sheep knows it's master's voice. Yes. Well, yeah, we decided to cancel the northern part of the tour. We decided that this morning and we'll talk a little bit about our reasons, but that's the it probably will come as no surprise for anybody just following the developments in California right now. A lot of stuff is closing down. March Madness I just saw just got canceled. So NBA is suspended. A lot of churches are. I just received a phone call from the manager of my park that the clubhouse will not be available for public gatherings until further notice. Yeah, it'll be interesting to see if your church, John, suspend services or not. There are quite a few churches in Grand Rapids who are doing it, which kind of surprised me because I haven't heard much coming from Michigan. Michigan doesn't seem to have been affected yet too much. But I don't know. So I'll talk about my reasons a little bit and then we'll have Job and John talk. Part of what really finally sort of tipped the scales for me is not so much the vector factor of Job and John and I spreading COVID-19 up and down the West Coast as much as right now the way things are in Sacramento. I just don't really want to leave my congregation. I have a lot of older people. Many of I just in fact was talking to a member of the church right now and she is very definitely a person who should not be out because if she gets this thing, it'll kill her. She has multiple health things that she's lived with for years. And I mentioned her and she's like, what are you talking about? It's like, there so and so we're going to meet with our council tonight, decide what to do about Sundays and such. I really that the problem is if we don't close down services, a lot of the people who very much shouldn't come will come because they always come. And if I say, you know, you've got to think about your health. You've got these factors. They'll say nuts to me and they'll show up. So tonight the council will decide what to do. But I didn't want to leave town under these circumstances. So for me, that was kind of the big, big factor. Right. Lots of churches in the Netherlands are also closing. I mean, I completely understand your reasoning and your motivation for this, Paul. I mean, it's not like we came to our decision to stop this any lightly. We, you know, we all three spoke about it. We put it by the ancients or voices where we got lots of responses. And this is like you said in an email, it's not time essential. We can do this again. We could we could plan for it. Maybe when it's not raining so hard in California. I feel I was lied to. I thought the sun's shown here, but it's just been raining for two days straight. So so now I can't even leave this house because it's just pouring down. And what's up with your flight job? I mean, you what's ironic is we had the first part of the tour and then you were supposed to have a conference. Did that finally get fully canceled? No, they still sort of ran through it. But lots of stuff has been done remotely and then projected, but you're still gathering people and I don't know why they do that because it's it's it's a disability assistive technology conference. There's loads of immunocompromised people there who I assume they weren't attending anywhere anyway, but I wasn't going to go and you know, these things happen and yeah, it's too bad about the trip but that happens. My airlines completely unreachable. No, no, I mean, I had like I called them on the phone because I didn't hear anything on my messaging app. And I called them on the phone and I get this dude, dude, dude. What is that noise? That's a long time ago. It's a busy signal. Wow. That's that's like when I was a kid, you'd get a busy signal on the phone. Oh, when somebody was on the internet. But you know, I'll probably still make a home. We're going to see if there's any food in the grocery store left in a bit. I heard that John Vendong hoarded all the toilet paper in Southern California. That's what I heard. No, no, I did not do that. If you've seen this man. He's wearing, you know, I was a little I was a little concerned because I saw him wearing that, you know, that down vest and I thought oh, John's got the fever. So but apparently it's just cold down here. It's sunny and warm here in Sacramento. So I don't know what your problem is down south. So that's pretty crazy weather. We don't usually have this cold and wet this time of year, but we love the rain and it's good for for many reasons. So yeah. So yeah, we actually do it to make Paul feel at home. I mean, Job feel at home. That's right. That's right. Well, I certainly am disappointed that that we're not going to make the trip. You know, I think our decision is the right one. I feel I feel good about our decision, but I was really looking forward to this and it would have been fun. So I very much once all of this stuff settles down and we can find time on the calendar again, I we still want to do this. Yeah, and actually logistically, it wouldn't be that terribly difficult to project this all onto another week and we can still pull it off in one week, you know, if we can get everybody lined up. So it wouldn't even be a major trip for Job to come back to it. Well, it's still 11 hours of flying. But you have to understand that Job was the big celebrity because I come on there. They hear me talk. Everybody wanted to hear Job's story. So if I don't know if the trip would be a success without Job. Yeah, Job, how's your faith? Job, how's your faith? I'm starting to ask Job, how's your face? Job, how's your face? Why is your face downcast, Job? Sin is crouching at your door. No, it's just from Donk's door. It's not my door. Sorry, everybody. So, yeah, it happens. I made an offer to do some video meetups, but it seems like most of the organizers just want the real deal. So which I totally understand too. So, yeah, well, although it might be in part the unfamiliarity of Job, Job, Job, Job, Job, it's part the unfamiliarity with something like that. And I personally can relate to that. But it would be nice if it were possible to figure out how to have you be virtually present with a group of people. It's kind of a use of technology that I myself would very much appreciate having quick and So that any number of resources, famous or otherwise, can be utilized in any local church or organization. A few groups have talked about that a little bit, but it just seems weird to me to be in this little box in the meeting and everybody's having this meeting in person and there I am in the little box. I'd much rather be live, be there. Well, I mean in a place that's set up for it, you could be on the full screen. You could be on a, you could actually be a very large presence. No, I'm serious. You mean you could be very present. I know, I know, but I did. Teleconferencing these days in the business community is quite a smooth operation. Well, but yeah, COVID-19 and the responses next our tour. Yeah, well, yeah, it was going to be fun. We had a lot of fun on the southern leg and I'm really glad we got that in. So, yeah, I can't think of another car. But it's time we try this again. Go ahead, Joe. No, I said they just they can't take the first leg of the tour away from us. That was fun. And yeah, you know, I keep thinking of that quote from Lord of the Rings where Frodo says that, oh, I wish this wouldn't have happened in my time. Gandalf says, so do all who see such time. But all we can do is, well, decide what we do with the time that's given to us. Sorry for butchering that quote right there. But it does seem particularly relevant because we're like, oh, shit, this is this is this terrible. But I'm more concerned about, you know, I'm all the old people that I see living in this this retirement community where John lives and the people in your church. And yeah, no, I'm concerned, too. And, you know, the the desire on the authorities to level out the curve so we don't get a big spike, you know, it would be nice to avoid what happened in Italy. And, you know, a lot of people think that Germany and France aren't far behind. They're still. Yeah, I don't know. This is this will be, you know, we haven't had really a worldwide, you know, pandemic sort of a plague like this and any of our memories, you know, what, you know, the 1920s, some people might remember the 1920s influenza. So you do. Right, John. Yeah, yeah, it was a hard time. Many of us succumbed. I did not. The inevitable Fandank everybody. That's right. Well, what one of one of my one of my lasting memories of this trip will be barreling down the highway between Arizona and Southern California. And and John's car is is putting out hot air in Rod's face. And, of course, Rod's getting been out back there. And and so then I've just so I go I go up to the front seat and I just I go up to the front seat and I go up to the front seat and I go back to the front seat. And I go up to the front seat and just basically, yeah, it's still blowing hot air. And there in the middle of the freeway at 70 miles an hour, John shifts it to neutral, turns the car off, turns the car back on again. It's like, what is this mad man doing? Well, it's called it's called rebooting. That's right, rebooting the car. The oh, that was that was a memorable moment. I thought crazy man. Christian music. So maybe that's why it would be a good thing that the next time we try this I have a different car. Yeah, well, we'll see. We'll see. But anyway, so yeah, we're not coming. And and my regrets and we will we will do it again when things normalize. And yeah, so I don't know if we have anything else to say. That's basically the news. Well, yeah, I think that we also want to thank all the people along the way who so graciously offered accommodations to us and then we were we were not able to take them up on that. But thank you all for your hospitality and also the venues that we would have utilized. So yeah, thanks everyone up and down the way and we'll be in touch when we come again. Okay, and maybe we'll see if job can come and then. Yeah, so we'll do it again. All right. So thank you everybody for watching. I'm gonna end the recording here. One last one last thing, Paul. Go ahead, Joe. Hey, Google, turn off all the lights.