https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=c5zk4VKuiKQ

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hi Paul, we talked about Kanye last week. We did talk about Kanye last weekend. You know what he said? Well he sort of dropped out of the race. He had hired a staff to try and get him on the ballot but that stopped but he gives mixed messages. So today... Like you were saying last week, he didn't say the right thing. Well I don't know. I think it takes a lot to get on the ballot in 50 states because you have to get on the ballot in all 50 states. So to run for president is a big deal. Costs a lot of money, takes a lot of time, you need staff. So we were going to talk about what other kind of people should run for president. Who do you think should run for president? You were saying I was telling you Paris Hilton. Paris Hilton? Maybe Michael Jordan. Michael Jordan for president. Okay well you need to have a lot of money to run for president. Craig Thompson? Nah you're right. They're not that important. I won't say they're not important but they're not that wealthy I guess. Well you made the point last week that that Kanye would bring a lot of poetry to the office and I thought that was a good point. Pizzazz. Pizzazz. Yeah yeah yeah so Or you could just make me president. We just have a party every day. Ready for president every day. Alright. We would pray to God and thank him and have a Christian party. Not, not unchristian. It would be Christian. We would say good things that make people uplifting like my mother. She's very good and she brought me up in a good way and I've known Paul for a lot of years and I've came a long way people. There was a time where I was not doing so great but I came back into the zone because I know I got the tone to come up and down and all around. I should be president really like a merry-go-round. I come up, I come up, I come up like this. Enough jitter chat. Now who's this they call him? Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ Paul. Yeah. Let's see. Let's sing man. How about Will Smith for president? Will Smith for president. You know the guy or Martin Smith. I mean is it Will Smith? Will Smith. Yeah. Martin Lawrence. His buddy from the movies. Yeah those two were in bad boys. They were in bad boys. There were a couple funny guys. Yeah. Yeah. And Jackie Chan was funny. Yeah. So yeah baseball is coming this week. Really? It's gonna be the Giants and the Dodgers. Giants and the Dodgers. Where are they playing? To begin. Oh they'll be playing in LA. They'll be playing in LA. No fans in the stands? I'm sorry not in LA. No. No fans. No fans. Just on TV. That is gonna be different. No Buster Posey. You know what I heard? What? I don't know how I hear all this stuff but I heard Buster Posey adopted two kids. Okay. So he's not gonna play this season. Maybe next season. Okay. That's all I heard. Okay. Okay. Okay. How about the Kings? Is the basketball thing gonna come out? I know they've been having trouble. Yeah the Kings might have been out. I heard it. All the Kings have to do is win four games and then they'll still make the playoffs. Okay. They play eight games and they have to win four out of eight. Okay. And if they win four out of eight they go to the playoffs. Okay. I don't know about the Warriors. My Warriors might not have been. But I like the Kings better because they're from Sacramento. Of course. You know. What about Republic? I heard about Republic one. Oh okay. The soccer team. Yeah the soccer team. Yeah. Sacramento's soccer team. We got our own soccer team. And way back when Paul we had a World League football team. Remember that? That's Sac State? No I don't remember that. Yeah we used to have a World League football team. Okay. Like the NFL but it was called the World League. Okay. Okay. And um hi David Linder. You used to play soccer. I used to watch him play. He used to play indoor soccer. He was very good. Yeah. Yeah. Dave Linder. I've seen him plenty of times. Dave Linder's a good friend of mine. Yeah. And let's put props out to my cousin. Your cousin Mark. Yep. Mark Holland. Mark Holland. Please out all the homies in the Holland family. All the homies in the Holland family. Freddie's cousins. And um. Mark's the pastor of one of our daughter churches. Yes. And he does a very good job I'll say. He does do a very good job. If you ever want to see him preach. Well it's hard right now because they're closed because of COVID. Right. They're just doing a little zoom thing as a church. But when I do make appearances over there once in a while. Yep you do. Just because he's my cousin. Yeah. And I want to give him moral support. That's right. And because he's a good guy. And I'll message them that they both got shout outs in this video. Right. We'll let them know. Because it's not. If we're talking about them it's good that they know we're talking about them. Right. Because that builds their morale. Builds their morale. Yeah. Absolutely. Alright. I think it's time to land the plane. I want to do a rap. Alright go ahead. Okay. Give me a topic and I'll do it. Well I thought. I thought. You know who should run for president. What does the country need. We'll have a political rap today. What does the country need. The country needs somebody that is cool. And don't do Paris Hilton because your mic drool. Back to the middle. Back to this. When I'm on the mic it's just like this. Ramen. Puffing. You gotta come through. Just like your merry go round dude. Don't you know I'm good to go without a word to say. They call me Freddie Beat from the 9164 shake a D. If you're president you gotta be cool. Just like I said from the new school. You gotta have pizzazz. You gotta come up right. You gotta be like Will Smith or maybe Martin Luther King. Or Lawrence or Ike on top of things all the time. Busting fresh rhymes every single day. Like Niagara Falls. All down okay. Like Yosemite where I went when I was with the cadets. I looked hard like I was in a Corvette. Rolling so fast. Rolling so right. I wasn't a CRC and it was dynamite. Gotta come up like this you know. I started with Builder and made it to the top. I had something on my shirt. Like hip hop. Rocking non stop. But don't forget about my pastor because he stands tall. And that's right. He knows it all. Because he's so good. And I'm not buttering up like a buttermilk biscuit in case you didn't know I had to kiss it. But I don't kiss men. Only I only kiss somebody named Jen. And when I was like this it was like Roddy Piper but not a Dorothy Cyper. Don't forget about CJ and Gordon Tew and Justin the man. He can do it alright too. 1 2 3 it's time to go. But I hope you like my rhyme. Really though. Time to go and show might have worked out. But that's okay. That was good. Alright thanks Paul. Alright 1 love. Check it out today. We had 453 views in 6 days. Look at that. It's a success. Thanks Paul. Oh okay. I was gonna be almost. Alright thank you you guys. We love you.