https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=z2CdKlEoS2k

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show episode 41. 41, 41. We're here, we got Gordon. What's up, Gordon, my homeboy. And Gordon and Fred are gonna see a movie. We just had lunch. Yep, yep, yep. And I don't know, what should we talk about? You gonna go see a Denzel movie? Denzel. What's the name of the movie, Gordon? Roman J. Israel Esquire. Okay, and what's it about? Well, he plays a lawyer. He's at a law firm. The person who passed the firm dies. He has to take over. And I guess he's casting temptations. He's tempted. He's a lawyer who tries to do the right thing, but he gets tempted to kind of do to the dark sides towards people like Star Wars. Oh, okay. Return of the Jedi! And with this new movie, he's not, you know, the typical suave Denzel. He's got, you know, he's more of a character driven character. A genius, right, brother? Yeah, he's not the GQ smooth Denzel. A genius, Paul. Let's put it like that. Like you, you're the genius. He has afro glasses and stuff too. And I just wanted to say the rest of the piece is David Cassidy. I mean, A Part of the Franny was a great show. David Cassidy died? Yeah, it was a great show. How old was he? You know, 67. Oh, that's young. He was a talented guy, but he had a bad ship with the pole and the stinger. He really had talent. So the rest of the piece is David Cassidy and also Robert Guillaume from Betsy. Oh, Robert Guillaume. I remember him too. He's older though. David Cassidy though, he was not that old. Wow. You remember David Cassidy, Fred? No, I forgot. I knew who the Partridge family was. Remember the Partridge family? He was on there. Which one? He was the teenage boy. I don't remember the character name. Keith Partridge. What's that? Keith. Keith? Oh, okay. All right. Yeah, he was on a show. All right. Anything else you want to talk about today? I don't know if there's anything you want to talk about. Oh, yeah. The Philadelphia Eagles beat the Rams fall. Okay. And the 49ers actually won. Yay! That's amazing. They beat the Texans. That's amazing. And the Raiders had a bye, right? I don't remember. I didn't watch any football because my fantasy team is doing terribly. And so I'm not paying any attention to football. I'm trying to avoid it. Okay. Okay? All right. You're going to do a rap, Fred? I'm going to do a rap. Here you go. Go ahead, Fred. I'm going to tell you a little story about me and my friends. About something we did a way back when I was eating spaghetti and getting kind of sweaty. When all of a sudden Ian walked Betty. Betty was my girl in these old days. And she had a lot of friends that were walking my way. I said first there was Helen. Then there was Ellen. But the best of them all, she had the name of Lou Ellen. She had the gleamiest eyes and the prettiest pose. But get this Gordon, she had some bony elbows. But back to the point. The point was this. Betty was jealous of my friend Sis. Sis at seven. Liz at eight. I said it didn't work, but it didn't work great. So take Fred's advice and never try that. It probably won't work and you might get slapped. All right. Good one, Fred. I like that one. Hi, Mom. I hope you enjoyed episode 40. This is a good one, too. Episode 41. And I mean, I hope you enjoyed episode 40. And this is 41. And I hope everybody... Oh, thank you for your... What's that person in Canada? Diane. Diane. Hi, Diane. She's from Canada. She gave us... I really...much props. Much props. Much props to Diane in Canada. You got it going on. Let's hope the Kings continue to do well. They beat the Pelicans, like I said the other day. And I really can't dance in the car, so we can't do that. But anyways, thank you very much, Paul. And I didn't give you no problem when you gave the waitress a tip. And that is so awesome. The awesome is awesome. All right. And I appreciate everything. Come on. Come on. You got to do it, Gordon. Come on. One...ready? One...love. Do it. One love. One love. Amen. All right.