https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=1etN0fWjpdU

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. What's happening Paul? How's it going Fred? What are they going on? How do you like those Niners? Pretty good. I just made sure that we just went to Golden Corral people. We had a good time. We talked about politics a little bit didn't we? Now I know I hear. About Kanye. Kanye, we talked about Kanye a little bit. We talked about, what were you guys talking about? Movies and streaming and YouTube and music, movies, sports. How it's all reflected in people's life. Some people have likes. Some people like sports. Some people like politics. Like Trump. Sorry Trump. Some people like things like music, dancing, movies. Movies are a big subject because they make a lot of money. You see how much they charge for a movie? $10. That's ridiculous. That's even more than that. That's like $12, $13. $12, $13 yes. And you can wait until it comes on disc Paul. Pay less than that. Pay $2.50 for a red box. That's true. There you go. There's an ad. Like Paul said, what's the idea? Freddie's giving away endorsements again. Is there any endorsements on Pepsi? No I haven't gotten any endorsements. Pepsi hasn't called or called. I watched a baseball game last night. You should have watched it Paul. The World Series? Yeah. Astros lost unfortunately. I was upset. 5-2 they lost. So they play tonight. And whoever wins tonight is the World Series winners. And they will be victorious. I think it's going to be Houston. I think it's going to be Houston. Washington, it will be interesting if Washington wins. You know why? They've never won a World Series. Never. So anyways, what show did you do last night? You said you had a show at 6? I did a debate last night. How'd that go? That went very well. I was very happy with it. I was very happy with it. I do a radio show tonight. Oh really? Yeah. How do you do it? The guy who's radio show it is, he calls me on the phone. I do it over the phone. For real? You know how to hook it up like that? I've had him on my channel and so he wanted me on his radio show. Dang, that's cool. Place in Florida. Oh, when is that guy coming down, Paul? Okay. From Chicago, the man that made my beat. No, the guy who made your beats from upstate New York. A guy from Chicago. I don't think he's going to be there for Sunday. The guy that made my beat was New York? The guy that made your beats was Adam. Adam. Do you know how to reach him so I can talk to him and find out what I should do with the beat or is it just mine? It's just yours. Is there lyrics on it too? Yeah, yeah. It's a whole song? It's from some of your stuff that you made. Oh, it's just a whole song? Well, maybe I'll put it on this then. Okay. I had a question. If I put my music back out, it'd be okay for me to talk about it on the show, right? Yeah. Where people can get it or whatever? Yeah, yeah, yeah. You could advertise your music on the show. All right, that's all I wanted. It's our show. You can promote your own music on it. All right. Well, what else is going on? Oh, I don't know. Just kind of normal life. Oh. A's or not the A's, but the Niners. It's going to be very interesting to see how far the Niners go. Oh, Niners. What if they do win eight? That would be interesting. They could. They're really good. They play Arizona, right? Oh, they're better in Arizona. Arizona Cardinals. That's who they play. Yeah, they should beat them. And did you win this last week? I did. I did. I did. And did you win this last week? I won. I beat my son, Philip. Good job. I beat my son, Philip. I'm still having a terrible year. I'm proud of you, though. You won. Because the highest score I had this year, Reggie, was a little bit higher, and so he beat me. Oh, Reggie? Reggie and your mom. I don't mean to be funny, but Reggie, I need to pay you. If you're watching, Reggie, I need to pay you. We need to talk, buddy. I know. All right, so let me do my rap. All right, do your rap. Kicking the side with the rhymes that do flow. Paul sitting down. Really, though. Good to go. The Astros play. They throw the baseball anyway. They throw it down the pipe in the middle. Yo, about 90 miles per hour in the middle. Fiddle like this and fiddle like that. Enough to the chat. My stuff is fat. Don't you know? Good to go without a word to say. Washington anyway is going to lose, really, though, okay? But I don't know. We'll find out tonight. The game will be somewhat out of sight. Goodness goes all the way. Whoever wins the game, it'll be good all the way. Coming like this. Coming like that. I hope Houston wins, and that's a fact. That's a fact. All right. Thank you. All right. One love. All right.