https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rlJfY0-IRsc

 Good morning, Paul. Good morning, Rick. Hey, Rich. Good morning, California. Good afternoon, New York. Good evening, London and Netherlands. And hi to all you insomniacs in the Land Down Under. We are starting our Friday question and answer. There'll be no question and answer next week. Next week is the day after American Thanksgiving. And holidays are crunch times for pastors. Not only do we have extra services, but in my case, I have kids coming in. And so I both have demands from home of not working so much and demands at work to work more. And so fair warning to you, video production might suffer. And every time I forecast that video production will suffer, I usually make more. So we'll see what comes next week. So no Friday question and answer next week. I was just talking to Rick and just all kinds of interesting ideas cooking. I had an idea this morning of a work conference, because Rick and I are trying to figure out how to get all kinds of things done at Living Stones. Maybe we should do a work conference where Rick says there's too many IT people. Well, if you're an IT person, you've got to pay your own way. But if you're a blue collar person that can do fencing and all kinds of other work, maybe we'll pay your way out here and we'll hang out and get a bunch of work done around church and talk. And the IT people can sit on their butts and talk next to us. Or maybe we'll put something in their hands to get some work done. So anyway, lots of ideas like that percolating around. I thought that'd be really, you know, the problem with conferences is you sit around and you talk, talk, talk, and you eat a lot of crap usually and it makes you fat and lazy. But if we had a conference, especially, sorry ladies, no offense here, but you know, a men's conference where men would come and work, you women can come and work too, would have a lot of jobs for you to do too. So it wouldn't just be a men's conference. Anyway, just a thought out of, I just percolated up because Chad the alcoholic is doing his work. He's setting a floor or something. And I know a lot of you because I listened to you when you contact me, you've got painters and plumbers and people who work the trades. And so, you know, you're in a room for three or four hours doing something and so you set up your smartphone or something and you listen to YouTube or this kind of thing while you're doing it. So just an idea. We'll see if it percolates away. All right, let's get to the question and answer. I'm always afraid that I'm going to somehow kill this format, but it seems to just keep giving. If you have questions in the YouTube chat, I don't really have that in front of me. You might plead with someone who is in both realms to copy and paste the question over into the discord questions for PVK. That's the list that I'm working on to answer questions. And the first question this week, another Jordan Peterson question right off the bat. Paul, thanks for your explanation of Jordan Peterson as the unauthorized exorcist from last week. I quite agree, although several times during his tearful video with Peugeot, I thought Peterson was exhibiting signs of a nigh to thy lips, Deuteronomy 30, 14 moment of salvation. What context of conversation will get him to that door again? I know it's up to him to open the door of faith. How long will Jordan Peterson stay apart from the body of Christ? I think some, well, do we make ourselves Christians or does God make us Christians? So I'm a Calvinist and I tend to think it's the spirit of God. The spirit of God takes us. That's sort of my preoccupation, but experientially that often, there's also a decision on the other end. And in our denomination, we have a profession of faith where one professes their faith. So whichever way you come at it, you're asking about a moment of decision where one crosses a line. So I made a video yesterday, a little bit of commentary on a podcast that is only in the podcast feed. It isn't in the video feed, at least not yet. It's a compilation podcast of a bunch of second wave, Jordan Peterson conversations about God, meaning and really saints, I think in some ways that compilation was. It's an excellent compilation. And so if you've subscribed to Jordan Peterson's audio only podcast, you'll find it, but you won't find it on the YouTube channel, at least not yet. It's clearly a compilation of his conversations with Vervecky, with Peugeot, with Bishop Baron, with Stephen Blackwood. I think I got his name right this time. I got his name wrong in the video. I had to correct myself. So this whole question about a moment of decision or a moment crossing the line, I don't want to in any way undermine the experiential truth of that, but there are also other layers of realization with respect to these things, such as before I knew, before I experientially knew that God was working in my life, he was already working to set the stage beforehand. One way to answer this question might be when will Jordan Peterson submit to the authority of a church and depending on which aspect of the church he embraces, it could be a local church or the Church of Rome. He seems, his wife seems quite taken with the Church of Rome. So to keep the family together, maybe he'll go that way. His daughter has moved to Nashville and has been, sounds like she's, if you're in Nashville, you're gonna find an awful lot of evangelicals. So I would not be at all surprised if at some point Jordan Peterson himself does begin to, see, here's a question I often raise. He may have already been baptized because my assumption is that the United Church of Canada as sort of a historic mainline composite Protestant church may very well have baptized him as an infant if his parents brought him for baptism. Maybe his parents didn't and if his parents didn't and if he left the church when he was 11 or 12 years old, like he has said, then maybe he hasn't been baptized. So how in fact to mark that line of demarcation might be a little difficult, depending on whether or not he's been baptized. If he hasn't been baptized, then baptism will obviously be the mark. Even though a lot of people like to say, well, he should join the Orthodox church, part of the difficulty you're going to face is that my impression of the Orthodox church is that they are more demanding than most in terms of the process of catechesis and the steps towards entry into the full life of the church. He would have to make a pretty significant departure from what I think has been the very stable comments he's made with respect to his thoughts to enter into that process. Could happen, sure it could happen. My guess would be he would probably first move towards the Roman Catholic church or perhaps a Protestant church. And even before he would do that, my guess is that he would probably have to start attending worship services on a regular basis. It's not unusual in the black community to walk into a church, sit in the back row, towards the end of the service, stand up and say, okay, I'm ready to pastor, I'm ready to join the church. That because of the unique demographic of my congregation, I'll have that now and then. Then someone after a Sunday or two will say, pastor, I've been in the church three weeks, you've never given me a chance to join the church. And my answer to them is, why don't you sit down for another six months and begin to enter into the life of the church and have your eyes open to what this church is about and we'll continue the conversation. Then we'll go into some more formal catechesis. And at the end of that process, you'll either do a profession of faith where you'll basically make the promises of a believer to the church or you'll do that and submit to baptism. That would be the process for entering the church. Now your question is what context of conversation? I don't think a context of conversation is going to do it that's prompted by us. Again, when a Calvinist basically talks about the Holy Spirit, the Calvinist is talking about a total system by which God is moving providentially in heaven and earth and bringing a person to the point of in some ways surrendering and submitting. And I think C.S. Lewis's conversion is a terrific example. I suspect that if Peterson decides to take steps towards the church and become an authorized exorcist as such, then I think that probably it'll follow something along the lines of C.S. Lewis's conversion. It's awfully difficult to convert on YouTube. It's more difficult for high status people to convert. And so a high status person converting on YouTube is doubly difficult. Now we've seen it happen. Rausch V., who was the pick up artist, has clearly converted to orthodoxy. The conversation between him and Milo used to be on YouTube but you can still find it on BitChute and a bunch of those other platforms. It's a fascinating conversation between those two in terms of the transformation and life required towards, in Rausch V's case, embracing the orthodox faith. In Milo's case, becoming a consecrated member of the Roman church. So there's process involved. So I, as a Calvinist, I basically put this in God's hands and as a minister, you've seen the way I do evangelism. You might say, well, how do you do evangelism? Well, I hope I wouldn't, I don't think I would scare John Vervecky off because I think he very clearly understands who I am and what my agenda is that my conversations with John Vervecky are evangelistic and that's how I would characterize what I'm doing with John. Now John, as the religion that's not a religion and so he doesn't embrace Christianity the way I do, but as friends, I would smile and say, of course, John, I'd love you to become a Christian. And John, I think, would smile and say, I'm not there yet, I'm not there yet, but I have that all the time. When I talk with my friend, Jacob, on the Discord server, of course he would love me to become part of the Jewish community and in some ways, abandon or forsake my Christian beliefs. And when I talk to a Muslim, of course, they would love for me to change sides and on and on and on and on. There are many different kinds of tribes and so many different kinds of lines. So I think Jordan continues to explore at his own pace the kinds of ideas he's playing with, but there's a difference between theoretically saying, oh, God exists, yada, yada, yada. And I think there's some credibility and credence to basic Christian beliefs. I don't know that Peterson will embrace that so much, partly because of at this recession of modernity, he and John Vervecky, in a lot of ways, have been deconstructing propositional truth. It's maybe not the right way. I think probably better said, recalibrating the role of propositional knowledge with respect to, for John Vervecky, the other three Ps. And I think that's appropriate. I think part of what happened in modernity was that the propositional was accentuated and out of step with some of the others. And so what's happening with the recession of modernity is that there's a recalibration going on and I think probably a better fit. And so Jordan is clearly in some ways ambiguous with respect to his profession of Christian faith when he says, I act as if I, you know, God is real or something of that nature. And you will find video, because so much of his talk is online, you will find moments where he identifies as a Christian and moments when he is quite explicit about what he sees as the shortcomings of the church in this audio compilation of a variety of his wave two conversations. There are a number of places where he expresses his frustration with the church. That obviously does not exclude anyone from participating in the church because I would say to him, I can completely understand your frustration with the church. In fact, because of the close proximity that I have to the church and intimate knowledge and experience within the church, I would say I'd see your frustrations and multiply them by 10, because I've got 10 examples for every one of his because I'm living in the church and I've got it in my eyes all the time. So yeah, I'm fully aware of the church's shortcomings. I'm fully aware of what's been happening. And that's again, why I think in many ways he's an unauthorized exorcist because he remains outside the church. If you are a church of one, you are not in a church. That's just the way that goes because you are your own church. And I think Peugeot quite lovingly as a friend was very clear with him that a fan base is not a church because the kind of accountability fans will hold you to, and you can think about the mooks and knights, the mooks and knights article that I mentioned, that I've mentioned quite a few times, they might hold you accountable by leaving you, but that's a very different structure than a church structure. And there are kinds of relationships that you'll have. It's sort of like the difference between living together and being married. When you enter a church, you take vows and those vows hold you to something. And that changes the context, whereas your fans, that's sort of like living together. And so that's not a church. So I'm not anxious about Jordan Peterson's soul. Would I love to see him commit to a church? Absolutely. Will that happen? Well, his wife is closer, his daughter is closer. Those kinds of things matter for people because we're not just talking heads on sticks. Thank you, ABC. We're not just talking heads on sticks. We are connected to our wives, we're connected to our families, and these things really matter. And they especially matter in terms of what the specific outline of your faith will be. I am a minister in the Christian Reformed Church in many ways by virtue of my birth into it. So what context of conversation? Probably more private conversation. I think the stuff on YouTube, we're learning what can be done in this. Yesterday I had a conversation with a couple and it was very quick, you know, it was very quick, it's soon into the conversation that it was obvious this wasn't something that we were gonna share on YouTube. There's just way too much personal information that it isn't appropriate to have on YouTube. And so I would imagine that if Peterson is going to join a church, it's going to, he'll probably, like Lewis, have to cross some lines, preliminary lines, like Lewis first became a theist before he joined the Anglican Church. There's a lot of debate with Lewis about his relationship to the Roman Catholic Church. He obviously wasn't terribly anti-Catholic. His ideas of mere Christianity afforded him a degree of flexibility within Christian denominations. But he, C.S. Lewis was from Northern Ireland and there was a rather fervent anti-Catholicism, at least in some of the people who raised him. So all of those layers go into an individual's life and then into the specific decisions they make with respect to how they enter the body of Christ, which room off the hall of mere Christianity they will enter into and what their, what the nature of their communion in that body will be. So there's just a variety of thoughts with respect to Jordan Peterson's status in terms of the church and questions as to whether he'll get there. God knows we don't. It's God that changes our hearts. It's God that arranges our lives. I think God is the best frame to look at this through and to begin the conversation with. It doesn't exclude all of the historical, experiential, philosophical, relational layers that are involved. 20 minutes, it's not too bad. All right, Kirk. What's the right framework of understanding the spiritual world and our place in it? In response to one of Hatkey's questions, Pezeau mentioned that spiritual principalities affect the world not directly but through us. And if I commented on that in my commentary, I talk enough on YouTube to know that sometimes I say things and upon further reflection, I might want to nuance or even change what I said. It's part of the beauty of the abundance of bandwidth on YouTube. I believe some, by definition, spirit shapes matter. It's the common way that that happens are through spiritual amphibians, which is what we are. We are spiritual agents. We participate in spirits. We are moved by spirits. We contribute to collective spirits. But I believe that human beings are not the only spiritually amphibious creatures. Angels are. And so if you look at, for example, the story of Sodom and Gomorrah, the angel strikes the people of Sodom blind. Part of the reason angels struck fear in people was they seem to, they have power in the physical world. So human beings are not the only amphibious spiritual material mediums around. That being said, one way to understand our role in the world as vice regents, as the stuff of earth and the breath of God, that's another way of noting our amphibious qualities. Is that this world was given to us to reign over. And so that's what we do. And so the common way is mediated through us in the same way that the spirit moves my hand. The spirit of Paul VanderKlay wiggles my fingers. The spirit of Paul VanderKlay wiggles my fingers. School spirit causes the basketball players to play better. NBA teams sometimes talk about the fifth man. Well, who's the fifth man? Well, the fifth man are the fans. How are the fans, or the sixth man, I'm sorry, the sixth man, how are the fans the sixth man? Because it's almost as if, if the fans are really behind the team, that they have an extra player on the floor. We talk about that as the home field or the home core advantage in basketball. So we recognize this all over the place, but are there spirits that can, are there other amphibious spirits in existence? It's incredibly closed-minded to say that there aren't, just because you've never met one or you've never experienced one. Oh, so now all of us are so supposed to be subject to your narrow window of experience. I think that's astoundingly closed-minded. And I think there is absolutely ample evidence to the fact that there are many, many spirits that move matter in the world. Beyond us. I think there's abundant evidence for that. What happens is that when you have the naturalist lab leak and you have a dogma, and that's exactly the right word for it, that says that the only amphibious spiritual material creatures in existence are human beings, that's simply a dogma, and I think it's a false one. And I think there's ample experience to demonstrate it. And I think part of the experience, that leads me down a whole rabbit trail. Anyway, so yeah, whether that's what Peugeot believes, or he misspoke, or upon further reflection, he'd like to alter what he said, that's up to him. But this is the way I see it. What do you think about this, especially in regards to the reality of spiritual beings and the primacy of physicality? I think I just answered that. I don't think the line between natural and supernatural are clear, I agreed. Similar to how the villagers see the god on the beach, but the modernist doesn't, right. Or how the resurrection isn't the same kind of event as signing the Declaration of Independence. There are aspects of similarity between the resurrection and the Declaration of Independence. If you can chew a fish, you can move a pen. So there are aspects of it, but theologically, what the church asserts, I believe, is that creation 2.0 begins in the resurrected body of Jesus Christ. I think you can get that from the Book of Colossians. I think that is expressed by some of the strangeness of the capacities of the resurrected Christ. C.S. Lewis tries to get at some of those ideas in his book, Miracles, when he talks about miracles of the old and new creation. When I was talking to Jonathan, when I was talking to John Vervecky and J.P. Marceau, when I talked about Peter walking on water, I think there are indications that the restoration of our place with nature implies a far greater harm and harmony with, as C.S. Lewis calls it, our sister nature than we currently have today. One way of understanding what I call the age of decay, or someone might call this particular dispensation, until the next dispensation which fully arrives in the second coming, is that we and nature are at odds with one another, and nature does not obey us. What we tend to do with nature is blunt force her. That's what we do with nature. And Tolkien, I think, expressed this beautifully in The Lord of the Rings, the difference between the elves and the magic of Saruman or Sauron. Saruman and Sauron blunt forced subjugated nature to bend it to their will. That's what technology does. And we're very effective at it, but all of the unintended consequences of technology, I think, exhibit the continued power of nature to rebel against us. And it seems like every time we sort of get a leg up over nature and bending it to our will, we discover some unintended consequence and a downside that often proves fatal. And this is why I know there are a lot of believers who are skeptical about human-induced climate change. I'm not a climate scientist. I think some of the climate models are overblown. But to me, it's not theologically incoherent to imagine that our abuse of nature through technology will have negative ramifications that end our lives. That's not a theologically out of bounds thing to imagine. So that's my position on that. So yeah, I think, I think I just articulated my thoughts on this. In my videos, I've tried to articulate in a way that we can understand a lot better using the word spirit. I don't think the word has completely gone from our language. I think we can recognize that. I think it's absolutely reasonable to imagine that we are not the only amphibious, spiritual material creatures there are. I think the Bible is quite clear about that. I think our posture towards the material world is one of antagonism at this point. And I believe that in the renewal of all things, in creation 2.0, we will be able to embrace and dance with our sister nature rather than feud with her. And I think that will be a joyful unification, reunification. That's, I think, the Christian theological lay of the land. Jotham, good day to you, Paul. Hope you're doing, hope you're feeling swell. I feel swell. Hopefully I'm not swelling. In the discord, there's a question asked by some Bridgers if the Lord is used to describe the Trinity as a whole or only the God, the Father. What are your thoughts on this? I think often in the Bible, the reference is to God the Father. Some, there's a line of belief that finds the angel of the Lord, this mysterious creature, not creature, oh gosh, the language. The angel of the Lord sometimes as the pre-incarnate, second person of the Trinity. I think generally speaking, the Tetragrammaton refers to the Father, generally speaking. But I don't think that the Bible is a pre-incarnate I think we have to be careful when we try to push these things too far. Prophet Zacharias, hey Paul, this week at work, the big dogs from corporate have come to our service center. I work in the trucking industry on a dock as a dock worker and they wanted to tell us about sexual misconduct. It's moments like this that my treeless nature comes out. Now these guys are not the politically correct types. I mean, I think you mean the guys on the dock. And this was an ill-fated project from the start. I have been in these kinds of places. That is so funny to watch. We are in there cracking jokes and laughing as I can very easily imagine. We even got the instructor, the investigator, to laugh at jokes. At some point he asked us what a wolf whistle is. And one of the older guys belts out a perfectly practiced and totally perfect wolf whistle. Some call it a cat call whistle. And my coworkers looked at him and said jokingly, I'm pressing charges. And we all had a big laugh. His boss, the head of HR and the whole company was present and wasn't having any of it. Yes, because... You know, I've, I worked my way through college loading lumber trucks and delivering lumber and working in a lumber yard. There's lots of ways that these games get played. Some better, some worse. And I think Peugeot is right in that what we're trying to do in some of these cases is reap the field all the way to the edge and not leave room for the gleaners and not leave the fringes. Then it all hit me. I suddenly felt like given all this time I've been spending reading and watching and thinking about all these interplays and meeting crisis, I and my colleagues were like tribal peoples to these college educated, soft-handed men. And they were missionaries come to colonize us, the uncivilized rabble. There you go. Access this dogma or we will fire you or duck and duck your pay. Not only access this dogma, you're well aware of the dogma. It's all around you. It's all around you. Comply and manifest this dogma. The question is, does that dogma really apply to your context? I had understood this concept since the backlash to the woke and the various red pills started falling from the sky. But this is my first instance post Tom Holland, seeing it like an anthropologist happening in real time. Yeah, there it is. I was suddenly standing on a beach with a loincloth and a spear looking at strange bearded men, deboarding ships carrying canvas and the King James. It's a clash of cultures. All right. Shepherd on Paranoid from Noah Walker. When I was an atheist, I didn't fear death, only pain. And my fear of pain was settled only by the thought that there was no pain after death, since I believe that consciousness and awareness ceased with bodily death. The prospect of eternal torment has upended this cozy idea. In the past two months, I've suffered existential anxiety and a few panic attacks concerning it. I'm 22 and death has only now become personal. The idea of heaven is comforting to many people in the face of death. Unfortunately, I've let myself become consumed by an opposite notion. Most of the people I know who have died were not believers. There are some Protestants who suggest with certainty the destination of dead non-believers and I can't cope with that. Many sayings of the Desert Fathers and the Orthodox saints likewise read as dire and haven't provided me with much hope for them or myself. Images like the ladder of divine ascent in which holy men near the top are nonetheless pulled down into hell by demons. Not your typical motivational poster. I know that I am a sinner. I am proud, jealous, and lustful in the most distressing ways. And I try all the time to correct my patterns of thought and behavior. Sometimes the gospel is so hopeful. I'm filled with perfect joy. Then I lend my ears to monks and preachers and the task of salvation seems almost impossible. What am I to make of some Christians calling this life empty with exhortations to deny all sensory pleasures, weaken the body so as to control it, turning inward while other Christians exalt the enjoyment of creation in so far as it orients one towards God in gratitude and love? What we ought to turn away from ourselves and be totally in the service of others. Are these not contradictory modes of being? I have been a pastor too long to imagine that I can dispel your torment with one simple answer. I might be able to help you. And given the fact that this is recorded, if it's helpful, you might be able to replay it and find that to be helpful. I can give you what I have. The panoply of options that you see before you, I won't in any way attempt to dispel or discredit. They all speak to you from times and places and are likely faithful testimonies to the dangers and opportunities that the Christian faith sees in the world. But all of this must be applied to you. And this is exactly why we have the church. The church is here to help us. Move towards Christ. I've wrestled with many of the questions that you bring here. And you can go over my videos and find answers to various aspects of them in terms of how I engage with them. I'm a pastor and what that means is I take my best reading of all of the material available and my best reading of you and I try to bring them together. And I bring them together in service of pursuing your continual transformation into what God has in store for you. Now, in all of my sermons, you'll notice the structure, which I get from the Heideberg Catechism, misery, deliverance, gratitude. And I think one of the ways of reading your question is to follow that framework. You have rightly noted that you do not have the power to save yourself. And the warnings that you see out in the world are frightening as well they should be. This world is not a safe space. Never has been, won't be until we get a second one. And part of your journey is moving towards that second one. Moving towards the culmination in this dispensation of Christ's work in you in turning you into a saint. That is exactly what he's going to do. That is what he intends to do. You can read in C.S. Lewis's Mere Christianity. That doesn't mean a little fixing here and a little fixing there. It means a major overhaul. And he will probably take his time doing it, which means that there are some sins that upon prayer and perhaps deliverance you will be delivered from quickly. There are other sins and sinful patterns that you may struggle with for decades. And if God does that for you, he does that for his own reasons because there are, there are ways of purification that take time to deliver. So misery, deliverance, gratitude, misery, yes. You are a sinner, yes. You put yourself in jeopardy both for this world and the next on a regular basis. Deliverance, Christ out of his complete generosity became flesh for you. Taught the people around him for you. Gave himself up as a sacrifice for you. Was raised on the third day for you and ascended to the father and sits over, reigning over history for you. And it sounds like he's already begun the work and he will complete the work. And you should participate in this work and it sounds like you're trying to do so. Part of that will be getting a pastor. Now I may be helpful, I'm accessible via YouTube and to whatever degree I am helpful to Christ's work in you. I'm thrilled to be a part of that helpful process. But I've now got a flock of, a virtual flock of thousands, which means I'm limited in my capacity to know you individually and personally. And that specificity of attention is needed by all of us. I'm also a Protestant where I believe that God will work through not only clergy like myself, but wise brothers and sisters in the Lord to give you counsel and to be a good person and to give you counsel and advice and comfort. Now with respect to damnation, I think there are two pitfalls. One is to dismiss warnings as unnecessary. I think warning is necessary. The other is to presume and to catastrophize the warnings. Christ is going to do what's right. And I think we will probably not be able to see the rightness of his choices until our capacities for judgment are themselves sanctified. So until that day, trust in him. Don't presume to know his judgments until he gives you that knowledge. You don't know about your dead relatives and your dead loved ones. Christ will do with them what is right. Trust in Christ, not in your capacity to gain knowledge and then judge for yourself. Trust in his judgment. In other words, don't worry. That's a direct command of his in the Sermon on the Mount. You're wrestling with things. That's a good thing. You're not wrestling with these things in isolation. You've brought the question to me. That's a good thing. Keep doing this. But you're going to have to do this in the context of the church, which can simultaneously challenge you and comfort you and support you and carry you. That doesn't mean that in your life, you won't face tremendous trials that try you to the bottom of your core. Nope, that comes. That doesn't mean you won't face doubts. We've also been given, each of us, a personality profile. Some of us are more anxious than others. Trait neuroticism, as Jordan Peterson calls it. Some of us aren't terribly neurotic. My level of neuroticism, when I did Jordan Peterson's know yourself thing, I am super low in neuroticism. I'm super high in openness. I'm moderately good in conscientiousness. I have received in my personality profile, however you want to imagine that comes about, a really wonderful mix. A lot of mornings I watch Grim Grizz and he has his little saving throws and it reminds me of rolling for D&D characters. But you don't use the 20-sided die to roll a D&D character. You use six-sided die because that then gives you a bell curve of probability. Well, you might think about personality profiles similar to that. I was given high in openness and low in neuroticism and relatively good, I just mentioned it, relatively good conscientiousness. That's a really sweet role for me. You might simply be higher in neuroticism and so these things you worry about. What does that mean? There are benefits in that. Rick and I were just talking. Rick's higher in neuroticism than I am. It also means that he pays careful attention to detail whereas my low neuroticism means I skate over detail and have unfortunate, uncomfortable gotchas. Rick's more of a worrier and so he looks at the detail. Together we get some stuff right, which is again why you need a body of Christ. It's why your gifts and your struggles are mediated by a larger community. That's the path because I can answer the specific elements of your question and give you my answers for them, but again by virtue of your personality, for a moment you might sort of have your consciousness filled with the vision I'm able to give you and you'll say ah, that makes me feel better. And because this is recorded, you can take a little clip of it and whenever you have this specific thing, if this answer works out well for you, you can replay it and it'll be ah, that feels better. I mentioned many times that I've read C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles, over and over and over again because I was wrestling with modernity and so I could go back to Lewis and ah, I would feel better. At other places in my life, when I had other challenges to face, there were particular Bible verses, there were particular sermons, there were particular songs that I would, that I would listen to repeatedly, play repeatedly and deal with my anxieties of the troubles in the world and the trouble in my life and continue to soothe myself by the Lord's capacity to save me. It was amazing to me that, I think it was John Vervecky and Tim Keller both grabbed at this one passage of Tolkien where Sam is going through Mordor and, or is he on his way to Mordor? And everything seems lost and of course Mordor, Mount Doom, that puts up this huge dark cloud that covers the stars and the sky and the sun and there's a break in the cloud and Frodo could see through. Tim Keller mentioned when he was a number of years ago going into thyroid surgery that he was laying on the table and they were about to put him under and they were wheeling him into the O.R. and you would think a good Christian minister would have a psalm or something on mind but no, that passage from Lord of the Rings came to mind. So, it sounds like you are on the journey. Keep working on the journey but you can't do it alone. You need to surround yourself with the church and with saints and with the weapons that by God's providence and grace he has given the church that you can arm yourself, that you can proceed meaningfully. Now you have a hard hill to climb and it sounds like you're climbing it. So, keep at it. Find a church, find a pastor, find a small group, find those nuggets in the Christian tradition that you can come back to to strengthen you on the path to God's work in making you into a saint. Next question. Any tips on getting the most out of Romans? I'll let you know as I go through. It's all the usual stuff. Part of the difficulty that I have is I spent two weeks on the book of Second Thessalonians in the worship service. Little 30 minute messages. Two weeks on that rather small sort of repeat of First Thessalonians book in the New Testament. Romans is a mountain to climb. I spent 75 weeks on the book of Revelation in my adult Sunday school class a number of years ago. I have that class because it does a number of things for me. It slows me down because these books are inexhaustible. As Jordan Peterson says, you can't get to the bottom of them. So it slows me down. And along the way I hope to not only deliver ideas to this tiny little group of people that gathers here at Living Stones now more via the internet, but also help instruct them and have better tools on approaching the Bible. You can exhaust your lifetime even just with the study of the study of the Bible. Because over the last 2000 years, the philosophical layers and the cultural layers just keep passing over this book and it keeps getting mined for resources. So there's a little book, some simple things, how to read the Bible for all it's worth. You can find that book. It's an excellent book on teaching basic Bible study, but that will tend to be fairly modernistic, historical, grammatical, exegetical. Those are good tools. You listen to Jonathan Peugeot, you'll get some symbolic tools that'll help you to understand the book. You read, so one of my favorite series of commentaries is this one from InterVarsity Press, ancient Christian commentary on scripture. And what this commentary does is goes through church fathers and takes little snippets because they didn't write commentaries as such necessarily and includes them, their little snippets on a particular passage. There are so many tools. And even more than that, do it together with people. The church is God's gift to us. Use it. And don't just use it, invest in it. So much of life. Let me think about what this YouTube channel has become for me. This YouTube channel for me has become the richest, most intense learning tool I have ever possessed. Now that sounds completely selfish, and in some ways it is. My YouTube channel is this learning tool because I learned from you. And some of you say, well, but I learned from you. Yeah, isn't it wonderful? We're having an exchange here. We're learning from each other. But this requires an investment on my part. I invest hours each week into this YouTube channel, into reading the comments. And I'm terribly behind in, there's all sorts of messaging apparatus for people to send me messages, and I'm just overwhelmed by the levels of messaging. But it's back and forth. But I have to invest in it. The same is true of a church. If your church is going to be useful for you, you're going to have to invest in it. Your time, your money, your commitment. It's no other way. But that's the way everything in life is. Is your marriage going to be fulfilling? You're going to have to invest in it. Are your children going to grow up and become, to become the kind of people with whom you can have life-giving relationships? You're going to have to invest in them. Is your career something that is not only going to be lucrative financially, but also meaningful and something that blesses the world? You're going to have to invest in it. So there's tons of tools out there for studying the Bible. Find a group of people, do it in the context of a church, and you will grow, you will grow. You've convinced your Sunday school class to walk through each chapter. Yeah, what you're going to discover is that the chapters aren't necessarily put in great places. And even at that pace, there's so much in the book of Romans. So yeah, keep watching my adult Sunday school class. It's taking a little bit of work for Rick and I to figure out the mechanics of the recording and everything, but we're continuing to work on it. And like I've said before, at some point, our goal, once we have the mechanics of streaming it, we're going to allow a limited number of people from the internet into the class via Zoom. So yeah, this is, but it doesn't have to go through me. There's tons of great stuff. Hello, Paul, I converted a few years ago from the Seventh-day Adventist faith to the Catholic Church. Yep, about as far as you can get across the Christian spectrum while still having a valid baptism. That's about true. A big part of that conversion was my understanding of the continuation of the praxis of the Israelites to the Christian community. That's kind of what Len Van De Zee was talking about in my conversation with him this week. The Sabbath, the sacrifice, the vestments, the incense, the rituals are all there in the early church. Lex Orendi, Lex Credendi, as your friend Len Van De Zee referred to. Obviously my setting, my seeking out traditional Christianity came from my exposure to the Peterson phenomenon like many others. But is it scalable to answer, but is it scalable to answer the crisis of identity so common nowadays? I think it is. And in fact, Christianity answered the identity question 2,000 years ago and it's all throughout the New Testament. You are a new creation, there's identity. You are in Christ, there's identity. Your life is hidden with Christ and the heavenlies to be revealed as and with your inheritance, there's identity. The book of Revelation, you're given a new name, there's identity. Those issues are all over the New Testament as they are all over the Old Testament. In circumcision, you're given an identity. In baptism, you're given an identity. And that identity is received and that identity scales. And I would argue that the identity crisis that we are facing is because in many ways we are turning away from the Christian inheritance that we have received. That is, is right worship of God the answer to the meaning crisis? So at a number of times during my conversation with Len this week, he was stating the truth in a tremendously articulate and accurate fashion. It's the job of a pastor to help people connect the dots. It's the job of the church to be the manifestation and the witness of those connecting the dots. And culturally, we have lost a lot in terms of the of the church's understanding of the church. The implicit mappings that people could inherit to connect the dots for themselves, to strengthen their lives and to proceed in the journey of sainthood. And what I mean by that is I would love to say that if a church gets all of its worship right, that will be enough. Because in some ways, thinking that way betrays my modernistic formation. And in some ways, my materialist formation. Part of what happens in the protest of the Protestant movement is deep insiders. Martin Luther was an Augustinian monk, one of the most brilliant theologians of his generation. Tremendous memory, tremendous capacity for language, brilliant thinker on top of an explosive personality. You know, what's the difference between someone like him and Erasmus? Well, a lot, but a lot of its personality and where they were. Luther wanted to engage the church in a theological conversation about a lot of the abuses that he saw. The church didn't respond well. And we had the blowout that we had. Was the medieval Roman Catholic Church right in a lot of ways? You can take the medieval church and map Len's description onto it quite easily. Except the church was failing, and this was in many ways Luther's big point. The church was failing to adequately equip the saints for ministry. Part of this was because of the transformations that were ongoing in Europe. Remember the Black Death happened a couple of centuries before the Reformation, a couple of centuries. The Black Death sets up the Reformation as does the Columbian Exchange, Christopher Columbus in the sense sparks globalism, as does urbanization. The medieval system was built on some sociological premises that were in many urban areas, especially in Northern Europe, increasingly outmoded. And, well, Luther was successful in reforming the church because if you're a faithful Roman Catholic, you don't just watch the priests celebrate the mass and you look on. Talk about a fourth wall. You participate. And in the Roman Catholic Church, you can not only have mass every Sunday, you can have mass every day in a lot of places. Praise God, that's wonderful. But scaling that out and having all of the various aspects work together, is a constant challenge that we face. So it's not the case that if you just get your worship right then bang, everything will happen in the same way that if you just get all the elements put together properly for the best nuclear reactor we can imagine today, then you'll produce tons of electricity. To put together a nuclear reactor involves a huge network of expertise, a fine tuning, an entire integrated networked culture. Real things are like that. So we have to avoid when we're doing critique of a system, and that's what Len's doing, when we're doing critique of a system, we have to bear in mind that these systems connect many different things. We don't have weekly communion here at Living Stones. Would that be my preference? Sure. Have I pushed for it? No, why not? Given all of the complexities at Living Stones, I don't know that we could handle it right now. Will that happen someday? Perhaps. Most of our church plants are now doing weekly communion. I praise God for that. I think Len was right in a lot of what he said, but just getting your worship service right isn't going to suddenly bring flourishing. It should help, but there's all kinds of other pieces that have to fall into place. Is the end of modernity creating space for high church liturgy? Yes. Or is it a return to traditional worship bringing about the end of modernity? Well, it's both and usually for these things. Part of the reason our liturgy isn't terribly high church at Living Stones is most of the churches that I see doing high church liturgy well are filled with college educated people who are very comfortable reading big words on text and papers in their hand. I'm not saying high church liturgy can't work with uneducated masses. Obviously it can, and in some ways, that's part of Peugeot's argument for orthodoxy. Your priest doesn't need to be that stellar as long as he sticks to the script. That's a good point. That's a strong point. Part of the Protestant Reformation was improving the educational level of the priests, of the clergy, of the ministers. And in many places in the Christian informed church a century ago, the clergy was the only one out in that rural area filled with dairy farmers who had a college degree. It didn't mean the dairy farmers didn't know anything, but that was how the system worked. Now I can minister in a church, we don't have any anymore, but in this congregation there used to be individuals with PhDs and individuals who couldn't read. There was one dear friend who moved to Sacramento in the 30s during, you know, Grapes of Wrath, the Dust Bowl era. That's before the polio, he had polio as a child, so he was never allowed to go to school. So he couldn't read, he couldn't write. His brother had Down syndrome, was an adult with Down syndrome. There those two sat right in the same row as someone, individuals who had PhDs in engineering. Living stones had to connect the PhD and the illiterate child of a Dust Bowl refugee who worked odd jobs most of his life, died in a crappy nursing home. That's the kind of scale the church has to address. If I had said we're doing weekly, probably weekly communion would have gone really well with the Down syndrome adult and the Dust Bowl refugee, and with the PhD, but not with some of the other individuals. And so when it comes to putting the whole system together, churches deal with that kind of scale all the time, and it usually involves compromise. So, and when I look at the church, that's what I see. I see, I'm not disparaging of joyful mega churches singing love songs to Jesus, because there's a place for that. And for some people, boy, that affords a spiritual power that brings them through this world and turns some of them into saints. I'm also not disparaging of churches that are liturgical, because boy, there's a power in that. Now, along the lines, we have our conversations and we try to improve it. That's what we're doing. But just as with the other question, the pastor and the church applies to the church and the church applies this enormous world down to the level of the individual. That's its job. And that's, Peugeot and I are on the same page. The answer to many of our questions, join a church. Why? It'd be like saying, pastor, I don't know how to play music. Get a music teacher. Pastor, I don't know how to read. Go to school. Pastor, I don't know how to live. Go to church. Yeah, but churches are a mess. Let me tell you how messy they are. Well, what about your church, pastor? I know if I lived in Sacramento, I'd go to your church. I'm not so sure. If you lived in Sacramento, I'm not so sure this would be the best church for you. Depends on a lot, a lot, a lot, a lot of things. And I'm totally good with that. This church is a particular place with a particular people with particular strengths and particular weaknesses. And so people come into this church after listening to my videos, and they kind of look around. Rick knows the score. They kind of look around and think, what is this place? It was kind of gross passing by the homeless guy in the parking lot. And then the music wasn't what I expected. And yeah, the sermon, that didn't hit the mark. And then afterwards, well, the people were friendly, but yeah, that's the reality of complexity. Colton, re-reformed. Hello, Paul, I don't know if you remember me, I certainly do. And my struggles with reformed theology and faith, I'm back now, re-reformed somewhat. I figured if only the laughs for the laughs that I should include you in my love life because I've included the entire server already. After telling myself I wouldn't, I fell on my face for a secular girl. The 21 year old zealous, bold, reformed Calvinist done in by an 18 year old blonde at a frat party. You're not the first. Oh yeah, this Calvinist is in a fraternity. Our God certainly has a sense of humor, huh, Paul? Yeah. Anyway, thoughts on missionary Dayton. Oops, Freudian slip, I mean, what the hell is a young man to do when he falls prey to a story as old as man himself? Like I said earlier, the warnings are out there for a reason, but it's also about the application. I've known people that have, again, the general rule is, oh gosh, this again, so many of these things. Who's the girl, what's her story, what's the situation, what's your level of maturity, what's the level of your relationship with her? There's a thousand, oh, there's so much here. And this again is why you need the church. You need to walk with saints through these things together because there'll be a thousand little turns. And it's easy for me, it would be easy for me to say, it doesn't matter or stop right there, kind of a Calvinist version of meatloaf. Yeah, you can have a lot of fun with that one, Chad the alcoholic. That'd be very easy to say. But it's the application to you. That girl, your faith, your level of maturity, the level of, you know, part you fall in love easy when you're young, partly because you haven't done it before, or at least not that many times before. As you get older, you gain experience, you learn. That changes how do you look at things, it changes how you interact with your feelings, it changes, oh, I remember those days, my friend. I remember those days. There's a lot there. You know the mapping of the terrain. Find good Christians to walk with you through it. All right, two naive questions from Zito. If God is the ground and source, these are not simple questions. If God is the ground and source of all being and Christ is God incarnate, then there's a qualitative and a quantitative and qualitative difference between God and me and God and Christ. Yes, there is. There certainly, you are not pre-existent in the same way Christ is. If the difference is quantitative, how is Christ God in the Trinitarian sense? If the difference is qualitative, how does that work metaphysically since Christianity is a non-dualist faith? See what I mean about scale? The previous question asks, gosh, I met this amazing 18-year-old blonde and I'm smitten, what am I to do? The next question, let's get into the depths of Christology and quantitative and qualitative as if those metaphors, the degree to which those metaphors apply to questions like this. In other words, since both Christ and I have received our being from God and have our being in God, what is the ontological difference? Well, your dog and your child both derive their being from God. Is there a difference between your dog and your child? I hope you treat them differently. So that's where action is an even higher compression level than story because both your dog and your child participate in being, but you definitely should treat them differently. Both you and Christ participate in being, but you are not the author of being, Christ is. It's difficult saying these things briefly. What are your views on soteriolity and eschatology? Just a minute or two. Why has Christ not come back yet? You should ask him. Are you supposed to participate, are we supposed to participate in the Perusia or merely wait for Christ? There's no merely waiting. You've got realized eschatology, which is the fact that I was, so I listened to one of my favorite crossovers so far, Nate Heil, Sherry and Grim Grizz in a video. Now Grim's gotta get his, he's gotta get his YouTube training up. He's gotta get his endurance up so he can go the long haul with the Rando's United crew or Nate Heil or maybe even up to Benjamin Boyce and Adam Frenden, but that was a fun crossover. But Nate knows a lot of theology. Christ and Sherry, Sherry's in her catechesis right now in the Orthodox Church. Christ is here. Yes, Christ is coming. All of that when Jesus announced that the heart of Jesus' proclamation in the Galilee was the kingdom of heaven is at hand. And we try in English to get that language right. At hand means present, but yet also available. And available means not fully here yet, potentially here more, but, and it's all those nuances and dynamics that are within soteriology and eschatology. And again, I guess the theme of this question and answer is getting practical and specific down to the individual level of analysis, which is you. And the answer to that is your life as a saint. The degree to which the new creation, because I don't know how to, I haven't thought, I haven't thought about ontology of creation 1.0 and creation 2.0. The world is huge. The world is huge. But what Christ is doing in you now by his Holy Spirit is redeeming your creation 1.0 and preparing you for creation 2.0 while you are still a sinner. All of that is happening. So that's where you get the now and not yet. And we struggle with language to get there. I was just watched most of Rebel Wisdom's conversation with Ian McGillchrist this morning. It was an interesting conversation. I like McGillchrist's left brain, the right brain thing, because the right brain in some ways looks at the totality and the left brain looks at the application. And so we go back and forth and back and forth and back and forth, because again, consciousness is monofocal. And so that sets up dualities back and forth. But once you have three, suddenly the system begins to get overwhelmed. That's our limitation. So soteriology and eschatology actually do come together in you as Christ is saving you now. And he's saving you into the future. That's all coming at the same time. So you participate in his redemption now, and you will participate in the transformation of being that has already begun in the resurrection of Jesus Christ. If we are supposed to participate, can we fail at this task? You can fail at a lot of tasks. Can God take your failures and use them as part of his redemption? Yes. So then are your failures actually failures? You see how tricky this all gets? You can just go around and round and round with this stuff for a long time. Now, if you think about it in two right-brained away, you wind up, then you can sort of play these little village atheist tricks on yourself, like, can God make a boulder so large that he can't move it? You can play these village atheist tricks that I think are really sort of tricks of the bicameral mind, because you sort of set something up on one side of the brain and say, ha, trumped it. But the other side says, no, there's suchness and moreness. What if we blew up the world? Yeah, that's, don't recommend it. Would that force the second coming? What if we literally, everyone started worshiping together, would Christ return? You know, one of the ways to understand the Pharisees was, you know, bully everyone to really, well, that's just the Pharisees. Many religions do it. Bully everyone to, rule number one about God, don't try to manipulate God, because you can't do it, because you are you. So, and my little corollary to that is don't play chicken with God. It's like a chicken playing God with a truck. The chicken's gonna lose. So, isn't creation two already here? Yes, it is. But it's not, there's potentiality, and there's actuality, and there's some actuality, but still a lot of potentiality. And that's why we have all this language of presence. Perusia means presence, full presence. Consummation, presence. We say someone has consummated the marriage. They have engaged in a physical act that the ritual and all of the stuff around it has been pointing towards. It's all this now and not yet stuff. And to think about it too much in terms of a right, a left brain, you're not going to understand because you're too busy looking at the pieces. Oh boy, okay. No more questions for November 19. No Q&A on the 26th. All right. 35 minutes. Boy said you were in the audience for his discussion with Friended. I was briefly. I was sitting at home and my wife was doing some stuff, and so I was waiting for her to do some stuff until we could do some stuff that we were going to do together, and so pulled out my computer and opened up YouTube, and oh, Adam and Friended are, Adam and Benjamin are talking together. So that was fun. So I just tuned in for a few minutes and said hi. But what about Friended School? I was like, oh, I'm going to go to the school. What about Friended Screed on the disjunction between Old and New Testament? I'll have to look that up. I'll have to look that up. If God is a spirit as mentioned, see again, this is where language is tricky. Is God a spirit? Is God a being? And now, spirit is a good word to use for our relationship with God or the relationship of materiality to God. But I know that John says God is a spirit. That's colloquial. That makes an understanding, but you have to always read that text in light of all the other texts that God is a spirit. So if God is, I don't have the Greek in front of me, but yes, so. And Jesus Christ is incarnate, then does the Holy Ghost come into it? Read the creeds. In other words, why are there three parts of the Trinity and not two? What role does the Holy Spirit play if God is a spirit? There is the spirit. There the spirit of God is God. Why would we distinguish from God, God from God? Hopefully that makes sense. How to tell this story in a short way. You've heard me talk about revolutionary monotheism. The conceptualization of God from the Hebrews is a radical departure from her neighbors. And I think Ezekiel Kaufman gets at this, and the language is really helpful, where there is not, and I usually say God is agent and the spirit is the spirit. Agent and arena, okay? And that makes sense if God is a ground of all being. All right? Trinity. When Jesus comes, they begin to worship Jesus as God. Understanding the Trinity helps make a lot of other theology work. Shorting the Trinity paints you into some corners. That doesn't mean that certain articulations of the Trinity don't have their difficulties. So what Christianity wants to do is to say that Jesus is God. Jesus is the instantiation of the coming of the Lord. But yet we also see differentiation between Jesus and the Father. Read the Gospel of John. It's all over the place. So how do you square that? And then Jesus starts saying, I'm leaving and I'm going to send another. So you have the Father who Jesus was praying to. You have the Son who was praying to the Father. And you have a third person who Jesus is referring to. There you have all three in the Gospel of John. That's part of why Christians believe it. Now, can you come in and try to say that the Spirit is the manifestation of Jesus? That's not improper language. It is God's Spirit and it is Jesus' Spirit that the Holy Spirit is. But it's not a modalism. It's not a modalism. Otherwise, Jesus would be talking to himself. But he's not. He's not acting as if God the Father and God the Holy Spirit are separate persons from himself. Now, this is what we have in Scripture. This is what the apostles heard. This is what the apostles wrote. Over time, especially in terms of the philosophical engagement with the greater culture, they had to put together language that made sense of this. That's where the creeds are. That's about as briefly as I can run through it. I've noticed a level of anti-Catholic animus among Protestants that is very surprising to me. European history? Especially in things like the Westminster Confession. Obviously, I don't like it when people call Judaism a synagogue of Satan. That's right. They use the same language for the Pope. And that isn't considered socially acceptable. Anymore. But it seems to me that it is socially acceptable to talk about the Roman Catholic Church being Satanic or evil. Depends. Societies are in little clusters. Given the level of conflict between Catholic and Protestant historically, the speed of the detente between Catholic and Protestant over the last 70 years has been nothing short of breathtaking. And in my opinion, welcome. Because once we stopped straw manning each other, we actually began to find that a bunch of the things we're fighting over, we can make a lot of progress on it. And a ton of progress is being made. So this seems like a real problem to me, yet I have no idea how to improve the situation. Suggestions? Well, I think there's a lot of practical ways that we can, let's first stop by passing judgment on each other. And if you're a Christian, I'd say stop it because Jesus said so. Judge not that you be not judged. And that doesn't mean that we shouldn't discern, but it does mean that we shouldn't condemn. And Jesus says, love your neighbor as yourself. And Jesus says, love your enemy. Pray for those who persecute you. A lot of the behavior between Catholics and Protestants were in contradiction, were a violation of Jesus' commandments because the culture war that Jesus was located in, in the Galilee and in Judea was at least as hot and as bloody as most of what any of us will find these days. So yeah, that part of the difficulty, and in many ways it's comparable to anti-Semitism, part of the difficulty is that a lot of this is in texts of a period when Protestants and Catholics were literally killing each other. So the Belgian Confession, which is one of the doctrinal standards of the Christian Reformed Church, was an appeal written by Guido de Brey in the French speaking area of the Lowlands to the Holy Roman Emperor asking that he stop slaughtering them. And Guido de Brey got killed by the Emperor. So people have been doing this to each other for a very long time. I praise God that I have learned so much from Roman Catholic and Orthodox Christians. I continue to learn from my Jewish friends. I don't know as many Muslims, but I'm sure I would learn from them too. So let's do more talking and less killing. It's just generally a good idea. From YouTube, the word for spirit and breath are the same or related in many languages. In Swedish, when referring to something like team spirit, the word for breath is used. That is team breath. That is amazing. Connection between them? Probably. I mean, this is where, so, what is the value added that Jordan Peterson is bringing to the conversation? Certainly, some of it has been the Jordan Peterson phenomenon and the exorcisms that have been happening to many of you listening to this channel. But in the technical sense, what he's working on is sort of a Darwinian lens to look at the dynamics of the evolution of the church in a healthy way. And in that way, he's similar to someone like, Rowan Barfield, who was looking at language and figuring out these connections. That's just an amazing thing to say. We say team spirit. They are, you know, a good basketball team moves as one. The fans in the stands are the sixth man. I mean, we have all this language. It's all right there. We just have this lab leak that we've gotta get over. And what's happening now, because these things move in much slower, is we're getting over the naturalist lab leak in the West right now. And we're recalibrating and new tools are coming online. It's a fun time to be alive. Also, will you do another conversation with Peugeot and Vervecke, undoubtedly? Maybe, you know, both John and Jonathan are busy. I mean, I'd talk to those guys, I'd talk to those guys every week, but I don't know if that would fit into all of our schedules. I've been absolutely delighted. I've had more opportunity to talk to John Vervecke than I have to Jonathan Peugeot, not that I, I mean, if I send Jonathan Peugeot notes, hey, let's do another conversation, I'm sure he'd say yes. But then we gotta get it on our calendars. And that gets harder and harder for both of us. I mean, success, success inhibits access. And so people like, I hope your channel gets to be a million views. No, you don't. You won't have the kind of access to me that you have now. And the kind of access you have to me now is not as nice as you wish it could be. And you have to work for it. And that's kind of the way it is. So absolutely, John and Jonathan and I will have more conversations, I'm sure of it. And I've been thrilled with how my relationship with John Vervecke has developed. You know, this is amazing because we talk every few months it seems, but we're able to pick up where we leave off, should mention JP Marceau in that mix, those conversations that the three of us have done. And in some ways, that's partly because of this hierarchy, that Peugeot was busy. But, and so in some ways, JP Marceau kind of comes in as a really nice stand and for Jonathan Peugeot, because JP Marceau is more of a philosopher and he's available. So, and, you know, we just did a, you know, Julian, Greg and Capello, you know, arranged that last conversation between John Vervecke and I and someone else just recently indicated, oh, I want to get you and John in and do a conversation with us. So John Vervecke is just a terrific conversation partner. And I've, I felt that some of my conversations with him have been some of the best that I've participated in. So absolutely we'll do more with, if, gotta be careful here. When the, I'm thinking about when the Peugeot, Vervecke, Bishop Baron, Jordan Peterson conversation drops, I've been thinking about how I want to approach that because there's going to be so much there. I might do an initial live stream of just watching it first and doing a little bit of offhand comments and then do a deeper dive. I never really finished, never really finished analyzing the Peterson-Vervecke conversation. There's two clips from that conversation in the compilation podcast. And what's really interesting about that compilation is when you put those clips next to even the Peugeot, Peterson conversation and the Bishop Baron Peterson conversation, I mean, the differences are just stark. So yeah, there'll be more. And at the same time, and many have noted it before, I mean, Jordan, because he's so far up on this hierarchy and is much more difficult to get access to, I mean, both John Vervecke and Jonathan Peugeot are personal friends of Jordan before his status rocket ride. So their relationship is much more important so their relationships with him are different. I don't know him. That means, you know, I'm sort of, the commentary I give on Jordan Peterson is impersonal because the only Peterson I really have access to is the same Peterson that you all have access to, which is there are these avatars out there living in this cyber world. That's an advantage that I have in some way that I can say things about Jordan that in some ways they don't or won't say because they have other layers of connectedness with him. I think Peterson reached out to Bishop Barron for lots of good reasons. Bishop Barron is a, he's a bona fide intellectual. He's got significant credentials. He's a bishop in the Roman Catholic Church. He's got a bigger YouTube channel and more of an organization around him. So that those four would do a conversation is extremely appropriate. If and when Jordan ever decides he wants to talk to me, that'll be fine. Who knows what the future holds? And relationships are funny. Individuals are funny. I mean, I, I, I, I'm an avid watcher of Chad the Alcoholic and Grim Grizz right now. Anytime these guys post anything, I watch it. That's for now. It could be that a year from now, I'll be watching other things. Andrea just sent me a video and said, would you mind looking at this? And then, it's in the queue. I want to look at it, but we're idiosyncratic like that. And personalities are like that and relationships are like that. So yeah, we'll see, we'll see. But I've been just delighted at how my relationship with John Vervecky has blossomed and with Jonathan Peugeot. And hopefully if this Thunder Bay Conference happens, the three of us will be there in person. And that will, I think, that will take all of our relationships with each other to a new level. Because being together in person is so much more. That's why, you know, at the beginning of this, Rick and I were talking about, we gotta build this fence. You know, we gotta remodel some rooms. We've got all these jobs we've gotta do. And then, you know, Chad the alcoholic is put in a floor and it's like, gosh, you know, I wish we had more skills like that. And then it's like, you know, how much would it cost to, and we'd have missed wages and stuff, but we'll negotiate with them. But you know, how much would it cost to get some of you, some of you out there with some trade skills here. And you know, if we spent a week together, working on stuff together, talking, hanging out, dinner, that'd be awesome. You know, we'd get some work done. We'd have some conversations. And the conversations you have when you're putting up a fence together, the kind of knowledge you gain between each other, doing things with your hands, developmentally, biologically, psychologically, it's even richer. You know, C.S. Lewis would go on long walks. C.S. Lewis became a Christian by walking with other Christians, not sitting in a room. So just as Grim Grizz always says, embody, embody. You have to embody. And so maybe, you know, maybe the first Living Stones conference will be a work conference. Who knows? That would be a scary amount of fun for me. So, and then, you know, we spend all week working on projects here, and then we close off the week with a worship service and communion for, and those who are Christians, you know, participate in it. And that'd be an awesome week. I'm excited just thinking about it. Will it happen? I have no idea, but I think it's an awesome idea. All right, I gotta keep going. Oh, I'm not doing too bad in time. Okay, Manuel, hey Paul, do you think some of the philosophical arguments for God, do you think some of the philosophical arguments for God's existence, as well as the historical arguments for the Gospels, would be helpful for someone like Jordan? Yeah. But again, we come to Christ, coming to Christ is more like falling in love than buying a sensible car. You know, poor Colton was smitten by that 18 year old blonde. I get that. I was smitten by a, how old was she? I was smitten by a 18 year old brunette, and I eventually married her. We get smitten, it's, and we come to Christ, sometimes with our left brain kicking and screaming, and that's where apologetics comes in. So, Lewis says, or Peterson has obviously read some Lewis now, because he refers to him more frequently than he did before. But in my experience, left brain apologetics is the emissary, not the master. We fall in love with Jesus. And then we fight to stay in the relationship sometimes with our left hemisphere. So, and that's why I say, you know, changing Jordan Peterson is God's work. He might use us, but that's God's work. And, you know, Jordan is a guy who sees, he's a mystic in a lot of ways. He sees visions. You know, you watch John Vervecky's conversation with him and look at how Peterson talks about visions, and he's talked about him in other podcasts. So that's how Jordan is wired. And I think if, you know, if and when Jordan does come into a church and submit to a church, maybe God will just appear to him in a vision, say, okay, Jordan, it's time to put things in a new chapter. Join this church. I've had people walk in the door here. Just during the pandemic, a woman comes in and she was in Sacramento. She was caring for a friend who was ill. And so she was just in town and she drove by the church and she said, God said, go to that church. And so she came right in the door and she said, God told me to come to this church. I said, have a seat. And she was with us for a number of weeks while she was staying here caring for her friend who was convalescing from some serious medical things. And we had beautiful fellowship with this woman while she was here for these few weeks. And so maybe God will say to Jordan, go to that church, talk to that pastor. Who knows what God will do? I've had people have told me, people have told me the most amazing stories about how God has broken through. Now, is it common? It's more common than you think, but it remains unusual. And that's why to say that, yeah, to me, materialism is just not an option. It's just not an option. I've seen way too much. I've heard way too many credible stories by way too many credible people. And of course you can explain it in all sorts of other ways and I'm not gonna fight you on it, but, like I say, God is God. Don't play chicken with him. You're gonna lose. But would those things help? Could be. I don't know in Jordan's case if they would. They might, he's shown some aptitude for them, but he seems to like to come up with his own ideas. Grim Grizz, why hasn't the CRC made CS Lewis a saint? Long time question, first time listener. The CRC doesn't have a category of saints in the same way the Roman Catholic Church does. And the Roman Catholic Church won't make Lewis a saint because he wasn't a Catholic. Now I don't know how the Anglican Church deals with saints. I think you could make an argument for Lewis even with the miracle because if you read Lewis on his prayer for Joy Davidman and her relief from cancer, I think there's a good argument that there was a miraculous exchange that happened between Lewis and Joy Davidman with respect to her illness. I have a friend who has a really dramatic gift of healing. And he tells me that when he prays for someone for their healing and when God answers that prayer, he will often bear the pain of the disease that has been left from the other, removed from the other. So, God is not a tame lion. Given that many of our ancestors are being animated by dead light, are we in the zombie apocalypse where our dead animated ancestors are feeding on our brains? Yeah, yes indeed. Also sign me up for the remodeling conference where we do yoga with hammers and towels. Well, if Job gets here, we'll have to do shirtless volleyball because Job's been asking for that all the way from the start. Wesleyan Whitefield, eight minutes. We got all kinds of time, cool. Hi Paul, greetings from Ireland. Octun Baby from U2 is 30 years old this week. Wow, that makes me feel old. Can you be a Christian and a rock star? Well, Bono's been trying. Have you seen Bono's chat with Eugene Peterson on the Psalms? I saw a little bit of it, I didn't watch the whole thing. That's such a hilarious story because here's someone's trying to talk to Eugene Peterson and of course, if you're a celebrity, if you're a star on the hierarchy like Bono, you imagine that everybody in the world knows who I am, not Eugene Peterson. So, I haven't seen it. So, all right, any questions from the voice chat and the Discord today? I think we posted a lot. All right, all right, good. Any of you YouTubers out there have anything coming up on your channel that you wanna promote? Can I hear that? See, I'm just, Sam's probably working. He did a conversation with Hank. I'm talking to John Verwigke and Michael Martin tomorrow. So, we'll see how that goes. Really? Yeah. That'll be fun. Oh, that'll be fun. Good, good. Not to steal any of Nate's thunder, but I've got my second conversation with Verveki on Monday. Wow. He's really making himself available. That's impressive. That's wonderful. Oh, it's gonna be a lot of must listen to conversations coming up. I'm excited. Not to steal anybody's thunder, but I'm trying to develop a documentary to make. If somebody wants to help me with that, that'd be super. Yeah, Chad's working on a documentary. He's trying to develop a documentary of estuary. So he wants to have interviews with me and with others in this little corner of the internet. So if you've got any documentary ideas or skills, talk to Chad the alcoholic. Anybody else? Well, maybe we land the plane on time this week, even a little early. Wouldn't that be something? Rick's like, yep, yep. I see him nodding in there. See him nodding in there. Okay, y'all. Well, maybe we'll end transmission and I've got a few more minutes so I can stay in the chat here in the Discord. Maybe someone has a question they wanna ask. Not out there in the salty sea of YouTube land. So thank you for listening. Again, I'm not doing a question and answer next week, Friday. And if you have any ideas about my idea about a blue collar conference, let me know. I'm really liking this idea because, you know, one of the struggles at Living Stones is it's just a few of us here. But there's many of you out there and how can we make this work? Who knows? Anyway, okay, Rick, you can end transmission. So I got a question if you want it.