https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=EVjuiVhw2EU

 Recording I'm Jeff I have Luke Jobe and a newcomer to the randos channel kind of Paul But this will this will be a dual release. This will be on your channel Paul and this will also be on the randos united channel And this is a reunion of sorts I can't remember exactly how long ago it was but the very first video that's on the randos united channel is the four of us together That was the first time that we tried the experiment of some randos from from Paul's audience if you will or his subscribers or regular watchers and sometimes Regular guests and in the case of one of us a many time guest We had the experiment to all come together and talk to Paul at the same time a little while ago So this is a this is a bit of a reunion What one of the things that I would like to throw in here before I forget because I know our Conversation can get going pretty quickly Is Paul whether whether we can talk about it in this conversation or I can just make a request that you talk about it At some point is you've had Jeff quack and bush on your channel a couple of times now. Yeah Yeah, he's posed a challenge that I feel like Has it really been addressed and it has to do with It has to do with Epic that reflects what we call the Christian ethic. It comes out of the Eastern traditions You know China The the very the various cultures from from that part of the world and So I'd like to talk about that a little bit because I have some some CS Lewis Evidence that kind of weighs in Jeff quack and Bush's favor surprise I have some CS Lewis quotes But I'll just I'll just leave it at that and that's a bit of my introduction and also a hope that we can either talk About here or that you can address it at some point Paul. So I'll shut up for now And he shuts up and we have nothing No What's what's the statement that the Christian ethic is as its origins in the in the east Well, I think in your was it your second conversation maybe Paul with Jeff. He said You know, it's he basically said no this this thing that we're calling Christian it it existed long before 2000 years ago and and also existed in in the eastern part of the world and I'll tell you what it's not Christian, you know very the very Big assertion, but I've I've had a difficult time as I've thought about it thinking well, wait a second this this did exist now From a Christian perspective and a Judeo Christian perspective one could say well, yeah God has been there the whole time. So it's no surprise that this week pre this would exist before The historical person Christ ever landed on the planet But you know that that was that was argued I think pretty well by matt Bill ahunty against that point that just says well then you can always say that right there You can make that assertion and you don't have to have the proof and so on a second here What are we talking about exactly I still don't know what exactly is that like what what does he mean by Christian ethic? Paul can you explain this a little bit better? I think he's arguing that the ethic of love the primacy of love Um is is something that was not unknown to the east now my difficulty is that's a lot of stuff to to study in depth my initial thought is the the dominant eastern eastern metaphysic which is of chaos You know that you know where if you get it from kansas, you know the old rock band You know all we are is dust in the wind. It's hard to build an ethic of love on that but I you know there is a lot of philosophy and And religious thinking in the east that I am completely oblivious to and so i'm reluctant to weigh in Without having done some research, but that level of research I don't think is high enough on my salient landscape. I have thoughts. Oh go Okay, so you could say let's say buddhism It's older in that sense in its own roots in hinduism are even older than that you could say the idea in there of meta of loving kindness of having a certain attitude towards the other person who is also part of that one that you are a part of is Is pre-existing pre-existent christianity but That is not absolutely not comparable to the christian idea of not only is there a god That's a personal god Standing outside space and time that I have a personal relationship with that god loves me That god loves the other I love god and therefore I must love the other there's sort of a small trinity in there of a triangle Relationship yeah I don't think that's Existed before christianity jews, especially wouldn't have liked it if you said that they'd probably get you killed and so Unless unless they were I'm overlooking all the religions than christianity. I don't think that particular embodiment of love the way that That that the creator god in which everything exists and through which everything exists also is Primary existence and love and goodness You could tell it to a buddhist it look at you like you were nuts Or a hindu because Go ahead. Sorry. I was I was just going to throw in there. I I don't think that that's the point that just Hugh is is arguing against I think you I burned the wrong straw man. Well, no, no, I think it's I think it's a perfectly legitimate point. I still don't think it it under um, I don't think it uproots the argument that he was making because He might concede and say yeah, that's fine that might have been where it first appeared and you know the with the hebrews and and later on reinforced with um with jesus, but The the actual ethics themselves of of love for another and care for another Doesn't doesn't need and there's evidence that it doesn't need that understanding of reality to even be present For this deeper ethic or for this other ethic to exist and his point again would be that's not christian Because it predates all of that. I don't even need that human in a in a god Is able to think that that is an important way to to approach life and approach Reality and and approach life. No, no, no But you you could you could reduce this all the way to say we're social species and therefore we need to love the other Yeah, but i'm sure so not gonna love that asshole and Christianity says no, you should probably also love him even though. Yeah, he's kind of a dick So this I don't know what's um Um So there's I don't I have a lot of thoughts. I don't know if I can bring them all out. Um so there was kale had posted on the discord a while back this lecture on the differences between monism dualism and trinitarianism on the discord from Ellis port potter. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, that's great, which was really good. And this is where I'll get i'll get up on my soap box again but this this gets into the differences between What you use the word embodied and I would say fun to this is what I try to argue when I talk with sam about Why i'm probably intellectually trinitarian is I think everyone acts trinitarian Because I think it's the nature of being And I don't think you can get away with it if you're being and so um And and I think that well this gets into what I keep trying to go all into doing is doing some sort of series on revelation Because I think this gets into what revelation is and the different kinds of revelation and what the revelation of The christ jesus was and is and what that did and what it accomplished Are you saying the book of revelation or revelation as a concept? Rev the the revelation of the incarnation the revelation of god the unveiling of jesus in the incarnation um because I mean my understanding of the new testament Is that's what? He this is renee gerard like things hidden since the foundation of the world This was the unveiling and the revelation in a way that was previously Not comprehended at least propositionally Conceptually maybe by the eastern religions or by jews or anything, but I would say that we knew that humanity knew in an embodied way because People love their kids ellis potter talked about that in his lectures. He says within I believe within buddhism He says it's this monistic religion It's this monistic religion. And so he says really all Love is actually what the cause of suffering It's it's we need everything is illusion like illusory and an illusion. And so even loving Loving your child is actually a sin on that framework because it leads to suffering But people do they act as if therefore they're trinitarian So I haven't listened to the whole video yet. I started it and I'm 280 hd, but I will I will finish it. I'm sure after this prompting Also, we dove right into the philosophy deep end, didn't we? We did It was all jeff That to this jeff it was it was jeff p and jeff q Yeah, and and then oh this so this is the other thing I would say about jeff q's thing and this is something that the joe says is like it's it kind of gets into the the modernist Evidentialist way of talking about these things getting evidence and proving it is people will be like well, they're all these Dying and resurrecting figures that predate christ. I'm just like so what? I don't care That doesn't do anything to Validate The truth of jesus. Well that you know it gets into your question about revelation You know what revelation is what do we mean by that term? Especially what do You know, i'll just pick on sam harris because he's so patently pickable The the idea so often that That atheist apologists promote is that revelation is Is new information out of the blue, which is a fair argument because that is definitely one aspect of revelation But for each of us the way we use the word Um, we would say, you know, that's a revelation to me. That's that's a new idea, but is it completely new idea? it's probably you know our our grasp on Our our grasp on the distinctions of our ideas Pretty thin we flow between them all the time and we forget and Yeah, I mean Sorry, go ahead joe new mathematical theorems, by that way are revelations Yeah Exactly the world is full of it And and so what what exactly are they Arguing well and in all fairness, they might turn the table say what are what are what do christians mean with revelation and You know even going back to good old reformed Catechism there's general and special revelation. What's general general is just about everything around us. What is special special? Always comes wrapped in general We see it with our same eyes. We hear it with our same ears. We feel it with our same feelings it's You know when jesus came in he didn't have uh, you know the artist later put the halo on him Um, he comes incognito and as i've the point that i've made many times jesus we would imagine would have been the greatest preacher in the history of the world and it seemed like just about everybody begged off on him at least when the Uh show wasn't there or when the government was pressing down on you. So What are you gonna say? So this brings so my The thing i'd like to throw out in regard to revelation is I heard So there's this um Orthodox priest father, he's actually the deacon of One of the main orthodox seminaries in america Of saint vladimir's in new york, but his name is john bayer And he talks about he has last name behr Like um Yeah, yeah He's a billionaire. He owns bear. I'm just kidding. Um Uh He's gotten rid of all his wealthly his earthly wealth, um So he he actually came out here and trophy husband should have a sense of humor Right, yeah, that's what I get paid for um so, uh, he came out here and he did a lecture and it's one of the It's one of those. I mean, I bet you guys have these where every once in a while it's it's I had a revelation when I heard him speak I saw I I realized something in a way that i've never realized before it was it was a transformative Um moment for me and um, and but the main point of his lecture was It was on it was on revelation somewhat and he he went through And he's so great because he's very dialogical in his lectures. He just sits there and throws out questions, which is really fun And so all these people answer and he'll be like, nope, nope, nope, nope Because they have all these pre-canned sunday school answers, right? And um, he he starts the lecture and there's he's done this in many different forums But he'll say like what was one of the most profound things about the disciples in the new testament And so people throw out all these answers and he essentially says At the end is how dense they were how how slow of hearing and seeing they were And he goes through all this He he walks you through all this but he says a lot of people assume and I would say kind of these modernist Christians assume and evidentialists like oh if I was alive 2000 years ago, I would have seen jesus and I would have just been like Oh, there he is the son of god No, you wouldn't and the reason we know no you wouldn't is that's not what happened with the disciples, right? And so With revelation what one of the most profound things to me and the most profound part of his lecture was that So jesus lives his whole life what you were saying paul. He does all these things People leave him they come and go all the time and he says, you know Like unless you eat my body and drink my blood you have no part in me people are like crazy Um, and they want to be fed so they come back And and I mean he's obviously compelling in some way, but he's also kind of scary Um, but then at the end everyone leaves him people and people think he's a jerk often I mean again if you read slowly and closely the kinds of things he says We're just oh, you know That's not what a moral person would do right And then revelation so how his main point i'll try to be quick on long-winded But his main point in the revelation is that even after the resurrection, right? There's all these Sightings of jesus, but they don't recognize him. They don't see him. Well, that's weird That's strange all these people that were with him all the time. I don't see him. He shows up in the upper room They don't know who he is these people who walk around with him for three years don't know who he is And then john bayer's point and I mean this is pro i'd never seen this in all my bibling in church And then all of a sudden jesus he does two things He opens the scriptures Walking through the old testament Saying everything that has to do with him and then he breaks the bread And in the opening of the scriptures and the breaking the bread all of a sudden boom their eyes are opened There's an unveiling there's an apocalypse. There's a revelation and they see christ for who he is John bayer's point father father bayer's point and the whole thing is that the way the disciples saw jesus as the christ as the messiah Saw him for who he is is the exact same way that we do right here now It's no different I think it's a good point. It's very calvinist point. It's by the power of the holy spirit Right. I mean it's christian. It's orthodox. I mean he's orthodox Isn't this also an order and chaos thing though? What do you mean? That revelation takes Chaos or a revelation is chaos Turned into order but not gradually so we don't because it's continuously we do this to the world anyway But it's like boom and right away There's a lot of chaos that's suddenly now habitable it's like it's like when when I watched that first peterson video and he told me about kathleen a was suddenly is wham and Suddenly there's christianity everywhere and You look at the world differently with not that it was chaos, but maybe I didn't understand it in a different way. So I don't know if this works everywhere I maybe Wittgenstein said similar things in terms of you know, if if a lion could speak english, we wouldn't understand it And you could use all the same english words You're not because the the frame of reference for the lion And I think I think it's true and and that's been validated with how many How long does it take from people from two different cultures to begin to get on the same page? That's that's you know, or even my wife and me Exactly, even people who've been, you know husband and wife for how many years? No, that's very true So then how does this apply to so then my question will be how does this apply to jeff q? And then his question and then a response because this is I agree with all that but then how does that not become just like Um somewhat of a christian trump card in dialogues about jesus trump card Yeah, that's Okay, and undefeat something you just can't defeat an argument. It's like it ultimately wins. There's no way you can beat it There's a problem I see this truth because I see it yeah And there's a problem in in normal human relationships with this idea of trump cards and defeaters that and The democratic culture is simply allergic to any exclusivist claim including vickenstein's Because because the democratic the democratic ethos says No, everyone is equidistant from whatever from the same point at every time and That's a I understand why people Like that idea and that idea definitely is within christianity in many ways But it's simply not true In how many circumstances? In how many circumstances? You know, I remember as a kid watching the little rascals the r gang comedies and one of the tropes in there was Anyone can grow up to be president Well, it seems, you know increasingly in american politics being a billionaire is super helpful so Even even if you're not using your billions to You know fund your campaign, but your fundraising so, you know This american vision of of democracy and egalitarianism Yeah, there's some real strut There's a reason it's had to be promoted because as the greeks would have said are all people born equal. I'm not equal to lebron um Lebron isn't equal to me in what in what essence are we trying to compare the people? and there's near limitless numbers of of Aspects with which we can try to compare so Americans are just really allergic to any kind of exclusion by Our culture so you get used to that. I have a question for you paul. This is something I've been wondering about a long time and I think it's Profound biblically and I think it relates is And it's a recurrent theme throughout the new testament, but what does it mean? that And i'm thinking particularly Book of romans talks about this and then another point I can't remember but for god that god does not show partiality I I think when We hear that I think there's two ideas one is that There is no there's no pit so deep that god can't suck you out of it I think that's one and I think the second is god does not show partiality in the ways that The roman emperor or the world would show partiality And you know, you might call me a little bit woke in this but the old testament Regularly talks about god's concern for the widow and the orphan and the poor and the neglected It's I think this the same lesson that jesus says when he says, you know when you enter When you enter the room take the lowest seat Um god god understands our hierarchies and he loves to invert them we can put them in peugeotian terms so Yeah, I agree. How does that how does that relate to trump card to like revelation and and knowledge? And knowing the truth about christ I think it's both and in terms of if you were Raised in a christian culture or a christian home or with godly christian parents There's no question that in some ways you have an advantage To know christ in other ways not And they're both true at once because even those advantages by virtue of Our depravity Can can become disadvantaged can become an immunization against the knowledge of christ Whereas romans right like israel gentiles, right? Exactly. It's romans one two and three And so romans one says here's the gentile world romans two said here's here's the jewish bubble Romans three says You know in a sense you're all in the same mess Now now americans want to say is the mess equal? Well, whose whose mess is ever equal? They're You know equal with respect to what equal with respect to our You know it there's just We get into the habit of easy equivalences And easy imagined measurements in our culture when if you look more deeply at it Let's say you're a shrink and two different people walk into your office are Are they equal equal in what respect it's You know, there's so many respects with which to imagine and so many variables In individual cases Equal has to mean certain very limited qualities that we are pointing to and even those are almost always aspirational, so That's what I would say So my one of the ways and I mean if you guys have other stuff to say but one of the ways I Wanted to did you doubt that luke could fill the video? Not at all Okay Just giving you There's a fire hose in here. I'm just giving a drip Luke has to leave in an hour and a half. So then we can talk Okay. Okay. We'll give lucas time No, one of the things so people ask you this paul, but i'm also curious But i'll take it really practical and not leave it so broad ideological The kind of like what have you learned since video one to now? But I would say what has it taught you about People specifically as it relates to Christian practice and the church particularly in the american context because that's our context or well, sorry, joe the christian the western christian context and In talking and relating to people Practically what have you learned about how to interact with people and then therefore Potentially counsel you would give either other disenfranchised religious randos or um or pastors who Because this is the thing right pastors a lot of times are saying like these are the people we want to reach all these people People but yet it's you know, it's not happening. Well Yeah, just to add to that question What what things have you learned about how to best help those people from this experience, right? Well, I have to say that these last two plus years have probably been some of the most intense learning Years of my life and i've been a lifelong learner. I love to learn In just about everything that i've done in my life. I feel like i've learned but this has I mean this has been intense and demanding just because of the volume of Interactions and different people that you know, i've been Um had the privilege of sitting down with and this this meetup tour that we're doing in march i'm thinking about that second week that trip from Sacramento up to vancouver or really fresno up through sacramento into vancouver and back down That's going to be intense. Um, that's you know, that's going to be a lot of interaction. So that will be challenging But I think it'll also be tremendously fun I don't know how good Boy this stuff is so hard You know every I woke up this morning thinking about um What it means to be a human being with respect to dreams At this dream of that. I was in some kind of weird go-kart race And You just realize that so much of our cognition is Not subject to our control or volition So much of it My I think you know, I I would have to say that probably my most influential teacher in terms of how to deal with other human Beings was my father Because I spent years watching and I wasn't I didn't know that I was watching him Because you're just a kid and you're just absorbing Just watching my father deal with Many many different types of people in paterson new jersey and in whitensville, massachusetts and in other places and his astounding Love and generosity and openness and patience Christians understandably want to Are highly motivated to sort of place people Sort of mold and shape and and get people to say certain things and do other things and pastors, especially And I understand that I number one have a fair amount of Skepticism that their vision of what people should say and do is necessarily That godly and christian often Because there's so much christian bs In the world and we see it all the time and the fact that People people like to imagine that it's nominal christians who sort of walk away from the faith And I love to use bark campolo as an example of the other because by almost anyone's Imagination tony campolo is a You know is it an amazing christian man? and his son had A terrific opportunity to see him up close and to be deep within christian ministry And he walks away as kind of a quintessential none and oh, yes, so I think And I think the one of the one of the big things That both and it was for vacay in my last conversation with him that that noted I i'd been noting a similarity between peterson and tom holland who's sort of been my latest You know guru crush and I just have regular guru guru crushes I get sort of fixated on someone and I want to study the heck out of them. Then I I move on to someone else But You know verveky noted, you know one interesting similarity between them in that they both Had an ability to recognize and articulate The performative essentiality of christianity in the west I love that so People Simply a verbal profession Is and again, this is very very petersona and simply a verbal profession of someone's Of someone's proximity to jesus Is not necessarily our best guide and I think this is biblical because again Not only does is god not a respecter of persons, but god looks at the heart and when the bible says that It means God can evaluate us in ways that we don't even know ourselves. So I know job job wants to get in there So go ahead job Have you raised your finger No, no, no people were walking by and waving at me Job's job's got fans they accumulate outside of his window So paul my I agree with everything you said and I think that's Spot on my but this I don't know. I'm thinking back to my first conversation with you My beef my struggle then and my own personal experience in the church though is Is because of things that I try to articulate often And pastors in in america are not going to do that. They're not going to acknowledge what you just said They won't well, there's tremendous social pressure within the church for good reason Because yeah, I have to have these kinds of systems to have social institutions and coherence And so and that's why the proposition is never the propositional level is never going away and it's it's really important in terms of Social dynamics, but I also think that the church is insufficiently aware of I mean just look at what happens at a billy graham used to happen at a billy graham crusade you come down You say the sinner's prayer and they say, you know You know just as you are Immediately once you get in just as you are they're trying to change who you are Yeah, I mean it seems like a total lie to people that I just have to say jesus is my lord and savior And I I think about this when I think about I don't want to name names, but certain theological traditions that You know, they say well this person said or did this and therefore We're we're really we don't even know ourselves. How are we judging each other to such a degree? And so I think I think openness is is very important but saying that I I do also want to recognize a point that I make quite often At church. I've made it sometimes on my channel that jesus is both more open and more demanding than we think is Is moral or responsible? And it's that sense in which jesus, I mean we're always working balanced. So paul vanderclay is open He's insufficiently demanding of people and that's true and it's not just true in terms of this area It's true in terms of other areas of my life And the older you get the more you see that that my strengths are almost always my weaknesses So I I haven't i'll shut up, um So how does this How does this relate you? I won't either how You linked a long time ago. It's one of my favorite things that you have promoted outside of your own content that bruce charlton Article on what we've learned from modernity And in that it essentially says that modernity has showed us a lot of what when this gets into what I call technological babel and even what I think guy sinstock was singstock was saying the other day about Technological colonization Is that is inherently bound up within systems. I think that's part of the mechanistic assumption of materialism and the whole modern world I think how does that relate to institutions and what bruce charlton was saying in that article that systems part of what post modernity the post modern critique was that when you think of things technologically mechanistically systematically What modernity has showed us is there's just there's too much the world is infinite There's too much information. There's too many facts too many things and then systems become infinitely complex carl don't yell at me I understand the difference between I mean, I don't know what you're saying. I really don't you're gonna be mad at me. So You know that yeah, I know he'll be mad at me no matter what so um but So then you build systems upon systems But it seemed like the takeaway that he was saying from that article is that there are things that are fundamentally not systematic Which are which which aren't? You could call them institutions, this is where I get to this your semantics of what you call an institution But that would be marriage and the family Those don't function on rules and systems. Yes. Do you have rules? but they're not this is the whole what I think the new testament is talking about with like Law and spirit is is rules. You can't you can't treat your kids Based on like a tax code rule book or it won't work The relationship won't work. You can't do that with your spouse and I think The church was always meant to do that So how does that relate to the institution and the systematizing of propositions within the church but still having that? Because this is the thing as I would say when you when you try to institutionalize propositions in confessional and statement of faith frameworks You're going to continue getting the kinds of things that I think you've been experiencing with people throughout these last two years And you're not going to get deeper relationships You're going to get increasing isolation and exclusion That's my whole point kind of But my question about that is This seems to be a relatively new thing and the church with all of these with all this confessionalism has been around for thousands of years true, you know, and so if If what you said is what yields all this stuff, it seems like it would have been happening a lot sooner Yeah, well this gets into I think somewhat and I don't understand this with like That I mean it's an assumption but kind of like the barfield evolution of consciousness I think the way that we Conceive of these things and like what has led to kind of I mean you see it in american politics like this the way that christians behave in the church with Unending schism and identitarianism isn't any different than what we're witnessing in the political realm right now This is why I called You know somewhat protestantism like religious intersectionality Is because it's unending schism and so like somehow I think I agree with you. We've had confessions forever but I think the way that we've Thought about those and related to those has evolved in the last thousand 1500 years I don't think the way that like The nysians or or even the orthodox now, I don't I don't think they think of the confessions in the same way Theologically that that that I was raised to think of them Protestantism I think is a response to the the the tyrannical Behavior of the roman catholic church. I mean you can just see that in luther's story luther begins wanting to have a conversation about a bunch of theological things and the You know the message he got very quickly from the catholic churches shut up or we'll burn you at the stake Luther had exactly the personality that said You know, he's sorry. That's why I always think about martin luther and jordan peterson together It's like well if you you know I i'm i'm not gonna say it Right here. I stand I can do I stand I can do no more you can put me in jail and I won't eat and I believe Them that's that's just how the dude is. So um I think I think what happened in protestantism was an institutional manifestation of a lot of the dynamics that have been in the church All along and when you when you look at the kinds of Theological disputes all throughout the middle ages the church fathers But but at the same time the only way we can have these disputes is with Propositions and actions You know and and so I I I think these I think these elements are inescapable and hopefully over time we continue to learn and and our understanding of them gets refined and improved perhaps but I You know the orthodox the orthodox churches had plenty of fights. I mean you get you get into You get into them and they will fight over language because It's the only way we can often create these representations they'll fight over language. They'll fight over architecture You know, i've made the point before that I mean one of the biggest it was long before I got here But one of the biggest fights this church ever had was whether to whether the state the carpeting on the stage Should be royal blue or burgundy and burgundy won because burgundy is the color of the western church. I mean it just it That we will fight about anything and I think anyone who's married should understand this Did we fight we need to do we need to do it in a way though. We're like It doesn't divide though because that's the difference between a healthy marriage and a dysfunctional marriage is yes Of course, there'll be disagreement It shouldn't divide you and then the question is what does division look like because for example in the protestant church division division is Institutional but then there's evangelicalism where people are saying oh, we're all bible believing church oh, and then there's you know, then you have the problem of the one in the many and And you can always and forever say well, everything's one. Okay. Um Good, you know sign over your house to me. Mr. One, uh, hand give me your car keys. You care if I sleep with your wife, you know I I always just kind of think I understand I understand seeing oneness But i'll tell you um Well, this one dollar is all the money in the world, uh, you know They don't let you buy a car with that Well, there you go. That's you can have both with the trinitarianism with ellis Well, and I think that's and I think that's part of what happens but by virtue of language and by virtue of action Dualities emerge Are you waving to people too jeff no i'm just pointing out that it looks like jobes ready to talk I have fans too job Pastor the discord what are what are jeff and I jeff's like the You're the reincarnation of c.s. Lewis. I'm the i'm the dave rubin of the discord. I'm the I'm the high and agreeableness low in intelligence Religious frock was this is forced upon me. I did not ask for this It it did work because yesterday I was supposed to Receive somebody's confession and so on the discord and I said, okay Well, you since are forgiven three cleaning your rooms and one bloody steak And then they show a bloody steak in the photo album channel brilliant that was uh, sevarian, I think I actually didn't have anything to say but No, it's so funny about this I saw your bike illuminated and I just assumed that means you're ready to talk I was thinking of it and then I was trying to figure out if I should and oh Well, I think you should joe because you're you're kind of a I mean you've always been a little bit of a You know, you're kind of like Weird. Oh, I get it. Yeah. Okay. No the outlaw fire, right? You weren't raised in church You were doing so it's really I am very interested in how all this strikes you and your thoughts about it This stuff is so difficult Um I uh, we had prayer week Two weeks ago and that meant that there were five nights where you could go to a church and there would be a half hour service but that means so there was the christian reformed church Down the street the reformed church where I go to the little catholic church that was started by belgian refugees from world war one That's where you can see where the border of my village is because that's where they were allowed to build a catholic church Like they can have fun, but no we get to see it And so I finally had an excuse to go to the little catholic church because i've been curious about it It's tiny but it's lovely inside little thatch roof statues rosaries, uh And I don't know. I mean I kind of miss that But i've understood in my church there have been Debates about the tiny the tiny wooden cross in the front of my church Which is not in the center of the other frame where it's in the left It should be in the middle, but it's not pisses me off to my mind, but that's probably also a very Particular decision so you notice that like what you said paul about the the carpet color And i've been taking part in this course on liturgy design and There's it's it's such a dance and you have to know all the moves And if you suddenly like well, I like this dance better You're gonna step on someone's feet and they're gonna be unhappy with you and like we were doing this dance Everybody knows this dance. Why do you want to do is see now everybody's feet? Are hurting? And the only thing I can think of because you were talking about marriage and about division It's like well, you need to confess to each other and the other needs to be willing to take that confession There's always going to be things you're going to disagree on and what matters is whether that's that's important Like I am a huge Like I worry too much about food So and I always do cooking at home and this that's that's I love doing that So we have a nice division of labor because my wife doesn't like to cook. She likes to eat what I cook and So for instance, i'll make her a nice egg and you know in the pan and I take care of it It's all nice and the balance is right and just enough salt just enough pepper You know like peterson has this whole nice scene of how to really screw up an egg in a diner In it's like called restaurant from hell if you haven't listened to it go listen to it's brilliant But anyway, I make sure it's a nice egg And then I give the egg and you know coffee because it's probably breakfast and like here you go, honey You enjoy that here is my my love for you embodied in this breakfast and she puts ketchup on the egg Like you are american barbarian And she's like, but I like it this way like it's not supposed to be that way it's supposed to be different This is the liturgy. This is how you're supposed to enjoy that. This is what you're objectively right to have joe of course, but At some point, you know I figured that's the way she likes to enjoy her Breakfast, I have my own thing. I love mayonnaise i'm dutch. I can't help it. She doesn't like mayonnaise You know, I I could show you a a jar of mayonnaise and a jar of ketchup. That's our marriage in an image And it's lovely because i've learned to just enjoy that difference for what it is because the surrounding Uh story is still there And so I can disagree with things in church like oh god these these these diabetes inducing songs about jesus that I just really don't care for but other people really love those like okay, you i'll just Pretend I haven't heard them And then you're happy with with the song Yeah, paul, you should write down diabetes. I did I got a diabetes inducing songs about jesus I got that there that might be a title oh, no, uh but but also like uh in the liturgy course I was talking to a Woman who was also going to be on the podcast where she got tears in her eyes just telling me about how she feels about the lord supper and how important that is to her and We're all focusing on different things within that same building and Yeah, it's it guys. It's gonna be a meaningless platitude no matter how I say it But what's important is that we talk to each other about what we value in it. I don't know how else to frame it I mean and then you could say yeah, but then at that point why not just go back to the catholic church? Or the orthodox church That's just that I mean, I don't have an answer. I mean, that's just So here's can we take it this way so then this is this is what I would say is like what What I think Has made people coalesce around you paul in this little corner of the internet Is that this was a place where people could say what they actually think? They didn't find that in church. Yeah, why didn't they find that in church? Well other people have found it in church before. I mean this isn't new but not as a rule. That's why we all exist Well, maybe yeah hadn't found it in church, but you know, there's quakers and I mean there's Liberal churches and but even that I mean and and there are things that you can say in our midst that will get you Kicked out and there are people I mean jeff quackenbush hasn't been around a while. I mean he might feel insufficiently valued or slighted or you know there I get you there's I don't I don't know if he'll listen to this but you know, there's someone who doesn't want to There's someone who sends me emails regularly about how he's not going to listen to any more of my videos because I let carl Talk in the comment section and because I talked to john verbecky and you know That's people they're gonna do it and so you know one of the things you learn quickly as a pastor is that if That that you can't as you as the pastor cannot be The the border between christ and not christ in the world You can't be that and you can't entertain that thought and so when people get offended they get offended and and you try not to You try not to take that personally and you try and when they and when they express their offense to you as anger You uh, you live with that too and you try to love them and bless them. I mean that's That's interesting paul that that you say in a pastor cannot be the the border between christ and the rest of the world There are plenty of churches that i've been in that say no paul. That's exactly what a pastor is supposed to do. Yeah So that's confusing too to you know, the layman like us or it's just like okay. I don't I don't know what's going on And obviously I disagree with that pastor But am I going to talk that pastor out of it? No, there's a long tradition of that. So So yeah, the whole term of border just sounds kind of weird That's because you're in the netherlands In the eu You have a brexit dutch brexit, huh, that ain't gonna happen Aren't the borders in the netherlands always moving out into the ocean too? No, no, they're also going to germany, which is where they need to be Uh Okay, I can't make jokes about this No, no I I have just learned that when i'm going to be in your church paul in the next, you know a couple of weeks I've already told me it's like don't make comments on the carpet. Don't say anything about the carpet. No, no Our church is that's a terrible color Than it used to be who picked that color Oh, yeah, they would welcome they would welcome sam and there's like sam you're fine As long as you like that purple carpet, but but even look at I mean you might have caught david fuller's comment to To andrea about his visit to my church and someone asked him Very naive innocently naively. Are you a christian and in america? That's just a you know, well they use They used code talk paul. Remember they said are you a believer, right? All right And and david was you know didn't quite know how to And you know, I look at an exchange like that because I know both sides a little bit I mean that there those were dave's issues in there and he grew up methodist and he's no longer a methodist and And anyone who's you know, it doesn't matter if you grew up a red sox fans and you move to new york And you sneak into yankee games. You're gonna have stuff about it. Um Job doesn't get that reference, but that's okay No, but it I I mean I When I first went to visit my then girlfriend my wife in the u.s She uh, she said I'll introduce you to some of my friends Uh, one of her friends for instance was a jehovah's witness uh Who asked pointed to me does he speak english? No, no, we've written in hieroglyphs to each other for like years And it wonderful lady, you know, that's especially true joe first first impression. Yeah, that is true. Um but she also took me to a a Friend of hers who she grew up with um and uh Uh that that's a black woman and her mother came from uh Mississippi like deep down, Mississippi and had moved to michigan and my wife had then Made sure to tell me whatever you do job Don't talk to her mother about religion Like okay, I want I didn't I didn't she did One of the first you talked back Oh, yes, one of the first questions out of her mouth was like So joe have you been saved? I'm like No, i'm an atheist and This was the first time in the u.s I did not know what people thought when they heard the term atheist to me That's just perfectly fine term to describe yourself. I mean to me it was the perfectly fine term, but to her it was like what? How can you not believe in the creator of this world and uh-oh, this is not this conversation Starts starting off. Well so yeah that I mean That that reminded me of what you said about code talk was like now I do a matter either somewhere else like uh-oh Like during headlights. Well, yeah, I just you know, it's I was raised that way, but I don't really you know I tried to take damage control because I wasn't going to tell her what I really thought about religion because Of course eventually I did Which wasn't a good idea because well basically, you know as far as i'm concerned god is a bloodthirsty tyrant That didn't go very well, no, uh, and he doesn't exist I mean he didn't exist Well, yeah, yeah, but if he did Right, but I mean that the that whole frame of of how you like are you a believer? Are you a christian? Yeah, that is a Have you been saved? I mean as far as I was I didn't even know what that meant like have I been saved? Some hymn about being washed in the blood that i'm thinking of right now It's like it's carry, you know The movie the the steven king movie carry That was her baptism into christianity blood Carry that's what it's about. You know, I thought it was the bible it was based on a book of the bible, right paul This is disgusting poor joe poor joe Just google just google carry and blood in youtube and you'll get the idea. I don't think I should It doesn't sound like Just just google these seemingly inconspicuous terms Make sure your work filter is turned off. Yeah, i'm sure But every every culture have has these language games Every every political culture every family It is it is endemic to humanity that their words have significance within context And certain words have more significance than others And well, what's interesting is when you're the outsider you recognize it when you're the insider it is invisible to you. Yeah So this is I mean, this is all jordan peterson sam harris stuff. What is truth? What is belief? That was the conversation you had job, right? Do you believe in jesus? You know, what the hell does that mean? You know like Have you been saved? Saved from what? I mean I get that and you know most of the time I I've just got this contrarian I I'm I'm not that low in agreeableness, but I enjoy I'm a troll deep inside and It's a bad thing to be as a pastor because every now and then you just got to let it out And show your true colors and trolls and especially as a pastor you can troll so well as a pastor because The whole situation in some context has just set you up for it to just say the most trollish thing you can imagine and Well paul, i'd like to welcome you to this free open environment where you can you know Explore that part of yourself and share it with us paul. That's something i'm actually very interested in is I mean don't answer if you don't want to but like where have you changed in the last two years? Confessionally and ideologically that you don't talk about on your channel You have a filter that means you don't say some things in your channel violate it, please No, I mean it's just we might publish this Yeah It's more it's more it's more interesting because it's something i've done a lot of thinking about and I quote you on is like In our first conversation you talked about confessionalism being a thin crust on the outside Which is true. So what that and and I think and this is true in this in all these conversations We've had over the past two years You know, are you a christian? Do you believe in jesus? But the reality isn't even in our conversations with someone like sam is All of these churches no matter what they confess are full of people like if you went through the early church beliefs Around say latrinity something as central as the trinity of christianity You're gonna have like Monophysitists you're gonna have diaphysitists. You're gonna have arians. You're gonna have all these different people within the church. They just don't know it so What does it mean to be a christian? What does it mean to believe in jesus because if jesus more than yourself Which I think is a great which I think is a great definition, but what like What's hard to tell if someone's a christian you can't you get signs but right and and then you have again the the jordan peterson tom tomm holland dynamic where Someone from the muslim world. I mean when when I read When I read in tom holland's book About the fact that when imperial britain basically you know Nudged the muslim world to formally give up slavery. That was christianization I thought yeah, that's there was a revelation for me and I thought That's that's a huge deal now Now will either side of and it will either side of the current culture war conversations Say that you know You know all horrible imperialism britain forcing the muslims to give up formal slavery How dare they you know, nobody's going to make that argument There it is and so This is why I think the abiding christian teaching is that there is one judge And and and so then the The the skeptical position. There is no judge. I find that position deeply unsatisfying Because we can't all we all do judge we all can't help but judge but It makes it really hard to be mad at pedophiles It makes it really hard to be mad at pedophiles Joe go ahead unless they no no no hang on. No. No luke you said something Well, I think that's our You know, so so right now. Oh, there's so much. I mean the internet. What does it bring to us? So So john ortberg, you know who john ortberg is? Yeah, here's a he's isn't he presbyterian Right john ortberg used to be the preaching pastor at willow creek, of course willow creek, you know bill hibles the stuff about him Just lately bill ezekian who was bill hibles teacher at wheaton and trinity. He's been in hot water over things uh john ortberg is is recently in trouble because he someone came to him and revealed himself to be attracted to children and john Um and said he hadn't acted on any of it, but john didn't make any moves apparently that formally kept this person from doing unsupervised ministry with children which Kind of really shocks me But that's as a pastor In terms of understanding confession and confidentiality Is a very difficult thing. I mean and in my church there are times when I've had no pet let me just say this at first, you know, i've had No knowledge of of pedophiles in my tiny little church at all No one has ever confessed that to me So i'll put that out there But there are times when I as a pastor will simply tell the council for looking at office fairs for me I don't think that person probably should serve right now And council will usually just take me at my word now That's a tremendous amount of power because if I decide I want to you know, I have a bias against somebody I have a bias against somebody but at the same time as a pastor, you know things that you can't That you can't divulge and so you just have to in a small church you can do this But as church of scale it gets very very difficult. So john ortberg is in some trouble now john ortberg has a child who is transitioning from one sex to another um, and so But it wasn't because of this but because of the the pedophile thing john ortberg was suspended from ministry In his church temporarily at least and it's just so This stuff is so hard when it comes to real human lives And and the the wisdom that we need And the decisions that we have to make are are are torturous, especially if you have any degree of responsibility control or power so It's just hard and that's that's that's our lot And what was the question Well, it was It was it was about no judge versus one judge And what's interesting about all that and tie it and woven into everything? Uh that you were talking about there paul that I was thinking about is that the one judge idea knows every single factor that goes into every decision and choice that Any of us make and so, you know luke brought up the point if there's no judge it makes it really hard to deal with pedophiles And the one judge knows everything that you know went into What would what would cause someone to even have? Those tendencies What factors led to somebody acting on it was it their own? Personal will and evil was it things that were built into them, you know, what was it and the the one judge model Accounts for all that and the no judge model just kind of leaves you Out in you know, the wild west, right? Yeah, and and and also Getting away with stuff. I mean that's It's been so interesting I mean the the many blessings of donald trump If anybody follows me on twitter they have a or on facebook They have a certain degree of idea about how I feel about that man but some of the blessings of donald trump is that I watch I watch people who on twitter and facebook and out in the public media have been just Posturing themselves as overwhelmingly opened and agreeable and you know They're never going to judge or condemn anyone and hell is the last thing that would ever cross their mind But once donald trump comes along boy They know who their enemy is and they sure want him Called to account and judged and held responsible and all of that And odds are that in the way human history works a man like donald trump is You know is is he going to we don't even know what judgment means I mean, how do you What is just to do to I'm not saying donald trump is a pedophile. Um, I think donald trump donald trump sexual tastes are pretty obvious to most of us by now What do you do with a philanderer or a pedophile what does justice look like we have no idea Yeah And and so it's it's absolutely reasonable that our narratives throughout history have pushed this into an afterlife where some of the rules of the manifest image that we currently navigate don't hold and You know, so I got into a little there's a there's a guy in sacramento He's a therapist who had theological training and you can find him on twitter because I go back and forth of them I hope that I should probably set up a coffee date sometime and Build the relationship with him because one of the things that one of the things that you learn, you know Luke in terms of your question is that The more it's it's a lot It's a lot easier to take cheap shots at at a little two-dimensional face of someone talking on the internet than once you enter into a three-dimensional Relationship with that person and so whereas I can say Probably straw man ish things against sam harris or or other people on the internet If I were to sit down with sam harris and have a meal and coffee you would probably know What because now I have all this video evidence on the internet that i'd softened against sam harris because I'm not only high in openness I like people and the the number of people that I like Once I meet them I I just like them. It's just how i'm wired and so And and you know some of the things I said about john vervecki before we started having real, you know at least Conversations like this after I meet him and I don't know if he's the hugging kind or not um, but you know and after we sit on stage and You know, i'm gonna like him more and that's going to Do That's going to alter my commentary on his things and i'm gonna pull punches and i'm gonna be more generous and And I don't think those are bad things, but they they're not necessarily completely good things either. So this all is just really really complex so that remind That reminded me of was it uh sevarian who made the The four p's one-dimensional two-dimensional three-dimensional four No, it wasn't it wasn't civilian. I can look it up. I put it on my blog. I thought it was great Yeah, but then that what that makes me think of then is like because you were just saying when you interact with somebody As a as a two-dimensional or a one-dimensional thing rather than as a full being that you can hug and interact with and that you Have to live with as a family Well, that's what Surrock there you go. That's what That's what propositional is right? It's one-dimensional in his framing and so So that's that almost to me is like what you were basically talking about in a story The what we're talking about propositionally, which is that when you treat people as merely propositional or just Like a one or two dimension thing and not a real person that you have to love and hug and interact with like in a family like in a marriage You start the you're dealing with your Idol of them your projection of them your your Static lifeless image of them. You're not dealing with them as an icon. This is why I think grief observed That's what I hear. It's agree. Yeah, right there. Yeah, that's exactly I think that's what lewis was talking about and so And that's what leads to straw manning judging and then schism because you're not treating a person as The infinity the expression of infinite is also infinite. You're not treating them as an infinitely complex being That has its ontology rooted in trinitarianism But that's what dealing with someone propositionally does But but the most the most four-dimensional relationship you have in your life, which is Probably a spouse or a parent or a child or a partner A spouse you also that the other scales as well because there's no one that you can hate like your spouse There's no one that can make you angry like your spouse That works, too Right everything everything is heightened. Yeah Oh, but that's because at that point you expect the other to also have the 3d View of you that you have of them which makes whatever they say more painful in that supposedly deeper understanding context and I don't know in my marriage is It's a thing. I really try to do like okay. She did something She probably didn't do it to get the effect that You know how I need you know what? I mean? Like right whatever she did was not supposed to piss me off So effectively i'm pissed off. It's probably my fault and That's seriously that stuff is important. It also come on and your marriage you piss each other off intentionally too, I bet Wow, you know That's possible I should ask Sometimes it's intention. It's unintentionally intentional in my in my experience Um And so many thoughts flying around there's there's a brilliant Lewis essay called the trouble with x that I would recommend everybody look up and read that ties into this But there was also there was a conversation going on. I think in the voice chat of the discord last night where there was some questions about uh good faith discussions And I think you I think good faith discussions Um When you start to suspect that someone is not operating in good faith anymore. It's it's when these dynamics come come into play Where it's just like this person knows better Um, they're they're intentionally uh missing the point I think I think more often than not people are are not intentionally missing the point They are seeing what they're seeing and it infuriates us that they can't see it the way that we're seeing it and Sometimes kind of a both end right like part of them is probably seeing it correctly Yeah, but are them is it and how much are how much am I aware when i'm partially seeing it? And i'm yeah, right how much of me is just being stubborn and not wanting to see what it is that somewhere in the recess? Of my consciousness. I know that I see But what am I going to have to give up what? What ground am I going to give up to them? And then are they just going to completely discount my perspective if I do that's that's so much of what I go through in in My disagreements and arguments that I get in with my wife And this is where christianity Is incredible and all these esoteric philosophical conversations like this what I say to my wife are incredibly practical because what you just said good faith conversations and and we have this Duality of there's certain things we see but we're maybe repressing. It's kind of elephant rider It's kind of iceberg There's stuff that we're maybe seeing that we're not seeing and we're acting in certain ways The christian ethic is self-sacrifice, right? So in a conversation Where you're Maybe you're trying to be So whatever, I mean, maybe carl will see this i'll just carl it was all public anyhow. We're going to conversation in In all the comments on me and karen's conversation carl made a bunch of comments the other day that I really felt like bad faith It felt like he wasn't trying to understand me um and so I've been talking to people because really like i'm Such a ridiculously emotional person, but like it really affected me like it sent my whole day into a tailspin There were other extraneous factors, but it affected me a lot Because I don't i'm always just whenever I whenever someone is mad at me i'm like you just most understand How can you not love me Well, I mean I understand how you could not love me too, but um, it's the trials of a trophy husband It'll be luke's channel, yeah a trophy husband, yeah Yeah But then so so then i'm trying to figure out like i'm just trying i'm I'm having all these thoughts right of self-sacrifice Racking my brain just not scapegoating and demonizing others. Well, just like wow, whatever, you know, so i'm just like how can I I think this should always be the christian's Thought is how how can I be christ to the world in the circumstance? How do I act christianly in the circumstance? How do I sacrifice myself? Maybe he has bad faith Maybe not maybe it's just a temperament thing And because I mean, I think I really think it's a good assumption to think everyone has well intended everybody gets Back him up in the discord last night of like judging intentions and it's like cares Deeper than that. We just say this all the time the road to hell is paved with them, right? So Stop analyzing intentions, you know, um I do think I do think that carl is driven by a love of the truth Um But but then it's just like it really feels like you're not trying to see something that maybe you're not seeing that I could be saying So then i'm like, how do I engage? What is my response then as a christian? How do I engage that? I and I really felt like I was at a Impasse I just didn't know I was like I feeling no matter what I say In this format or in this context. It's not going to work What which which pearson rule is it? I assume that someone knows rule nine. Whatever number that is nine rule nine Yeah, nine nine I'm just thinking the german rule Even in what you think and this is impossible to do i'm just throwing it out there theoretically I shouldn't say it's impossible. I know for me, it's very difficult to do this in the moment but if I could if I could ever seize on this idea of Presume not even presume just just be convinced Especially when you are when your spider sense is going off and you're saying this is in bad faith. This is in bad faith Say there is truth in what this person is saying I need to dig in and find it And agree with that person on the truth that I can find Right, and if you do nothing else and you just do that They may be 99 percent wrong But there's at least one percent of truth in what that person is saying and if you can find that That's that's a way in my experience. That's been a way to build a bridge Right, it doesn't matter as a christian, right? Even if they're in bad faith. It doesn't matter Yeah, everybody with jesus was bad faith In the whole acting like christ self-sacrifice thing there is a As far as i'm concerned a real risk in self-sacrificing and by self-sacrificing smothering And that's Well, wait a sec for paul to come back i'm gonna pause So we're yeah right now Oh, yeah, well i'm still recording Oh, no See, that's why that's why something is recording paul could go back and he can listen to all our personal stories that we were talking Yeah, so do I have to edit this? Do I have to edit? We will definitely that was Pretty yeah, we were talking about personal stuff. I used I used my wife's name and i'm not supposed to use that on youtube All right, I will cut it out I basically I basically destroyed my own marriage in five minutes. So we gotta cut this i'm gonna keep it Okay, but there is one judge and he will not be happy about that that's true that is true All right I'm gonna start recording again. I don't know how this affects it. Do I get a separate copy? I'm not sure what's going on It's gonna just no just just just just unpause the recording and then it'll just continue it worked perfectly I've paused and unpaused many i'm unpausing now and and job you you said something about um self-sacrifice When I mentioned that there's oh, yeah, there's there's at least one percent truth in what somebody's saying Smothering. Yeah. Yeah. Well that yeah, you could be christ-like but then you can also not allow someone to grow by always Kind of i know be you're always so what's the zero you're curling the floor in front of them They don't get to stumble you're in a because you're always sacrificing and I don't know, but that might just be a dumb remark on my side. Maybe that's just the way this is Oh, can we be codependent with jesus? Oh, yeah Well, not on him not from his side, but from our side. Absolutely as as pastors you see it all the time Why I mean he says go pick up your cross. Yeah And he also says, you know ask anything and it'll be given Including the cross People don't do a lot of asking he says can I have a cross There's also the be careful already have one yeah There's the be careful what you wish for right? You'll you'll ask for what you want and you'll get it but it'll come in a way that you weren't expecting sometimes lord Can I have humility and patience? As for those things well the good you know, jobe, I don't know if you've seen is the good place in the netherlands Uh, yes, uh, it is the netherlands name. It is pretty much that yeah It's also known as the low countries, but also yeah But that's part of the that's part of the I I want to be careful with spoilers because i'm trying to hold back on spoilers for a while in that little series, but That's part of what the show deals with that self-improvement for most of us requires Uh difficulty and that's and you see that all the time with codependent relationships that They're they're they're desperately trying to Make life better for their children, which all of us as parents want to do and so so figuring out using having the discernment to figure out when to remove an obstacle or when to You know, you're just watching them and you know, they're gonna hit it and it's like okay and you just sit and watch and And and to then sometimes people come back and say you saw that coming. Yeah, I did Well, how could you why didn't you stop me? Well, sometimes you actually did try to stop them and they didn't listen Or you just know What conversation was it? Oh, it was with guy about advice giving, you know people people Don't work that way Oh, if you tell me all of the pitfalls, I will avoid them. Yeah, right. Maybe if you're already fairly wise and open and Actually have a degree of control over yourself, but most of us don't and so Sam Harris if we could just all be rational and just do all these obviously reasoned things I would I would I would like to take a liberty for just a second if you guys will indulge me Just read the first two paragraphs of that trouble with x episode because I think it ties to the or trouble pecs essay because I can't hear So he says I suppose I may assume that seven out of ten who read these lines are in some kind of difficulty about Some other human being either at work or at home Either the people who employ you or those whom you employ Either those who share your house or those whose house you share Either your in-laws or parents or children your wife or your husband Are making life harder for you than it need be even in these days It is to be hoped that we do not often mention these difficulties, especially the domestic ones to outsiders But sometimes we do an outside friend that asks us why we are so glum And the truth comes out On such occasions the outside friend usually says but why don't you tell them? Why don't you go to your wife or husband or father or daughter or boss or landlady or lodger? And have it all out People are usually reasonable All you've got to do is make them see things in the right light explain to them in a reasonable quiet friendly way And we whatever we say outwardly think sadly to ourselves He doesn't know x We do We know how utterly hopeless it is to see x or how utterly hopeless it is to make x see reason Either we've tried it over and over again tried it till we are sick of trying it Or else we've never tried it because we saw from the beginning how useless it would be We know that if we attempt to have it all out with x There will either be a scene Or else x will stare at us in blank And say I don't know what on earth you're talking about or else Which is perhaps worst of all x will quite agree with us and promise to turn over a new leaf and put everything on a new footing and then 24 hours later Will be exactly the same as x has always been And I when she started reading I remember that essay so well My favorite biography of lewis's the narnian because I think more than any of the other biographies it See lewis was could be terribly private um, he he you know A grief observed was a you know, you know, basically a life obscured um And but but but alan jacobson the narnian goes into You know, what what was his what was his relationship with mrs. Moore? And we've got enough circumstantial evidence to imagine that he's living with this crazy woman who he likely had a romantic and sexual relationship with of possibly with lewis's own kink and But then he after becoming a christian Lives, you know serving her in a very cruciform way And but but even see part of the crazy thing about christianity is that You can tell yourself you're doing something in a cruciform way for x because And at the same time, it's just all co-dependence and you don't have the courage to negotiate You know, so you got to take the jordan peterson stuff also in there that Oh people people people people and it's and it's us I mean and so I was I was actually um You know, my wife had said something to me a couple days ago that Kind of set me off And and again nobody can set can set someone off like their spouse because spouses is just way too much territory that you're all contact with and and you know I had a I had many good reasons why She should not say do or think as she does but It began to dawn on me that there wasn't just a little bit of something wrong in me that was contributing to my pissiness about this interchange and Whatever's on her side of the line is on her side of the line, but Always recognizing that there's something on my side of the line. I can't do a lot about what's on her side of the line But I should be able to do more. I'm more responsible for what's on my side of the line. And so it's just So there you there you do it there you do the christian mortification and the confession and the And the examination and It's and that's part of the reason I really love louis because that aspect of the christian life is Such a huge percentage of it if the problem with x the number the percentage of The percentage of people who come to me and that's What they want to talk about with me is what 80 90 That's us that's humanity That's why I love the great divorce because the scene on the bus at the beginning of the book that's I got the same thing man. Like i've done this Meet up two times now And the first time I was already prepared oh, you know, I had all my philosophical notes I know we talked about was kids and and and And uh meaning and and victor franko and After the second one, okay, we had our subjects we're going to talk about evil So I had all my like, okay is evil universal or particular and And I had the ring of gaijis and well, what if somebody is psychotic and responsibility and evil all prepared You know three people showed up. So we're over five of us and We just talked we didn't talk about evil. We talked about about truth about How to be a good Business man how to train people to actually elevate them instead of just having them work for you Uh That's what people want to talk about we didn't even talk about anything so philosophical and as soon as I brought up You know the the problems with objective morality people like yeah. No, that's kind of too difficult. Let's talk about this instead And like next time i'm just not even going to bring notes clearly pointless And here I was being oh, no, they're gonna ask me difficult questions about philosophy. I'd better be able to answer them No No, that people that's not on people's minds. So that's exactly what you're saying paul people come to you and say I want to talk about this But are you sure you sure you don't want to talk about widgenstein? No But that's what's so great, I mean, I don't know I Obviously I like philosophical conversations almost as much as anyone but what's And paul you bring this up on your channel a lot and I think we all find this true is that some most often the most meaningful and transformative conversations are the Are the personal ones are the ones where we're and this is And I was going to say job even in in all of that um your When you're talking about kids you're you're talking about philosophy. You're talking about all this really deep stuff at the same time You're just not using You know esoteric You know ten thousand dollar words To do it and it doesn't and it scales because everybody can talk about that Most often I don't know I said something on the discord the other day and I think it's true I really do is that like a propensity toward intellectualizing things or even high intellect or high iq I would argue. I don't know. I almost feel like it's It's often and maybe more often a hindrance to genuine faith than a help Could be Whatever if we could define genuine faith Well, I think it just distracts us. It's really easy for us to start using ideas as a heuristic And then you just say well, i'm just playing this game of figuring everything out conceptually Well That's difficult luke Because I get I get that retorts Sometimes on the discord perfectly fine valid by you know people I respect say well, you know You're trying to figure all these things out. You're trying to you know, do it all philosophically but You know, maybe it's not what you should be focusing on if if I understand their comments correctly But also you can just take things at face value you gotta think about them you can't just oh, yeah sure I mean with some things. Yeah, you know I have no good examples But but it's also a function of certain people Yeah, and and in terms of my channel. Well, you know, that's that's a high degree of the people who have come here You know, we're all kind of bound up in our heads and we have to think things through and it's just part of what we What we have to do other people need to net Other people need to go chop wood It's it's and at this point Yeah Well, I mean it is true that at least i've come to this realization for myself Is that at some point? Nobody gives a shit like I can read this book about can't I say? Oh, that was really useful Nothing matters. It's like before you were enlightened you chop You keep doing the same thing, you know, like I actually had a weird thing this morning where I often have thoughts when i'm taking a shower and you know, it's when i've Figured many things out that later on the discord. I kind of work out So, you know, I was thinking about things and I got this strong idea of like Whatever you're christian just act like it Okay, fine And that's just been kind of sitting in my head the rest of the day like well, maybe that's the whole idea Doesn't mean I can't read the book Fine, but it's kind of it's not the focus of it It's just yeah, you can read the book on the side and you can talk with your nerdy friends on the discord You go do that, but What what still matters is that okay, you know You know, I'm not going to be able to read the book What what still matters is that okay, you know having conversations with you folks Going to church tomorrow doing the podcast There's probably a fancy vervekey word for what i'm describing Watch out paul There probably is there probably is yeah I don't know that was just kind of sitting in my head. So I had to talk about that sometime I got nothing to do otherwise There's there's something that links up for me to what you called genuine faith luke And paul, I think you alluded to a little bit of of where the ideas connect for me with your Definition of what a christian is somebody who trusts jesus more than they trust themselves It has to do with you know Where luke you had said the the higher the intellect maybe the more difficult it is to to reach genuine faith Something I thought about is The more control I have the more direct control I have over something The more i'm going to rely on myself the more i'm going to trust myself. So if I have direct control over figuring out a situation because I have a higher intellectual capacity or ability or ability to problem solve I'm, not even going to think of relying on trusting in to use to use The frame that you presented paul trusting in jesus. I'm going to trust in jeff. I'm going to trust in my problem-solving. I'm going to trust in Of my money to be able to deal with the problem of you know, the The leaky pipe that needs to be fixed and the plumber is going to charge me, you know, a thousand dollars or however much They're going to charge. Well, i'm just going to rely on my money. I'm going to rely on my resources It's it's when I run out of the ability to address the problem myself that I have to fall on My knees I can not do this. I am finally At my end and there's nothing that I can do to to fix this problem Well, that reminds me of what You said I think with guy paul I believe that you were talking about and I quoted it in the comments But like yours you're beginning to think that a lot of the problem the meaning crop crisis stems from uh our affluence And something else because that's essentially exactly tied to what you're saying jeff is you because we're affluent We think we have control over all these things and so we don't need We don't need trust but then ironically and this is where all these Spiritual things and material things Come together, you know and where heaven meets earth is because you could say, you know The bible is don't store up for yourselves where moth and rust destroy but store for yourselves in heaven. Well, this that's not just some like Nonsense Abstraction it's really real and practical. So it's what they're essentially saying is But they're essentially saying is don't don't trust in your bank account to fix your pipes You know like if you have a plan Like if you have a plumbing issue Because that's not where your faith is. It's like that could go away in an instant That's the thing that we don't this is this is why I love that george mcdonald quote so much from lilith Is that no man understands anything and when he gets that that's his first tottering step not toward understanding But toward the capacity for one day understanding because we don't really understand how the world works We think oh I have money in the So I have a good job I have money coming in I have this paycheck I have this house I have this stuff I can pay off that bill I can do it could all disappear You don't like it could all disappear in a second and god and his mercy may do that to you to show you You've built your house on sand What's that? You're gonna tell that story to me to be somewhere in my first name. Yeah Right, I mean is yeah It reminds me of that parable paul. I I just recently saw it But I can't remember where it was. I'm sure i'm hoping that you'll know it very well Which is the the man that jesus talks about who had like a an abundant crop and his his barn was too small to hold It all i'll build a big bar. Yeah, I have enough to live on for the rest of my life. I'm gonna I'm gonna you know, i'm just gonna live it up and then How does it go? He? I got tonight you're basically i'm god comes to him says up i'm i'm calling in the loan that which is your life I'm doing it tonight And you know what happens then to your plans little man? And yeah the barn builder the parable of the barn builder. Yeah, great parable And it can it's so true. It can all just go away. I mean i've been i've been thinking about you know i've been researching investing And luke and I have talked about this before or it's just like Well, what if if I if I am blessed with surplus funds beyond what I need to live on What is the best thing to do with it? Should I store it up to? Try to make sure that i'm not a burden for anybody else in the future Uh and invest it in such a way where i'll have x amount of dollars in the bank because I know i'm going to need to Continue eating when I can't work anymore and I can't produce an income or you know, should should I Release that money into the world for bringing making a difference making more good happen in the world right now and not Not put my faith in the money to take care of me in the future But to just kind of let it go one seems very reasonable by a certain standard and the other seems completely unreasonable And it just depends on what your perspective is on which is the unreasonable version and which is the reasonable version Is that the right term or is it which one brings the kingdom? That's code talk Well, no, I agree. No, it is not code talk. I disagree with that I don't think that's code talk I think that's very real I and code talk isn't unreal. It's just of a certain language Yeah, that's okay. I should say that's insider talk joe. You'll have to explain what joe I get what you're saying, but I think what jeff is saying is that You can You could from a christian perspective talk yourself into either way of Living and deciding and justify them and rationalize them both as kingdom I'll tell you a story that I heard in seminary years ago and i've never I mean how much of seminary haven't I forgotten? But you never forget the illustrations there was a i'm not going to name him but there was a fairly prominent Reformed theologian Who did not believe he should store up treasure on earth for retirement? And he I mean this guy is published. He's he's not a level but anybody who's got too much um Who's got a little bit of reformed? Um Education would probably recognize his name. He's published he published some important books So he opted out of social security He denied a pension. He saved no money And this man because he was well known When in fact he was elderly and could no longer write books or teach seminary or any of these things Still had to eat and so his church his community because his name was known fairly broadly People put out word and a whole bunch of people went through a whole lot of work to make sure that this guy would not Die of starvation once he could no longer draw an income and they took care of him Well, okay What's our perspective on that story? Was he irresponsible in in sloughing off his? um Is due diligence in caring for his retirement years or Did you know god simply provide as he always imagined god would? I don't know. I mean This is really difficult like friends of mine and they're not even friends they're people I met once and they live in america and We the friends of us on twitter basically their little girl has cancer Has had it for a long time Uh, and is now like she's that girl has wanted to die You know, she said that to her parents because the suffering is so terrible. The cancer is in her spine It's just just just torturous. They can't operate because the cancer is in her spine. So they're going into like the last Months maybe of of this long process and they're saying well any and you know if If you can help we'd appreciate it And that's when I think okay. Yeah, that's that's how what can I do? So I send money But then of course next question is why am I doing enough? How much should I send should I even be sending? Could I not give this money to somebody who is And closer to me. Yeah, but closer in what way? In my village in my family where where's that border again? Where's that barrier? I I don't know and then That doesn't mean that yeah, I could also maybe if I invest that money, you know I could do something even greater with it if if I had more because I had that profit And then I then I kind of get into Then I feel like i'm in the same domain as when i'm reading all the philosophy books like i'm thinking about this too much And instead I just send money And then well, maybe I made the wrong decision or for as much as that decision even exists like Well, the fact is they had money that they didn't have and I had money that I could spend I mean That's so difficult when well I don't have an answer and maybe there isn't well, of course there is one but I don't even know if I'd build when Yeah, I got nothing So my I don't know my My idea about this and I don't know if it's I don't know if it's right, but this is where I am right now and in my understanding of Theosis and this ties into Jordan Peterson is I think when you follow It's rule seven, I believe which is tell the truth or at least don't lie And you and you couple into that with doszajewski's like don't lie, especially to yourself I think part of what at least in the orthodox understanding of theosis or sanctification is is that you purify You purify your eye or your vision so like when Jesus said the eye is the lamp of the body And if your eye is well Your whole body will be full of light. But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be full of darkness And paul you brought this up the other day and it's something I've thought a lot about over the past few years But another way you could translate evil is divided or James the brother of christ talked about um, saint james talks about um The double-minded man unstable and all he does who's tossed to and fro by the waves of life I think when you This is why I love jordan peterson so much is I think when you tell the truth I think in as much as it's possible if we were truth-telling especially with ourselves All of the It doesn't I don't know I don't know what it means about hard decisions, but I think a lot of our waffling would of Indecisiveness and not knowing and questioning would go away so much because I think you purify your vision to such a point that you It's not that you don't have Disagreements with maybe other people or you see the world differently, but I think that I think it's coupled with that passage in 1st corinthians which said or no, it's in romans where it's You know this man thinks one day is holier than the other and this man thinks sunday is the appropriate day Each man should be fully convinced in his own mind I think if you can stop lying I think your conscience and your Noetic knowledge your noose the center of your being becomes purified and and you see with a vision Which may not be the same for everyone else But I think you can live into it with confidence And so like a decision like that I don't know. I mean if you're I don't think it's a right or a wrong thing. I don't think you can I don't think you can figure it out that way You know what I mean like what should I do I think it's more of like an inward intuitive Truth-telling thing because there are many right decisions. There's an infinite. I mean, this is the whole problem again, right? There's an infinite amount of things you can do with your surplus of money with infinite But I think our call is to be christ to the world in our particular circumstances And I really do believe there's I don't know. It's it there's a line from loris toward the end of the book loris I Looked so good. That said something and I'm not gonna remember it as well as he wrote it but it was something like at the end of his life this character said something like He saw and he realized at the end of his life that there really only was one path Because he's because the loris plays with time and it's and he's thinking about these decisions from his youth and he's thinking about all these different iterations of He has all these different names throughout the book and all these different people that he was and at the end He's looking back to the fire like his youth and earlier on in the book He was looking into a fire and seeing himself in the future loris is one of these trippy books and he was saying At the end he started to see like there only there only ever was one path For me And I think part of that is the purification of your I don't know if any of that makes sense What's that that game luke is is really focused on in that movie a hidden life, right Yeah I think that's what that movie's about. I don't know if either of you have seen that movie yet Are you familiar with what that movie is? No, i'm keeping myself from it until I can see it. Ah Yeah, so we won't go into too many spoilers then or any really Yeah, I think in a lot of ways it's what I was saying we're also two hours in And it's about time for me to go make dinner, ah, ooh, it's on the eggs No, it's a keto pizza Lovely that looked the picture you post on the discord looked delicious So think about it. The crust is made out of cheese with some almond flour egg and cream cheese That's just the crust. Wow, you add on that more cheese meat and some vegetables and some tomato sauce You gotta lay down after that. It's just Dense. It reminds me of a weird al song What one is that Um the complicated song That I don't know that one But put it in put it in the notes. I'll put it in the notes That'll probably be most people's favorite thing of this conversation Yeah, this is this went all over the place but it could we could probably be going on for a while yeah All right, we can stop recording and i'll tell you all what I really think Well, i'm glad everybody was able to Get together this this is good. I enjoy it. Oh, I enjoyed it too. Thank you so much. Um It is it is so much fun. I I you know in all fairness I I on a very regular basis You know, I I put the you know, the two the two convo limit on which spawned a lot of things and so i'm not I don't have any regrets about doing that but I so do want to swing back and and just follow up and have more conversations and And it's time this is why again I can't I can't get rid of my desire for um the freedom from time and decay Because you know I could talk all morning with you guys and I don't know if anybody'd care to watch it But I would enjoy it And but then you know how And that just scales all over my life So You're just too popular paul you got to be start being less likeable and fewer people want to talk to you Used to have this problem. Well, you're you're also too interested in too many things and too many people That's true. That's yeah Someone someone in the comment section uprated me for for yes. Oh, that's interesting. That's interesting Is this you've used that word how many times in this video? I'd say you you should not use this word again I thought yeah, he's probably right, but that's interesting too It just doesn't Yeah, there's some there's a lot of fillers that I noticed that people all the people in this community use which will be like It's complicated or that's interesting or we'll say and all the things and the stuff and the things Always wrestling with that which we cannot um Get our hands around grasp so yeah, very true Interesting Well, jope's getting hungry. We got to let him go and luke's got to go and yeah, i've got to go so All right. Well, thank you all. I will I will edit out the middle of the Conversation and I will post it probably Probably sometime next week. So All right. All right. It's good seeing you all Wonderful. Have a good day morning evening night