https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=L7G93145Z-c

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through my current version of the Sunday Sermon. Last week we talked about the connection between what for Romans was the strangely restrictive Christian sexual ethic and between that and the unique Hebrew worldview, their conceptualization of God. We are not free agents trying to broker deals better to feed our hungry drives and that's a real difference between the pagan culture and the new Christian culture that Paul is trying to create in the midst of these churches. Now why would people go to these churches? I've sometimes made an appeal to friends of mine with respect to certain aspects of Christian ethics, emphasizing the sacrificial aspect of it and they look at me and they're like, Well, no wonder your church is so small. Why would you? This is what you're selling? At the same time in our culture though, an ethic of love has in fact won, at least in theory. And so people say, Oh yeah, love, but what do they mean by love? Well, here's a famous picture from the depression that I think encapsulates a lot of it. Love comes at a tremendous cost. This picture is famous for a reason. A mother loves her children and during the depression, this mother wonders not simply for herself, but for the welfare of her children. This love is lived out sacrificially generating powerful gratitude from the children or if failed, a powerful sense of betrayal. That's how love works. Now these new Greco-Roman churches were very small, very fragile, very diverse. The Jewish elements from the synagogues were suffering stress from alienation, probably from the relational stress between themselves and those who didn't care for Paul or his message about Jesus or the resurrection. The Gentiles undoubtedly had their own stresses from social bonds. Jews had in some ways created a culture that could buffer them and have them live in the Roman Empire, many ways sort of as aliens in that place. But the Gentiles that were beginning to associate in the church didn't have that buffer. Christians would eventually be accused of everything from atheism to cannibalism in the Roman Empire. And so one of the things that they that had to be working in the church was a tremendously powerful vision to attract them to this kind of sacrificial love. Now N.T. Wright in his book, The Resurrection of the Son of God, has a really wonderful chapter going through the worldviews available in places like Thessalonica and just talking about the way people thought about decay and death. Basically it was a one-way street and I love how he sets this up in his chapter. So insofar as the ancient non-Jewish world had a Bible, its Old Testament was Homer. And insofar as Homer has anything to say about the resurrection, he is quite blunt. It doesn't happen. The classic statement of that is Achilles as he addresses the panic-stricken Priam mourning his son Hector whom Achilles has killed. You must endure and not be brokenhearted lamenting for your son will do no good at all. You will be dead yourself before you bring him back to life. That's Homer. But then again, there's Plato. If Homer functioned as the Old Testament for the Hellenistic world, which by the first century included the entire Middle East, its New Testament was unquestionably Plato. The relationship between the older poet and the newer philosopher is fascinating and complex, worth pondering both in itself and its many partial analogies to that between the ancient Hebrew scriptures and the early Christian writings. And at no point is Plato's newness more striking than in what he has to say about death and its aftermath. So radical is his perspective, in fact, that like an Athenian-Marcian, he proposes cutting out of Homer the very scenes that express the poet's view of life after death. He takes his censor-scissors to Iliad 23 and Odyssey 11, the tales of Achilles and Patroclus and of Odysseus' journey in the underworld. Will, he thinks, do the young no good? How will we get people to be good citizens, he asks, to serve in the army, to do their duty to their friends if their vision of the future life is conditioned by epic pictures of gibbering ghosts in a gloomy underworld? Instead, the young must be taught the true philosophical view. Death is not something to regret, but something to be welcomed. It is the moment when the means by which the immortal soul is set free from the prison house of the physical body. Now if you want to get a much bigger picture of the span of beliefs available to people, for example, living in Thessalonica, check out NT Wright's chapter. It's quite a bit longer, obviously, than any sermon here can afford, but this pretty much gives you a rough draft of that. And in fact, Plato has won in many ways, just considering some of the movies that dealt with the afterlife in a popular way that sort of captured the popular imaginations of, let's say, the 1970s and the 1980s. Heaven Can Wait with Warren Beatty, Ghost, all of this stuff is extremely platonic. In fact, many Christians, you'll hear stuff that's sort of like Plato. Well, if you love Jesus, you go to heaven when you die, and that's the end of the story. Now as in fact, even as with secular atheism sort of increasing in number, there's a little bit of shakiness going on right now in terms of the artistic imagination and the afterlife. programs that might grab your attention would be The Good Place that used to be on NBC and Upload, which is available on Amazon Prime. Right now, a lot of people are skeptical about is there an afterlife? You only live once and ideas like that. And so a lot of the platonic optimism is sort of leaking out of our culture. The anxiety of this might be all that there is is undercutting platonic visions of disembodied pleasantness. Cyber virtuality dreams bring in darker clouds. But what of sacrificial love? Oh, I've got some new ideas that I can go on this slide. How can hope? What hope can power a sacrificial love like the kind that we would see in the early church? Well, good spent good parents spend their youth, their wealth and their lives for their children. Sometimes children are grateful, sometimes they're not. Increasing numbers of young people are turning away from the idea of family. Children are a sacrifice. Why bring children into the world with so much suffering, they imagine? Why not simply live for myself? Well, Christianity impacted the Roman Empire in a powerful way, precisely because of this resurrection. And you can hear Paul talk about that in this letter to the church at Thessalonica. Again, this is very on very early on in the development of these churches. Brothers and sisters, we do not want you to be uninformed about those who sleep in death, so that you do not grieve like the rest of mankind who have no hope. For we believe that Jesus died and rose again. And so we believe that God will bring with Jesus those who have fallen asleep in him. According to the Lord's word, we tell you that we who are still alive, who are left until the coming of the Lord will certainly not precede those who have fallen asleep. For the Lord himself will come down from heaven with a loud command, with the voice of the archangel and with the trumpet of trumpet call of God. And the death of Christ and the dead in Christ will rise first. After that, we who are still alive and left will be caught up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. And so we will be with the Lord forever. Or encourage one another with these words. Now brothers and sisters, about times and dates we do not need to write to you, for you know very well that the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night. While people are saying peace and safety, destruction will come on them suddenly, as in labor pains on a pregnant woman. And they will not escape. But you brothers and sisters are not in darkness, so that this day should surprise you like a thief. You are all children of the light and children of the day. And we do not belong to the night or to the darkness. For then let us not be like others who are asleep, but let us awake and be sober. Let us be awake and be sober. For those who sleep, sleep at night. And those who get drunk, get drunk at night. But since we belong to the day, let us be sober, putting on faith and love as a breastplate and hope of salvation as a helmet. For God did not appoint us to suffer wrath, but to receive salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ. He died for us so that whether we are awake or asleep, we may live together with him. Therefore encourage one another and build each other up, just as in fact you are doing. Now Paul lays this out quite clearly here. Those in Christ who pass prior to Christ's return are with him. The dead in Christ will rise first. Now the meet him in the air is sort of a reception party. NT Wright likens this to certain behaviors in the near east where if a noble person is coming to town, they will come out and meet the person on the way and escort them into town. It's not unlike if the president comes to the airport, the mayor goes to the airport to greet the president at the airport. And then he talks about the day of the Lord themes, which should be familiar to us because we bump into them in the gospels and we bump into them in the Hebrew prophets. It's a day of reward for those in Christ and it's a day of trauma for his enemies. Now all of this is very much following along this theme that we saw last week with respect to the Jewish, the restrictive Jewish sexual ethics. This is not some neutral arena in which God's battle out for supremacy and their peons ride their coat tails to victory or humiliation. The author of existence has a will with a shape and those faithful anticipate the culmination of his coming. In other words, Paul says to the church at Thessalonica, do not fear. Yet it is not in any way unusual today for many people to be anxious about death and to be anxious about their dead loved ones. And I hear this regularly in the church. There's anxiety about the wait. Why is he taking so long? There's a wondering of the cost. Is the Christian life really worth it? Is it true enough? Is it true enough to sacrifice welfare and comfort for love? What I'd like to do to finish out this sermon is to read some Lord's Day question and answers that summarize the end of the Apostles Creed because I think the catechism really nicely answers a number of questions that people have and it's written very beautifully. And I think if you memorize it, especially that's what the catechism has been for. Obviously you will find joy and comfort in it. What do you believe concerning the Holy Catholic Church? I believe that the Son of God, through his spirit and word, out of the entire human race, from the beginning of the world to its end, gathers, protects, and preserves for himself a community chosen for eternal life and united in true faith. And of this community I am and always will be a living member. What do you believe concerning the forgiveness of sins? I believe that God, because of Christ's satisfaction, will no longer remember any of my sins or my sinful nature, which I need to struggle against all my life. Rather by grace, God grants me the righteousness of Christ to free me forever from judgment. How does this article concerning life everlasting comfort you? Even as I already now experience in my heart the beginning of eternal joy, so after this life I will have perfect blessedness, such as no eye has seen, no ear has heard, no human heart has ever imagined, a blessedness in which to praise God forever. What do you understand by the communion of the saints? First, that believers, one and all, as members of this community, share in Christ and in all his treasures and gifts. Second, that each member should consider it a duty to use these gifts readily and joyfully for the service and enrichment of the other members. How does the resurrection of the body comfort you? Not only will my soul be immediately taken after this life to Christ its head, but also my very flesh will be raised by the power of Christ, reunited with my soul, and made like Christ's glorious body. Amen.