https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=oaVDxBY17S0

 Hi, this is Paul. I'm not done with the Jordan Peterson monk debate analysis. What's been interesting in terms of watching the Jordan Peterson rise is how often these conflicted events have been important in terms of the conversation. And so when there is an event like this where there has been some conflict, I think it's worthwhile to spend a little time and analyze it and diagnose it a little bit. Now, some of the response I got from my first video is, you know, attack Dyson and, you know, Jordan Peterson's our boy and we're not going to let someone attack our friend like this. And we're all against tribalism. Well, if we're against tribalism, why do we act like a tribe? I understood. I first listened to the debate. I was shopping in Costco. Some people ask, well, how do you manage to get through so much material? I'm an auditory learner and I can listen to a lot of things while I drive, while I shop, while I do relatively boring, mindless things. I have an Android phone and I have YouTube read and I listen to stuff and I listen to a lot of audiobooks. So I was listening to this in Costco and I was so angry. I didn't know what to do with myself. I was pissed off and I wanted to do something and there I'm standing with a shopping cart in Costco. And here's the thing about anger. You lose your mind with anger. Anger possesses you. You know, again, look back at all the Jordan Peterson stuff. You get angry and it grabs you and you get triggered and I got triggered. Well, OK, so you get triggered. Does that mean you're right? One of the most difficult things about anger is that anger feels self-justifying. When you feel angry, you want to say something or do something and you feel justified in doing it. One of the biggest places we stumble is when we feel justified to do something that we normally wouldn't do. And one of the biggest challenges in growing up and this is true whether you're 15 or 25 or 55 or 75, is getting a hold of yourself and losing those buttons that everyone can push and not getting triggered. And when you get angry, realize, OK, I'm angry. What do I need to do now? Usually what you should do when you're angry is nothing. And sit back, take a deep breath, wait a little while. My whole project with this whole Jordan Peterson episode of my life has been in many ways to slow things down. And I know a number of you have talked about the length of my videos and that's an issue. My videos are mostly thinking out loud, but they're also just a collaborative process in thinking out loud and working out things together. And that's not necessarily the pace of YouTube. I see a lot of other videos, they've got sophisticated graphics and they're sarcastic and they're loud and they're visually grabbing. And God bless them. That's not how I am. I don't have those skills. That's not who I am. I got into this project because I started thinking out loud in front of this crazy computer through this crazy thing called YouTube. And to my complete and utter astonishment, a whole bunch of you want to think out loud with me. And you leave me comments and you send me notes and you call me up on the phone and all kinds of things. And it's been good. Well, one of the things that we have to get a handle on is tribalism. And tribalism is not a bad thing, necessarily. We all need tribes. It takes a village to raise a child that Hillary Clinton loved to quote. We need a community. I remember everyone needs a friend. Everyone needs a tribe. Everyone needs a family. And part of what's going on in the West right now is people are atomized and divided and people don't have people to be with them. And we're separated and we've used this technology to remove ourselves from each other. And we talk to each other through this technology, which is by no means the same as having a real relationship in real life. Tribalism is a default distinctive reaction. And it's natural and we live by it and we need it. And I personally am a fiercely loyal person. You attack a friend of mine and I get angry fast and I'm ready to jump in there and defend my friend. And even if my friend is wrong, I don't care. He's my friend and I'm not going to let you do what you're going to do to my friend. I don't know if that's from growing up in New Jersey or what, but that's you know, that's how I feel. But tribalism has its limits and we have to come to terms with it. We group around obvious signals like race or kin and we stick together. Now, some of those things are what they are and we've got to deal with them. It's a survival strategy, but it's bad at truth. And you know, I laugh every time I see the original Star Wars. Trust your feelings, Luke. And it's like, yeah, I see a world of people trusting their feelings usually to stupid ends. Feelings are good things. Feelings are signals. They're sometimes from the watchers in our heads. They're from our hearts. Our feelings in some ways are incredibly smart. And sometimes something happens and you see it and it just feels wrong. And your feelings are telling you stuff from your broader non-conscious brain. The elephant is talking and you should listen to your elephant. So you should always listen. So you should listen to your feelings, but your feelings cannot be your masters. Your feelings must be servants. Your feelings must be data. Your feelings must serve you. If you make your feelings your masters, well, I see people do this all the time in their lives and their lives are a mess. And there's a lot of that going on. And so thinking fast and slow, how to think by Alan Jacobs. If you're feeling triggered, slow down. Take a deep breath. Take a walk. Count to ten. Don't do anything now generally. Now again, it depends on a certain thing. If the feeling says, get out of the room, go someplace else because you're in danger, listen to your feelings. They're not dumb, but they're not divine and they're not infallible. So process them with everyone else and with other people. And part of, you know, with my C.S. Lewis project that I know has been kind of waylaid by all these things from Jordan Peterson popping up, but I haven't forgotten it, you know, supernatural effect of reason. And C.S. Lewis talks about that. And again, in processing C.S. Lewis's work, Miracles and thinking about the Dilla Honti stuff, you know, I'm thinking a lot more about reason and reason. It's amazing this capacity that reason has to colonize nature to the world around us has benefited greatly from reason. But here's the thing about reason. I'm also a Calvinist and Calvinists know that our noetic capacities are impaired by sin and we don't reason well. And sometimes we reason wrongly. And if you put your faith in reason, well, sometimes your reason will lead you astray. You've in a sense, just like your feelings, you're going to have to deal with reason and you're going to have to you're going to have to have a certain humility about it. And this is in a sense, you know, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Very famous quote out of the Old Testament. And there's a lot of wisdom in that quote that that that leads us to humility. And we ought to think about it. Now, this question about Dyson and Peterson triggers me so much because of where I grew up. And if you go back to my video, The Divine Lobster, I tell some story about stories about my father. And this is where and when I grew up in Patterson, New Jersey. And I remember growing up and I remember first time as I was probably I was a news news this kid. I always loved listening to the news. I was interested in the news and somewhere along the line, I had heard that, you know, the black population of America was 10 or 15 percent or whatever it was in the 70s. And I was in shock because I was I always thought, of course, there's way more black people than white people. That was simply where I was growing up and when I was growing up. And and so part of my frustration with the current race conversation is is people are like, well, we have to listen to people of color. I'm like, which one? There's way more people of color in the world than white people. And in almost every place I've lived in all of my life, there's been way more people of color than white people. And so and their people, they have different ideas. You can't just, you know, in some other conversations, you know, you're ghosting people. I hate the people of color framework because it ghosts people because it makes them all the same. And every time I listen to this, I think this is something trumped up by white people, people of color. What a silly phrase. Does skin color tell you all you need to know about a person? Never. But does skin color not impact your experience in the United States? And again, I grew up with this. We'd have church meetings in North Haldane, which at that point was kind of a white suburb and and black folks would be driving to the Bible study. They get pulled over by the cops because they're just driving in the wrong neighborhood. But then my sister driving in my neighborhood, which is a black neighborhood, gets pulled over by the cops in Patterson because they're worried she's buying drugs. You know, it's way more complex than the propagandized conversations are trying to get people to think in terms of. And I appreciate the fact that if you're trying to promote an agenda and to propagandize it, you have to lower the resolution. But the more I listen to this, this conversation, the more I think we're having it in such a dumb way. And look at my church today. It's the community that I pastor in in 2003 or 2003, I think it was Time magazine called the most the most diverse neighborhood in in the United States. There's everything in my neighborhood and there's no majority in my neighborhood. And and in my church, there's it's a CRC church. So there's a higher number of people of of Dutch CRC descent. But there's folks from Japan and from Hawaii and African Americans from some from the south or some from Southern California. And there's white folks and there's, you know, people in from Brazil in this picture who are here with us and and all over the place. And every single one is a unique individual and they all have different backgrounds and different stories and different takes on life and different perspectives and different ways they've been hurt and different ways that they hurt others. This is how people are. Now, I want to go through the the opening remarks of the Peterson monk. The Peterson monk debate, because there's a lot in these opening marks that sets up the rest of the debate. And I might do another video after this where I dig into the Peterson Dyson clash. And I want to bring in Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter because in terms of the conversations about race, I hear today, those that seem like their actual conversations where people are daring to speak the truth. You know, they talk about the intellectual dark web. Well, well, these these guys are are, you know, Glenn Lowry keeps saying we're the black folks on blogginghead.tv. Well, they're the black folks in the intellectual dark web, even though nobody's paying them any attention. But to me, those two guys talking about race are some of the best conversations about race I can find on the Internet today. And if you've got better ones that you're listening to, you know, you know, queue them up for me and I'll take a look at them because Lowry and McWhorter, I think, are are really digging into issues where things are at with a lot of truth. And now I want to take a look at the opening comments, though, and I want to use a religious framework. Now, I know some of that triggers some of you because you've got some religious triggers out there. I know. But what I'm not doing is saying that they're being religious, but saying that religion as a schema can be a helpful diagnostic tool because all life is religious and we are all religious in different ways. Now, you know, don't take me too far in that and get all hung up with the atheist and the agnostic. This is a template by which we look at how we structure certain things that come up in us from below. And almost everyone has a sense of the good or the lost Eden, and almost everyone has a sense of the threat, which is sin or an adversary. Almost everyone has a sense of the way, which is a path to salvation. Almost anyone has a sense of the moment. What does this moment require of us, which is like the call? And almost everyone has a goal or a telos or an eschatology. Jonathan Pujo just did a video on on post postmodernity, which what which I thought was worth watching and trying to introduce people to the idea of eschatology and a telos. Every thought system has a telos that they're they're looking to. And I'm using these here and we're going to listen to the opening remarks. And as we listen to them, I want you to think about this framework and ask yourself what religions are these different spokespersons promoting implicitly? And now these are implicit religions. They're not necessarily well formed. They're not necessarily explicit. But I think it's helpful to look at it through a religious kind of this religious template to ask, OK, what where are you really trying to go with this? What are you really trying to turn us from? What what is your sense of the good? What is your sense of the adversary? And so that's that's where I want to do. And I'm going to start with Michelle Goldberg. And I think the consensus, at least what I've read, is she was the weakest member of this of this of this foursome. She she didn't bring a lot to it. She you know, she didn't bring a lot to it. Now, I didn't know anything about her until and I until I had read this this piece from computer. You can do it. This piece that she had written where she had mentioned Jordan Peterson. And it was. Yeah, you know, yeah, it wasn't a great piece. I didn't think she was terribly insightful. I did a little bit of I did a little bit more research on her, you know, went to her Wikipedia page. And one of the things that I noted is the controversies around her. She doesn't seem like a very careful journalist. And this was in a sense betrayed during the during the debate when she's mentioning she's she's hitting Peterson with these things that are just erroneous. And and here's the thing, if you want to take someone down, take them down with the truth. Don't take them down with misrepresentation, because if you try to take someone down with misrepresentation, And you might be effective in the law in the short term, but in the long term, your criticism is going to be taken down because you're just wrong. So get back to the correct one. So so this is this is Michelle. And again, as I've done in some of the past videos, we'll listen through straight through to her opening comments and then we'll go back and maybe chop it up a little bit. But actually hers, there's not a lot. There's not a lot to chop up. Michelle. OK, well, thank you for having me. As Rudyard knows, I initially balked a little bit at the resolution that we're debating because there are a lot of things that fall under the rubric of political correctness that I don't call progress. I don't like no platforming or Twitter or trigger warnings. You know, like a lot of middle aged liberals, there are many aspects of student social justice culture that I find off putting. Although I'm not sure that that particular generation gap is anything is anything new on the record about the toxicity of social media call out culture. And I think it's good to debate people whose ideas I don't like, which is why I'm here. So if there are social justice warriors in the audience, I feel like I should apologize to you because I'm probably not. You're probably going to feel like I'm not adequately defending your ideas. But the reason I'm on this side of the stage is that political correctness isn't just a term for left wing excesses on college campuses or people being terrible on Twitter, especially as deployed by Mr. Peterson. I think it can be a way to delegitimize any attempt for women and racial and sexual minorities to overcome discrimination or even to argue that such discrimination is real. In The New York Times today, Mr. Peterson says, quote, The people who hold that our culture is an oppressive patriarchy, they don't want to admit that the current hierarchy might be predicated on competence. That sounds particularly insane to me because I'm an American and our president is Donald Trump. But it's an assumption that I think underlies a worldview in which any challenges to the current hierarchy are written off as political correctness. I also think we should be clear that this isn't really a debate about free speech. Mr. Peterson once referred to what he called, quote, the evil trinity of equity, diversity and inclusivity and said those three words. If you hear people mouth those three words, equity, diversity and inclusivity, you know who you're dealing with and you should step away from that because it is not acceptable. He argues that the movie Frozen is politically correct propaganda. And at one point he floated the idea of creating a database of university course content so students could avoid postmodern critical theory. So in the criticism of political correctness, I sometimes hear an urge or an attempt to purge our thought of certain analytical categories that mirrors, I think, the worst caricatures of the social justice left that want to get rid of anything that smacks of colonialism or patriarchy or white supremacy. I also don't really think we're debating the value of the Enlightenment, at least not in the way that somebody like Mr. Frye, who I think is a champion of Enlightenment values, frames it. The efforts to expand rights and privileges once granted just to landowning white heterosexual men is the Enlightenment or is very much in keeping with the Enlightenment. To quote a dead white man, John Stuart Mill, the despotism of custom is everywhere the standing hindrance to human advancement. I think that some of our opponents, by contrast, frame challenges to the despotism of custom as politically correct attacks on a transcendent natural order. To quote Mr. Peterson again, each gender, each sex has its own unfairness to deal with. But to think of it as a consequence of the social structure, it's like, come on, really, what about nature itself? But there's an exception to this because he does believe in social interventions to remedy some kinds of unfairness, which is why in the New York Times he calls for, quote, enforced monogamy to remedy the woes of men who don't get their equal distribution of sex. When it comes to the political correctness debate, we've been exactly here before. Alan Bloom, the author of The Closing of the American Mind, compared the tyranny of feminism in academia to the Khmer Rouge. And he was writing at a time when women accounted for 10% of all college tenured faculty. It's worth looking back at what was considered annoyingly, outrageously politically correct in the 1980s, the last time we had this debate. You know, having to call or not being able to call indigenous people, quote, Indians, or having to use hyphenated terms, at least in the United States, of terms like African Americans. You know, adding women or people of color to the Western Civ curriculum, not making gay jokes or using retard as an epithet. And I kind of get it, right? New concepts, new words sort of stick in your throat. The way we're used to talking and thinking seem natural and normal, you know, by definition. And then the new terms, new concepts that have social utility stick and those that don't fall away. So if you go back to the 1970s, Ms., you know, Ms. as an alternative to Mr. and Mrs. stuck around, and women with a Y didn't. And I think that someday, or I hope that someday we'll look back and marvel at the idea that gender neutral pronouns ever seemed like an existential threat to anyone. But I also don't think it's clear that, you know, that might not happen because if you look around the world right now, there are plenty of places that have indeed dialed back cosmopolitanism and reinstated patriarchy in the name of staving off chaos. And they seem like terrible places to live. You know, I come to you from the United States, which is currently undergoing a monumental attempt to roll back social progress in the name of overcoming political correctness. And as someone who lives there, I assure you, it feels nothing like progress. Thank you. I am tempted to not go back through it, but. Yeah, in the last video, did get those numbers wrong. Oh, come on, YouTube. So, so let's sum it up. She's not really interested in the topic. She's really there because she wants to debate Peterson. And the real issue she has with Peterson is he is retarding progress, progress that she thinks is natural and normal. And the reason she's afraid of Peterson is because of Trump. Now, again, we're going to want to look at this and think about for her. What is the good that she that she assumes? What is the threat that she sees? What is what is the way of salvation that she imagines? What is the moment that they are in? And what is the eschatological goal that she is hoping to to realize? Now, I'm going to take these slightly out of order because the first thing I want to do is to talk about the fact that she's going to be in a state of crisis. And I'm going to talk about this a little bit more because the first two are, I think, possessed. Peterson would say possessed. The first two have the have the current ascending religion in at least on the American left today. And the second person was was Michael Eric Tyson. And I knew nothing about him coming into this. And so I did a little bit of research on him. He's got his own Web page. There's a story of his life. I was a little curious when he talked about himself as a preacher. And apparently in his younger years, he attended boarding school at age 16. He didn't feel comfortable with his classmates who treated him as an outcast. Was it a white boarding school? I don't know. Lashed out against these students in schools and was expelled, attended public schools, after which he became a teenage father to be living on welfare. These responsibilities helped him access the series of maintenance and auto sales jobs. He hustled, was a gang member. Yet through everything, he stayed with his Baptist Church, slowly began to recover his life of oratory and with the help of his church pastor studied and became a minister by the age of 21. And that's where we get the reference to to him being a a preacher. Very interesting conversation with with with Ta-Nehisi Coates in the Washington Post in October of 2017. Very interesting conversation. And they kind of both expressing their disappointment with with Obama and and kind of on the same page with each other. Let's see. What else did I find? I was the that was the Washington Post piece. Yeah. And then this and then this and then this his his own page himself, sociology professor, New York Times contributor, opinion writer, contributing editor to the New Republic ESPN's undefeated website. OK. His book tears. We cannot stop. A sermon to white America. Here's a sermon that is as fierce as it is lucid. It shook me up by by Stephen King. Now, again, if I do another video, I'm going to queue up some stuff from McWhorter about how this is McWhorter's really helped me in terms of my thesis about the civil war within Christendom, especially in the white church in North America and how you have this ascendant morality on the left and it has redefined Christianity. This is a redefinition from the old Cold War definition that redefined it in a certain way. And obviously the church has a broad and complex history. But but this this quote from the book I found I found quite interesting. Come on, you can come up. There you go. Just a piece, just a piece from it on the on the invention of whiteness, which which I'm frankly glad he brings up because whiteness is a colonial invention in many ways. And I think it's at least the perspective of whiteness. And I think that's the most important thing about the book. Now, how to deal with it. Now we can talk about that on black defense in the dissent in the face of white fragility on the obsession of black on black crime. Tears, we cannot stop. Notice how reading these words makes your blood boil. So I'm going to read a couple of words from the book. I'm going to read a couple of words from the book. I'm going to read a couple of words from the book. I'm going to read a couple of words from the book. I'm going to read a couple of words from the book. We cannot stop. Notice how reading these words makes your blood boil. See how your nationalist is bravado ashes. Can you imagine how your rage might spill over if if that were said to you in the same callous regard for white life that Giuliani speaks when he's dismissed cops killing unarmed black folks. See how your temperature rises by reading those words. OK, well, what are we what are we trying to do here? We're trying to get angry. We're trying to we're trying to motivate tears. We cannot stop. OK, well, that's that's kind of helpful to me knowing a little bit of where you're at. Well, let's let's listen. And as again, I mentioned, I think these two, John McWhorter and and Glenn Lowry and you can find them on blogging heads dot TV. I think to me, those are some of the best conversations on race and and John and Glenn are not on the same page on a lot of things. John tends to skew to the left. Glenn tends to skew to the right. But but they can speak with honestly and they honesty and they can own things and they can have they can they can make they can say things that you know others would denounce them for. But but again, some of the best conversation on on at least black and white race today. And that's that's another point that racial dynamics are so multifocal and the dominant conversation that that gripped the U.S. for much of his history was was obviously former slaves and and various shades of white. Well, not to mention Native Americans. Now, in a kind of in a in a context like mine, you've got black folks, you've got Hispanic folks, you got white folks, you got Asian folks. And, you know, in in my church alone, there's my church meets, but we also rent out the facility to a Tongan congregation and to Nigerian Anglicans. When I have conversations about race and when I have any conversations at all, you very quickly appreciate that diversity doesn't just mean two things. Diversity means many things. And you discover that conversations about race are are hugely complex because all these different communities are relating one to another. And there are layers and layers and layers and layers of history. Now, I knew this growing up because the the black folks who came up from the south didn't necessarily get along with the Puerto Ricans and or with the Dominicans and Dominicans and Puerto Ricans don't get along and Dominicans and Haitians don't get along. Again, I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic and I worked with Haitians. And so those dynamics and and then Africans when they come over, watching how the Africans do or don't relate to African-Americans and, you know, and the Chinese. And the African-Americans and the Chinese and the Hispanics and on and on and on and on and on it goes. These are enormously complex conversations and most of what I hear is just simply is just simply low resolution. Well, let's let's listen to let's listen to his initial comments and then we'll see what we want to do with them. Thank you very kindly. Wonderful opportunity to be here in Canada. Thank you so much. I'm going to stand here at the podium. I'm a preacher and I will ask for an offering at the end of my presentation. This is the swimsuit competition of the intellectual beauty pageant. So let me show you the curves of my thoughts. Oh, my God, was that a politically incorrect statement I just made? How did we get to the point where the hijacking of the discourse on political correctness has become a kind of mannequin distinction between us and them? The abortive fantasy just presented is remarkable for both its clarity and yet the muddiness of the context from which it has emerged. What's interesting to me is that when we look at the radical left, I'm saying, where they at? I want to join them. They run enough and I'm from a country where a man stands up every day to tweet the moral mendacity of his viciousness into a nation. He has turned into a psychic commode. Into a nation he has turned into his psychic commode. Y'all got Justin, we got Donald. So what's interesting then is that political correctness has transmogrified into a caricature of the left. The left came up with the term political correctness. Shall I remind you? We were tired of our excuses and our excesses and our exaggerations. We were willing to be self-critical in a way that I fear my confrères, my compatriots, are not. Don't take yourself too seriously. Smile. Take yourself, not seriously at all, but what you do with deadly seriousness. Now it is transmogrified into an attempt to characterize the radical left. The radical left is a metaphor, it's a symbol, it's an articulation. They don't exist. Their numbers are too small. I'm on college campuses. I don't see much of them coming. When I hear about identity politics, it amazes me. The collectivist identity politics. Last time I checked, white folk invented race. That was an invention from a dominant culture that wanted groups at their behest. The invention of race was driven by the demand of a dominant culture to subordinate others. Patriot, right? Patriarchy. Patriarchy was the demand of men to have their exclusive vision presented. The beauty of feminism is it's not going to resolve differences between men and women. It just says men don't automatically get the last word. Of course in my career they never did. And so identity politics has been generated as a bettenoir of the right, and yet the right doesn't understand the degree to which identity has been foisted upon black people and brown people and people of color from the very beginning on women and trans people. You think that I want to be part of a group that is constantly abhorred by people at Starbucks? I'm minding my own black business. Walking down the street. I have group identity thrust upon me. They don't say, ah, ha ha, there goes a negro. Highly intelligent, articulate verbose. Capable of rhetorical fury at the drop of a hat. We should not interrogate him as to the bona fides of his legal status. No, they treat me as part of a group. And the problem is that our friends don't want to acknowledge is that the hegemony, the dominance of that group has been so vicious that it has denied us the opportunity to exist as individuals. Individualism is the characteristic moment in modernity. Mr. Peterson is right. The development of the individual, however, is predicated upon notions of intelligence. Immanuel Kant and David Hume and others philosophically Descartes comes along introducing knowledge into the phrase saying that knowledge is based upon a kind of reference to the golden intelligence, the reflective glass that one possesses, and yet he got rooted in the very ground of our existence. So knowledge has fleshly basis. And what I'm saying to you, the knowledge that I bring as a person of color makes a difference in my body because I know what people think of me and I know how they respond to me and that ain't no theory. Am I mad at trigger warnings? The only trigger warning I want is from a cop. Are you about to shoot me? Not funny. In America, where young black people die repeatedly, unarmed, without provocation. And so for me, identity politics is something very serious. And what's interesting about safe spaces, I hear about the university, I teach there, look, if you in a safe space in your body, you don't need a safe space. Some of that is overblown. Some of it is ridiculous. I understand. I believe that the classroom is a robust place for serious learning. I believe in the interrogation of knowledge based upon our understanding mutually of the edifying proposition of enlightenment. At the same time, some people ain't as equal as others. So we have to understand the conditions under which they have emerged and in which they have been benighted and attacked by their own culture. And I ain't seen nobody be a bigger snowflake than white men who complain. Mommy, mommy, they won't let us play and have everything we used to have under the old regime where we were right, racist and supremacist and dominant and patriarchs and hated gays and lesbians and transsexuals that, yeah, you gotta share. This ain't your world. This everybody's world. And let me end by saying this. You remember that story from David Foster Wallace? Fish are going down, two fish are going and an older fish comes in the opposite direction. He said, hello boys, how's the water? They swim on, they turn to each other. What the hell is water? Because when you're in it, you don't know it. When you're dominant, you don't know it. Nothing Kaiser Sozi said is more interesting that the devil did than to make people believe he didn't exist. That's what writes it in his head. All right, let's see if you two belong. Thank you, Jordan. Michael Eric Dyson, your six minutes starts now. Thank you so much. I'm here in Canada. Thank you very kindly. Wonderful opportunity to be here in Canada. Interesting how he introduces himself and, you know, in terms of the effect and what's he trying to communicate about himself right here? That he is an outsider, that he's, well, he's not white taking on this voice. Now he's about to take on a preacher cloak. Thank you so much. I'm going to stand here at the podium. I'm a preacher. And it's interesting of all the things in his bio, why this? Now, again, if you look at my framing video, because in a sense, this is a, this is a purity. This is a purity move we're about to make. This is this is about purifying and this is about purifying and getting rid of something. Now, again, I wanted you to look at a religious look at this through a religious template. What is what is the good he's seeking? What is the threat? What is the moment? What is the end? And I will ask for an offering at the end of my presentation. As a preacher that wow. To me, what that says is this is not a guy who preaches every Sunday. This is not a guy who actually runs a church. This is not a guy. This is not a guy who is who's actually interested in a church. This is a guy who is, I think, running the Blue Church. This is the swimsuit competition of the intellectual beauty pageant. So let me show you the curves of my thought. Oh, my God, was that a politically incorrect statement I just made? Again, this is this is clever. Is it overly clever? So, oh, so we're going to talk about political correctness. How did we get to the point where the hijacking of the discourse on political correctness has become a kind of Mannequin distinction between us and them? The abortive fantasy just presented. Now, he's talking about Peterson's speech, which which we'll play a little bit later that Peterson's speech is an abortive fantasy. Now, pay attention again to Michelle Goldberg's. What is what is the problem here? What is what is Peterson doing that has them so upset again? Neither neither Dyson or Goldberg's. They are here because they want to attack Peterson because Peterson is a threat. They want to take him out. They want to take him down. They want to do some damage on him. And they're you know, Dyson doesn't even mention Frye. Goldberg mentioned Frye a little bit, but he doesn't even mention Frye. He is he is there to take down Peterson and he's there to take down him. And he's there to take down the whole thing. But he doesn't even mention Frye. He is he is there to take down Peterson and he is there to preach a sermon to Peterson. He is there to and this is going to become crystal clear. He is there to give everyone an instruction about what it's like to be him. All right. Remarkable for both its clarity and yet the muddiness of the context from which it has emerged. But here's the thing about Dyson. I've listened to a number of this stuff on a number of his speeches a number of times. If you slow it down and if you actually listen to the words he says, I'm not sure what he's saying. I'm not even sure what he's trying to say. It's he's just kind of throwing words up in the air and it's like, OK, well, let's slow it down. They're pretty words. They're evocative words. They're emotional words. They're words to to to pull on. I mean, this is this is he comes begins as a preacher. And this is all the kind of this is all the kind of preaching that really annoys me as a preacher. Because if there's anything I hate as a preacher, it's its pious talk. That means nothing but but is there to seemingly support what is assumed to be the right rather than actually making a case for it. What's interesting to me is that when we look at the radical left, I'm saying, where they at? I want to join them. They run enough that I'm from a country where a man stands up every day to tweet the moral mendacity of his viciousness into a nation he has turned into a psychic commode. OK, back to Trump. Why back to Trump? We y'all are in Canada. OK, I mean, I can talk like this to y'all are in Canada. You know, y'all are there in Toronto, which is a North American terms about as blue state as it gets. Why Trump? Now, now, again, I mean, those of you who've watched my videos, I'm not a fan of Trump. I didn't vote for the man. I'm not a fan of this man at all. But what's the obsession with Trump? Now, now, that's where we're going to have to get into the religious, you know, figuring this out religiously. And why connect Jordan Peterson with Trump, which which, quite frankly, makes zero sense at all. And it's just all, you know, kind of a facile. It's just kind of a facile association. Although that the end of that line was quite clever. And again, as a preacher, I can appreciate some of the power of his rhetoric. But we're going to have to examine it a little more closely. Now, that now there was an applause line. And if you pay attention to the opening remarks, Fry gets the most applause. At Justin, we got Donald. So what's interesting, then, is that political correctness has transmogrified in transmogrified is is. When you use a word like that. You're really trying hard to have us pay attention to the word you're using. He's going to use it again to a caricature of the left. The left came up with the term political correctness. Shall I remind you, we were tired of our excuses and our excesses and our exaggerations. We were willing to be so critical in a way that I fear my confreras. My compatriots are not. Don't take yourself too seriously. Smile. Take yourself not seriously at all, but what you do with deadly seriousness. Now it is transmogrified. OK, this is a this is a sermon. OK, and I and I don't mean that. This is not the kind of sermons I like. These are not the kind of sermons I preach. But this is a sermon. This is a blue church sermon. And and the point of this again, go back on my framing video. The point of this is purification. And what we need to do now is purify the world of Jordan Peterson because Jordan Peterson is contaminating. Jordan Peterson is is is threatening to retard the progress. He is being purified into an attempt to characterize the radical left, the radical left. And in a sense, what he's saying is I haven't seen a left radical enough. Well, OK, is a metaphor, is a symbol, is an articulation. They don't exist. Their numbers are too small. I'm on college campuses. I don't see much of them coming. When I hear about identity politics, it amazes me. Blackness, identity politics. Now, what's amazing is that he this this entire thing he's doing is he is basing his authority on his blackness. Now, I don't necessarily have a problem with that. Each of us should be able to speak out of our experiences. But there are limits to that. I can speak out of my experience of growing up in Patterson and growing up within the black community. But that doesn't mean that my experience was as a black person because my experience wasn't as a black person. My experience was as a white person. And and there's a difference there. And I think that's an important difference. But you have to if you if you totalize these things, you lose them. Last time I checked, white folk invented race. That was an invention from a dominant culture that wanted groups to at their behest. And I think that's a very valid point. And it's a point that I wish would be made more often that, in fact, whiteness came about through colonialism, through the hegemony of the European powers, through a long history. It's also a complex history. And that actually will get I won't talk about it in this video, but that'll get touched on a little bit later. The invention of race was driven by the demand of a dominant culture to subordinate others. And again, I think that's true. If you look at how in Virginia in the colonial period, early in the period, there were there were indentured servants that came over from Europe. And then there were slaves who were purchased from Africa. And the Virginia legislature decided to find a way so that basically slave owners could hold their slaves in perpetuity. And some of the things that they did was generally was to make make the children of slaves slaves, even if they were the children of the slave and the landowner. And so they did a number of really horrible things that set the course of American history in a very bitter way that brought about what would be America's bloodiest war, which was its civil war. And there's no way to not call this evil. And there's no way to not call this wrong. And I agree with Dyson that the effects of this continue. But it's important to figure out, OK, what are the effects of this? To what degree are these effects still in play? And most importantly, how can we constructively and productively engage these effects? So let's I am I am happy to have a conversation about that. That again, this is where Lowry and McWhorter are so helpful because Dyson doesn't seem interested in talking about those things at all, or at least not very much. What he's really interested in talking about is saying there is a problem. I say, OK, I agree with you. There's a problem. Now let's talk about what we can do about the problem. No, no, no, I just want to keep saying there's a problem. OK. And I want to keep saying that you have the problem, not me. And I think, well, I actually think all of us have the problem together because we are we are tied in this problem together. And if we are going to work on this problem, we are going to have to work on this problem together. Patriot, right? Patriarchy. Patriarchy was the demand of men to have their exclusive vision presented. Now, when he starts talking about patriarchy, he doesn't have as much patriarchy is far more complex because and again, look at look at Brett Weinstein talking about in the Joe Rogan where he's with Jordan Peterson. Weinstein makes a really good point that, you know, men and women have to work together in significant ways that it's it's harder to you can you can tribalize around race easier than you can tribalize around sex. And that's really that's really important. And and so but now what we're seeing is we're going to put these two things together. Well, why? Well, when we get to the religious part, we're going to see why the beauty of feminism is it's not going to resolve differences between men and women. It just says men don't automatically get the last word. Of course, in my career, they never did. I'm a little reluctant to say this, but but but in some ways, going to Canada talking like this, he's kind of putting on a minstrel show. And, you know, I understand how you want to play on these tropes. You want to talk about patriarchy and matriarchy in in the complex relationships that have happened in the history of the African American tradition. Now, he's written a lot of books. I'm sure he knows a lot about this. Why is he trading in these tropes? Why is he why is he playing this game? Well, he's playing a preacher game. And again, he's he's working to to move in a purifying way. And so identity politics has been generated as a bettenoir of the right. And yet the right doesn't understand the degree to which identity has been foisted upon black people and brown people and people of color from the very beginning on women and trans people. Wait a minute. The right doesn't understand how these biased enterprises have benefited them. Or see, here's the thing. There's not a there's not a righty on this stage. Jordan Peterson is a moderate left Canadian, which puts him further left on the American spectrum. Go go back and look at, you know, what is Jordan Peterson in favor of state sponsored single payer health care? Yes, Jordan Peterson is not a righty. He never has been. But we're going to push him over here. The right doesn't understand the ways in which their privilege has benefited them or they won't admit to it. Are you saying they won't admit to it? Well, that's a different thing. But now we're going to have to talk about that. And again, later, I think one of the most effective moments in the night is when Peterson basically tags him on and says, OK, let's talk about privilege, but let's get specific. Let's really talk about it. Let's have an honest conversation where we're actually going to talk about the ways in which my white skin gives me a pass where black skin doesn't. And I am I have grown up with this. I have seen this played out again and again and again. I continue to see it played out in people in my church right down the street. One of my best friends worked very accomplished, wealthy, successful man, regularly pulled over right here on Florin Road. I have never been pulled over. This stuff is real. And, you know, OK, you want to instruct me in this? Go ahead. Do I have more to learn? Probably. But you don't have to make that point. I get it. The question is not is it real? The question is what can be done about it? And the truth is, I don't hear a lot coming from the left that is actually practical. I hear a lot of more education. All right. Well, here's the thing with the left. It's always more education. But what I've seen from the left in terms of their capacity to educate has been grossly underwhelming because here he's going to later tell Jordan Peterson he should go to a black Baptist church. Well, man, I've been living in these communities all of my life and I have had it up to here with all of the tropes about education. Human beings are far more complex than that. And again, I would love to step aside and put Glenn Lowry in here to talk about that because he is right. If you this I actually made some videos about this that I have not posted because I get so triggered by this conversation. I get really upset. And what I get upset with is not that whitey doesn't understand. I don't know if whitey ever will understand. That's not my problem. My problem is what can we do about it? Because people are dying out there and there is a lot that needs to be done. And I don't see serious conversation or a lot of serious conversation about it. I see a lot of political posture. I see a lot of political posturing. I see a lot of we're not going to talk about these things because we only want to talk about these things. I see a lot of that. But I don't see a lot of let's really talk about what's going on in our communities and how we can make things better. And there's a lot of things that the black left will not talk about. And folks like Glenn Lowry and John McWhorter and many others that are these black conservatives, they're ready to talk about it. But we don't want to go there because that's blaming the victim. Well, you know, I don't care who gets what blame. I just want to see the misery end because I've been looking at it all my life. My father gave, see now I'm preaching, you know, my father gave his life for this. I mean, he poured out himself for this. Go ahead, read Chains of Grace by Stanley VanderKlay. You can find it on Kindle on Amazon and read what he did. And he came to Patterson with no with no background in any of this. But what he had was a sincere Christian heart and a desire to help and ears open to learn. And he learned and what he learned was sin is deep and dark and holds us bondage. And it takes a lot more than some flowery talk to save us from ourselves and save us from each other. Now, dog on it, I don't know if I'm going to post this thing because this guy's got me preaching. He's got me triggered. He's got me so mad. You think that I want to be part of a group that is constantly abhorred by people at Starbucks? And you know, what happened in the Starbucks? Yeah, this kind of stuff happens all the time, but it doesn't just happen to black folks. Most of you know Freddie. Freddie was in a Starbucks up in an area town that had a fair number of homeless people in it. He sat down, he bought a cup of coffee. He got the bums rush. They wouldn't even let him stay in there. He's a white guy. Daniel, who was a white guy, used to sleep at my door. He couldn't go into any store in the neighborhood. And most of the black folks, all the black folks in my church, they go into these stores just fine. There are more layers to this. And simply taking out the resolution and making it black or white, male or female, does not help the conversation. Oh, I get triggered by this. See? See? Not being a good example. I'm minding my own black business. Walking down the street. And again, I think, is this a minstrel show? What are you doing? I have group identity thrust upon me. They don't say, ah, ha ha, there goes a Negro. And you know, he's right on this point. That is right. And you know, this is a real issue. And it ought not to be diminished, but it ought to be engaged with seriously. And again, listen to McWhorter and Lowry. They speak well about this. They have honest conversations. Highly intelligent, articulate verbose. Capable of rhetorical fury at the drop of a hat. We should not interrogate him as to the bona fides of his legal status. No, they treat me as part of a group. But let's be honest here. You're on this stage, okay? And you're wearing your suit. And I appreciate the fact, because I know a lot of, I have a lot of friends who they will wear a suit because they know if they're wearing a suit, they're going to get treated differently. And a black man wearing a suit gets treated differently than a black man who's sagging going down the street. And I get that. But I was in a situation, I was in church one Sunday, some people are coming in to interview for doing some landscaping. And I've lived in the black community all my life. I know what goes on within the community, okay? So this minstrel show makes me angry. And the problem is that our friends don't want to acknowledge is that the hegemony, the dominance of that group has been so vicious that it has denied us the opportunity to exist as individuals. Individualism is the characteristic moment in modernity. Mr. Pearson is right. The development of the individual, however, is predicated upon notions of intelligence. Immanuel Kant and David Hume and others philosophically, Descartes comes along introducing knowledge into the phrase saying that knowledge is based upon a kind of reference to the golden intelligence, the reflective glass that one possesses, and yet he got rooted in the very ground of our existence. So knowledge has fleshly basis. And what I'm saying to you, the knowledge that I bring as a person of color makes a difference in my body because I know what people think of me and I know how they respond to me. And that ain't no theory. Yes, yes, that's right. But you don't necessarily know. You know how you're treated. And you can surmise often with some accuracy that some of the ways that you're being treated are because of racism. So I lived for seven years in the Dominican Republic and a very white dude in the Dominican Republic. And sometimes my race meant I got treated well and sometimes my race meant that I got treated poorly. And I remember, my wife talks about this often, you know, they give us, we get treated poorly in a store in the Dominican Republic. Is it because I'm a gringo? Is it because I talk with an accent? But I was with Haitians often in the Dominican Republic and they were treated very poorly. And there's a complex racial dynamic that goes. But here's the thing. You can't always know what's going on in someone else's mind. And if you are a prisoner to those preconceptions, you are a prisoner to yourself. And if we are all going to break out of this, it means we're all going to have to talk together and we're going to have to talk together honestly. And what I hear from people is, well, we need a conversation about race. And I say, yes, we do. But we need an honest conversation about race, which means we're going to have to listen to things by the other side that we don't want to hear. And we're going to have to listen. Now, Dyson wants to be all about telling folks what they need to hear. Okay. That's not a conversation. That's a sermon. A conversation means we talk with one another. Well, we're bringing up the Enlightenment. Well, what is the Enlightenment about? Well, okay. It's complicated. But the Enlightenment is supposed to be about, partially about, reason based on evidence. And so what that means is that I should be judged, again, in the words of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., by the content of my character, not the color of my skin. And that goes both ways. Now, you can continue to say, I have been and my people have been and continue to be at a disadvantage in many cases because of race. And I will say, yes, that's right. But unless we can talk about it and actually talk about it, we're not going to get very far. And much of what's going on, this is why John McWhorter will only talk with Glenn Lowry about race in America because John McWhorter says, everything's at a standstill right now. And it's at a standstill for all the reasons we see on display in this stage right now. Am I mad at trigger warnings? The only trigger warning I want is from a cop. Are you about to shoot me? And again, you know, yes, that's clever. But, you know, it's not a conversation. Not funny. In America, where young black people die repeatedly, unarmed. See Glenn Lowry on this. Without provocation. And so for me, identity politics is something very serious. And what's interesting about safe spaces, I hear about the university I teach there. Look, if you in a safe space in your body, you don't need a safe space. Some of that is overblown. In other words, we're not really here to talk about political correctness. We're here to talk about Jordan Peterson. Some of it is ridiculous. I understand. I believe that the classroom is a robust place for serious learning. I believe in the interrogation of knowledge based upon our understanding mutually of the edifying proposition. Then let's practice some of it. Of enlightened met. At the same time, some people ain't as equal as others. So what does that mean? Can we have a conversation or not? That's the question. So we have to understand the conditions under which they have emerged and in which they have been benighted and attacked by their own culture. And at what point will I know enough about the situation? Again, listen to McWhorter. And I ain't seen nobody be a bigger snowflake than white men who complain. Okay, now we're just being insulting. Is this the way to have a conversation? Mommy, mommy, they won't let us play and have everything we used to have under the old regime where we were right, racist and supremacist and dominated and patriarchs and hated gays. Okay, now if I want to, I was at a gathering in which one of the mainline speakers was a black pastor. The audience was predominantly white. In that gathering, the black pastor repeatedly took on, I'll call it white speech. Okay, and you all know how this goes. And I can talk this way too. All right, what does that mean? What does that mean? Well, you're more, it's better to punch up. Okay, well, how about we talk instead of punch? All right, and you know, if Jordan Peterson were to get on there and start, I mean, he can mock you too. And I've got issues with mockery because I'm prone to it. And so that's a sin of mine. And that's something that I have to continue to deal with in my character because you just saw me a little bit before I get triggered. He's just saw me a little bit before I get triggered. How can we have this conversation together? And now he's talking down. You know, you're supposed to be punching up. That's pretty much punching down. You're basically saying, basically recognizing the left has the hegemony at this moment. It's the ascendant morality. And we're going to deconstruct this a little bit. Hello, boys. How's the water? They swim on they turn each other. What the hell is water? Because when you're in it, you don't know it. When you're dominant, you don't know it. Nothing Kaiser Sozi said is more interesting that the devil did and to make people believe he didn't exist. Okay, when you're in it, you don't know it. When you're dominant, you don't know it. Well, is that true for you too? I mean, look at your look at your your CV. You've got PhDs. You're making a lot of money. You're way up on the status hierarchy. People are bringing you on TV. When you dominate, you don't know it. Well, what does that mean? Does that that is impact you? How am I going to do this? Let's do it this way. Okay. What I want to do in this video somewhat is use this religious template to take a look at some of this. So listening to because I think Michelle Goldberg and and Eric, Michael, Eric Dyson basically are from the same camp in the country. Okay, there's there's nuance in the camp. But but this is this is the this is the ascendant morality as I call I call it progressive liberation ism. Is there a good or a lost pass? Was there a time before the patriarchy? Probably not. Was there a time before white? Yeah, white white is a fairly recent invention. And I think that's a good thing to do. And that that makes their case more difficult and Frye will go into some of this because the the the relationships that that we're talking about are all quite recent. And and what Peterson wants them the point Peterson wants to make is that other factors involved are quite a bit more ancient. And so all of these factors are coming in together. And if we actually want to be productive in engaging them, we're going to have to have some understanding of how this goes. Now I understand if you've been hurt and I understand if you get triggered, you just saw me triggered a little while ago. Getting triggered doesn't necessarily help have a productive productive conversation or relationship because being triggered what that means is that I get upset and all I want to do is yell and my anger wells up inside of me and I feel self justified and I just want to win. Well, here's the problem. We're, we're not you know, we want to win together. And if we make black and white a zero sum game, black will lose in America. And that has been the case right from the start. And and this was the reality that if we look at the situation from the perspective of black and white, we're going to lose. Black will lose in America. And that has been the case right from the start. And and this was the reality that if we look at the civil rights movement, you say, let's look at Malcolm X and his nation of Islam years versus Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. This was some of the dynamics that they faced and Malcolm X so often wanted to, you know, black nationalism. And it wasn't going to work. And it's in fact the flip side of white nationalism. So is there a past? Was the Americas and Africa Eden before the Europeans? Find me a human tribe that wasn't genocidal. And there's a lot of conversation about okay, indigenous peoples in North America and the treatment they had at the hands of the European. Was it evil? Absolutely. Was it wrong? Absolutely. Well, to the benefit of those people, we have a record of what the Europeans did. What we don't have the record are the thousands of years of genocide that were carried on in North America. And we don't have a record of the thousands of years in genocide that was carried on in Africa. The thousands of years of genocide that gets carried on throughout the world. Genocide is normal to human beings. This is a problem. This is a serious problem. So find me a human tribe that wasn't genocidal. We've all got blood on our hands. The law of the jungle is my well-being at your expense. Now, what happens here is that this tends to borrow from the current sacred self-religiosity. And these things sort of come together. But just like a lot of the alliances in progressive liberationism, they're not really going to hold because in time, the situation is far more complex than the propaganda wishes to assert. And so there are going to be conflicts between the different people. Get my watch to shut off. What's the way of salvation for this tribe? Well, oppressed people found their voice and rose up to call out and challenge injustice. Is that the story of the Civil War? Actually, the story of the roots of the Civil War is far more complex. The Civil War was begun not so much about abolition. Abolitionists didn't start the Civil War. Secession started the Civil War and the fear of the South that the North was going to take away their slaves. Non-oppressed people resist the call of justice, but with the help of allies in the long arc of history, they overcome. That, my friends, is eschatology. But it's interpreted as a way of salvation. Only the people who have experienced oppression have the truth and moral quality to guide the movement. Now, this doesn't hold much water in any case. Some of the roots of the Civil War were, for example, Uncle Tom's Cabin, Harriet Beecher Stowe, and Josiah, I forget his last name, but there's a movie coming out about him. The history is far more complex than just simply people rising up and taking ownership. And again, the Emancipation Proclamation happens during the course of the Civil War, and Lincoln only frees the slaves in the seceding states. He doesn't free them in the border states because he wants to keep them in the war effort. Again, and now, Michael Eric Dyson, I'm sure he knows this history. Why are you giving us propaganda? What is the story of, is their story of salvation true? The Civil Rights Movement has become in America the gold standard or foundational story for the movement soteriology. In a sense, the Civil Rights Movement has taken on mythic status, but a lot of the history has been mythologized. And in that sense, it has become less historical. You know, read that history. Look at the nuance. Look at the complexities between the various different groups. Look at the conflicts between the various different groups that was going on during that struggle. The Civil War was a very different story. This is a mythologized version of the Civil Rights Movement, and it borrows from Christian eschatology, but not Christian soteriology. In other words, one of the things Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was essentially neo-Orthodox. And that was, in a sense, the theological wave that was reaching its heyday during the Cold War in American history. The churches in which Dr. King was able to mobilize in the black community, these are conservative. And for the most part, we might call them evangelical Christians. And the reason they could, you know, Dr. King's vision, you have some Tolstoy in there. You have some Gandhi in there. You have some Thoreau in there. But you've got a lot of Jesus in there. And it's this rather unique amalgam of these things. But what it really trades on is the sacrificial story of Christ's salvation and redemption and sacrifice on the cross. And Dr. Martin Luther King could mobilize the churches with that. Read a good biography of Malcolm X and take a look at, now the autobiography of Malcolm X is a complex document. Read, I just recently read a biography of Malcolm X, which I thought was quite a good one. Read that and get a sense for how these things come together. What has happened is that this salvation history that has been mythologized has become soteriology. And what I mean by that, this is their way of salvation. And it's very interesting to look at Ta-Nehisi Coates and the books he's been writing because he basically is, he's basically saying that this calamity cannot be undone, that there is no way out of the despair. And maybe I'll play a video where he talks to Dr. T, a pastor in a Washington, D.C. church, a very interesting conversation. If you want to really look up something interesting, look up Thomas Chatterjee Williams' take on Coates' book. And he begins with the study of Germany. And basically what he's saying is that this movement, and here you see Coates and Dyson on the same page, and I think Thomas Chatterjee Williams is exactly right. This particular voice, among many voices in the black community, is in fact giving whiteness power. And this was in the New York Times that Thomas Chatterjee Williams wrote. Read the whole article. I think it's a terrific article. What happens in the 20th century? And you can read Harari on this. I think Harari lays this out fairly well in Homo Deus. 20th century evolutionisms. You had Nazi ideology that talked about the inevitability of racial struggle and evolution. You had Marxism, which had the inevitability of class struggle and evolution. And there's a very real question. Why didn't the West succumb to either of these ideologies in the struggles of the 20th century? Was it religion? Russia was very religious. Germany was very religious. Was it the political institutions? Now the Tsar was a crumbling institution ready to fall, and Russia had been crippled by its engagement in the First World War. And the Marxists took power. Germany, the story is far more complex. But was it marquise? Was it rivalries? Was it science? What's interesting, and Peterson hasn't really brought this out, that in a sense this progressive liberationism is in a sense a merger between these two things. You have this progressivism. You have this evolutionary spirit that says, the long arc of history will enable to bring us here. This is an appropriation, and yeah, I choose that word intentionally. This is an appropriation of Christian eschatology. And it's now being used to serve an alien vision of the good, an alien eschatology. Now there are ties to this. If you look at Revelation 6, you see the Christian theology has always imagined that God draws his people from every tribe and every nation and every tongue. But this is again why I think that progressive liberationism is in fact a Christian heresy, just like there are other Christian heresies on the racist right. But this is a Christian heresy. Now let's look at, and I think we're going to play Peterson's, because I think Peterson is attacking this. And this is why Peterson is so unnerving to these people, because in a sense he's saying, you know, you've got an ideology here that, now he doesn't put this together, but I think it's true. You've got elements of Nazi ideology that there's some racial evolution going on. And you hear this in the claims of, well, because of the color of my sin you can't challenge my thoughts. Well, I think quite frankly, if I can't challenge your thoughts because of the color of your skin, then we are in fact not equals. And at least we don't have an equal playing field upon which to talk. Because what happens is that it can happen different ways. If the power differential, which people love to talk about, if the power differential is one way and I don't feel I can challenge your thoughts because of the color of your skin, because I feel myself underprivileged and you have race privilege that you're leveraging via political correctness in the conversation, well then, you know, you are then impoverished in the way that white people have been impoverished because we can't benefit from your perspective from the underclass. Or if I am in fact just patronizing and giving you a platform from which to speak because I am owning the institutions and I am saying, and I am actually participating in a word that hasn't been used in a while, again, St. Glenn Lowry on this, tokenism. Oh yeah, I'm going to listen to you because of the color of your skin. Then we're not equals. Then we're not actually having a conversation. And where the enlightenment should come into this, now the enlightenment, it's got all kinds of things we could say about the enlightenment that I have, where the enlightenment should come into this is that let's have a conversation and let's debate points, not color of our skin. Let's look for truth. Not simply I can say this, I can't say this because of my skin. Now again, I am not undermining the fact that by virtue of the limitations of my story, by the limitations of my history, which includes my skin color, which includes my sex, which includes my socioeconomic story, which includes all the elements of my personal history and all of the complexity that that has. Those things are limiting factors in the world as I see it. And if I am in fact humble, I will listen to others who have had other kinds of history and other kinds of experiences and I will learn from them. Now that is what Dyson is asking for and I say amen to that. Let's listen to each other. But that also means that maybe you should listen to this crazy Albertan who grew up in a place very different from Detroit where you grew up and had a whole different range of experiences. And maybe we can listen to him and maybe we can listen to Michelle Goldberg and we can evaluate what she has to say and maybe we can listen to this gay Jewish man from England and evaluate what we have to say. And that is in fact the goal of us having a conversation that we can all learn. And yes, I know it is very difficult for us to keep a hold of ourselves and not get tripped up on our biases. But if we cannot have the conversation because of the various colors of our skins, then we do not have this very necessary tool by which hopefully all of us can march into a better future. Now I am starting to preach again. I want to listen to Peterson and then I want to listen to Fry. Let's see, where do I have them? Okay, I am changing the order that I set up initially. Hello. That just cracks me up. And you know, okay, I have listened to the guy for a year now and I love the guy. I love the guy. I love his quirkiness. In some ways I think he is kind of a shy guy. He does not know how to... He is not a preacher. Hello. He does not quite know what to say. He is in his own town. It is funny. Am I going to interrupt him or am I going to play it through? This is going long. I will probably interrupt him. Here we go. So we should first decide what we are talking about. We are not... Define the terms. Now notice this is Peterson. He is not a preacher. We can talk about that in other videos. He is not a preacher. He is working through this. This is where he likes to be. We are talking about this. Fry will kind of play with it. My views of political correctness. Despite what you might have inferred from the last speaker's call. That was Goldberg's speaker because Dyson actually speaks after him. This is how it looks to me. We essentially need something approximating a low resolution grand narrative to unite us. Classic Peterson. We are pulling way back. We need a grand narrative. Wow. We need a narrative to unite us because otherwise we don't have peace. What is playing out in the universe... Big, big picture. ...and in broader society right now is a debate between two fundamental low resolution narratives. Neither of which can be completely accurate because they can't encompass all the details. Obviously human beings have an individual element and a collective element. A group... We are going to talk... This is where it is really interesting because Peterson really does set the stage here. They all are responding to him. Not so much Fry. Fry is in his own world. We are going to talk about Fry in a few minutes. The question is what story should be paramount. This is how it looks to me in the West. Okay. That is a hierarchy. I think he is talking about a hierarchy of functional, reasonably free, remarkably productive, stable hierarchies that are open to consideration of the dispossessed that hierarchies generally create. Right there, I didn't hear that the first two times I listened to it. But what he is saying is he is actually taking into consideration some of what the others are saying. Now the others might be saying you haven't taken it into consideration enough. Okay. Fair enough. We will talk about that. But what he is saying is that actually there is a reason Africans are still trying to get to America and not a lot of African Americans are trying to get to Africa. And there is a reason that Nigerian refugees are trying to cross the border from the U.S. to Canada. Because you are going to get socialized medicine. You are going to get money from the government. And people are, people make decisions based on their own self-interest. And despite all of the, you know, Michelle Goldberg, we have Trump. I am so afraid. You ain't moving to Canada, honey. I don't believe you. I think you have got it pretty good. And again, I don't, I am not happy Trump is president. I can't stand all the drama and foolishness that are going on. Okay. I am not going to trigger the Scott Adams conversation. And I know I triggered a bunch of you there. But let's have a little perspective here. Okay. Our societies are freer and functioning more effectively than any societies anywhere else in the world and than any societies ever have. And as far as I am. And again, let that sink in. I am concerned, and I think there is good reason to assume this. It is because the fundamental low resolution grand narrative that we have oriented ourselves around in the West is one of the sovereignty of the individual. And it is predicated on the idea that all things considered, the best way for me to interact with someone else is individual to individual. And to react to that person as if they are both part of the process, because that is the right way of thinking about it. The psychological process by which things we don't understand can yet be explored and by things that aren't properly organized in our society can be yet set right. The reason we are valuable as individuals, both with regards to our rights and responsibilities, is because that is our essential purpose. And that is our nobility. And that is our function. What is happening as far as I am concerned in the universities in particular and spreading very rapidly out into the broader world, including the corporate world, much to what should be its chagrin, is a collectivist narrative. And of course there is some utility in a collectivist narrative, because we are all part of groups in different ways. But the collectivist narrative that I regard as politically correct is a strange pastiche of postmodernism and neo-Marxism. And its fundamental claim is that, no, you are not essentially an individual. You are essentially a member of a group. Now again, pay attention that he said we are both, and we always are both, but we are parts of many, many groups, which is part of what makes us individuals. That group might be your ethnicity, and it might be your sex, and it might be your race, and it might be any of the endless numbers of other potential groups that you belong to, because you belong to many of them, and that you should be essentially categorized along with those who are like you on that dimension in that group. That's proposition number one. Proposition number two is that the proper way to view the world is as a battleground between groups of different power. Right there. The proper way to view the world, this is what this political correctness, this is what he's battling against, what he calls postmodern neo-Marxism, is that fundamentally the story of history is that, what? What is the story of history? It's racial, well, it's racial evolution. That was the Nazi vision. It's class warfare. That was the Marxist vision. And this is being, again, he's complaining about the universities. This is what's being taught in university. This is the dominant story of the culture. This is his complaint, and this is getting reinforced, and the reason that language is being employed, again, pronoun Peterson, the reason language is being employed is to subtly make this the frame of reference in which we now think. When I bought a Subaru, I was amazed how many Subarus were on the road. When I bought a GMC, I was amazed how many GMCs were on the road. When I bought a Mazda, I was amazed how many Mazdas were on the road. Now, what was happening? Well, a good psychologist will tell you, because I was thinking about Subarus, I saw Subarus. Were all those Subarus on the road before? Yeah. Why didn't I see them? Because I was thinking about them. What we are doing as a society is we are increasing, we are putting energy into paying attention to race and sex more and more and more and more. And immediately what we start doing whenever we watch movies or whenever we see anything that has any political capital at all, we start counting people by race and sex. And we start paying attention to race and sex. Now, to acknowledge what Dyson is saying, if you're black, you've often had to pay attention to this. Some might say you're always paying attention to this unless you're in amongst your own kind. Now, Dyson is going to say this a little bit later in the program. So, but the problem is that the more we pay attention to it, the more we're going to pay attention to it, the more we're going to see it. And if we keep forefronting these issues, then we begin to have a basically, we begin to have this be all that there is for us. And this is in fact going to make our conversations more polarized and our community more polarized. Now, I'm going to show my hand here in terms of the part of the racial reconciliation movement that I grew up in. I personally think integration is one of the most important things we can do in order to build bridges between communities. Which means I, you know, I live in a very diverse community. I have always lived in very diverse communities. I choose to live in very diverse communities. Why? Because I like what it does to me. Because I'm used to having to deal with lots of people different than myself. Am I high in openness? Yes, I like that. I realize that there's temperamentals, temperamental factors to this. I want to go to a, I want to worship in a church where there are multiple, where there are multiple cultures expressed and in the room. And where we have to work with these things and where we have to deal with these things. And I would love to sit down and talk to, I'd love to sit down and talk to Michael Dyson about race. I have no problem with that. I have no problem with talking to anyone on this stage. But the problem is when you make these, when you make these large narratives, the dominant narratives in the culture, and that's why Peterson is talking about this, you change the conversation that accentuates the conflict. So you define the groups first and then you assume that you view the individual from the group context. You view the battle between groups from the group context and you view history itself as a consequence of nothing but the power maneuvers between different groups. And that is exactly what in a sense we saw in Nazi Germany and it's exactly, that's exactly what we saw in the Soviet Union. This is what Peterson is saying. He is saying we are reworking the conflicts of the 20th century. And in a sense progressive liberationism is employing the worst of both regimes. That eliminates any consideration of the individual at a very fundamental level and also any idea, for example, of free speech. Because if you're collectivist at heart in this manner, there is no such thing as free speech. It isn't that it's debated by those on the radical left and let's say the rest of us, so to speak. It's that in that formulation there is no such thing as free speech. For an individualist, free speech is how you make sense of the world and reorganize society in a proper manner. For an individualist, there is something called free will or real agency as I would prefer to call it. An individualist has agency. But if you're a collectivist... For the radical left type collectivist that's associated with this viewpoint of political correctness, when you speak, all you're doing is playing a power game on behalf of your group. And there's nothing else that you can do because that's all there is. That's a really important point. And the point in fact gets manifest in this talk because nobody white on stage can say anything about race to the black man. Nobody male on stage can say anything about sex to the woman. Nobody straight on stage can say anything about sexual orientation to the gay man. What that means is that we no longer have anything to say. That everything is presupposed by a prescribed narrative and that's all there is. And we can't make progress with each other. We can't have a conversation. Because the white guy doesn't know anything about being black. But what that tends to mask is that it's a two-way street. And so both sides are going to have to finally come together and negotiate a way to live with one another. And not only is that all there is in terms of who you are as an individual now and how society should be viewed, it's also the fundamental narrative of history. For example, Again, what we saw in Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. It's widely assumed in our universities now that the best way to conceptualize Western civilization is as an oppressive, male-dominated patriarchy. And that the best way to construe relationships between men and women across the centuries is one of oppression of women by men. It's like, well, look, no hierarchy is without its tyranny. That's an axiomatic truth. People have recognized that literally for thousands of years. And hierarchies do tend towards tyranny and they tend towards the usurpation by people with power. But that only happens when they become corrupt. Okay, and this is where we're going to go into the further videos. If Peterson wants to make progress, he's not going to be able to make progress in attempt to diminish the impact. I think what he needs to do is demonstrate that the imagined solutions to the problem are insufficient. Because if he, as a white man, says anything that sounds like he doesn't understand the depths of the complexity or the depths of the problem or the price that others have paid. Now again, he'll say this again and again and again. This is not the side of the equation that he's going to be heard on from the left. We have mechanisms in our society to stop hierarchies from becoming intolerably corrupt. And they actually work pretty well. And so I would also point this out. Don't be thinking that this is a debate about whether empathy is useful or not. Or that the people on the con side of the argument are not empathetic. I know perfectly well, as I'm sure Mr. Fry does, that hierarchies tend to produce situations where people stack up at the bottom. And that the dispossessed in hierarchies need a political voice, which is the proper voice of the left, by the way. The necessary voice of the left. These parts of Peterson are generally not heard. But that is not the same as proclaiming that the right level of analysis for our grand unifying narrative is that all of us are fundamentally to be identified by the groups that we belong to. And to construe the entire world as the battleground between different forms of tyranny in consequence of that group affiliation. And to the degree that we play out that narrative, that won't be progress, believe me. And we certainly haven't seen that progress in the universities. We've seen situations like what happened at Wilfrid Laurier University instead. We won't see progress. And here again, you should have, you might have fleshed that out a little bit. And that might have been helpful to the audience. Although maybe everybody knows it in Toronto. The next level we turn to is exactly the same kind of tribalism that characterized the left. Now notice there weren't any, we didn't get any applause lines in the, during his speech. The applause at the end was because he had run out of time. That's the convention of the evening, what the moderator had told them to do. Now what does that say? Well, Peterson, very intellectual, very big picture. You know, Dyson's preaching, Peterson's lecturing. Well, Peterson, Dyson's a professor too, according to a CV, but he postured himself as a preacher. Peterson postured himself as a professor, giving instruction. Now what's interesting, and again, why attack Peterson? The call, the moment, the threat, why attack Peterson? Trump has broken the script. Why has, how has Trump broken the script? Listen to Goldberg's existential panic about Donald Trump. Now I think, again, this panic is a show because I'm sure she feels it, but she's not acting like Donald Trump is going to come after her, or she could move to Canada or Europe or someplace that she would feel safe. After the Trump election, Alan Sorkin wrote a letter to his daughters, and this is what he said, Sorkin Girls. Well, the world changed last night in a way I couldn't protect us from. That's a terrible feeling for a father. I won't sugarcoat it. This is truly horrible. It's hardly the first time my candidate didn't win. In fact, it's the sixth time, but this is the first time that a thoroughly incompetent pig... Wait a minute, I thought we weren't supposed to call people animals. ...that a thoroughly incompetent pig with dangerous ideas, a serious psychiatric disorder, and no knowledge of the world and no curiosity has learned, no curiosity to learn has. It wasn't just Donald Trump who won last night, it was his supporters too. The Klan won last night. White nationalists, sexists, racists, and buffoons. Angry white men who think rap music and Cinco de Mayo are a threat to their way of life or the reason for their way of life have been given cause to celebrate. What is this? This is religious. This is someone who is possessed by a religion, and again, I call this progressive liberationism, because the imagination is that history will continue to unfold and that up... Wait, wait, wait, wait. We had the black president, now we'll have the woman president, and then I suppose we'll have the gay president, and then we'll have the transgender president, and then we'll have the black gay transgender president, and then... This is your religion. This is the world that you're living in. This is what you think will happen. This is progressive liberationism, and what Peterson is in a sense doing is saying, this is the game you're playing. Now Peterson's a Canadian. I don't think he fully understands, well maybe he does, what Michelle Goldberg is dealing with and thinking about. Peterson got a sense of that on the Bill Maher show. Now, so Peterson is a threat. Paint him as a racist or an ally of racists. New York Times, he's a custodian of the patriarchy. Enforced monogamy, state-enforced monography. Peterson, you know, and he had to put up a webpage to try and explain that. Facts be damned, we've got some liberating to do. This is a religion that we're dealing with on the left. Now, let's talk about Fry. And, you know, I've talked about Peterson's religion quite a bit. I won't go into that too much here, but let's talk about Fry. Listen to Fry and see if you can locate him. Whoops. Did I not put Fry's? Oh, nuts. Okay. That's what white supremacy is. That's what white supremacy is. Actually, I didn't catch that earlier. So, are you saying Peterson's a white supremacist? Thank you, Michael. Stephen, you're up, but we're going to put six minutes on the clock, and please start. God, I'll try and be as quick as possible, because if I miss that plane to London, I won't half hear the end of it from the bridegroom's mother. Oh, he's talking about the royal wedding. I didn't figure that out. In agreeing to participate in this debate and stand on this side of the argument, I'm fully aware that many people who choose incorrectly, in my view, to see this issue in terms of left and right, devalued and exploded terms, as I think they are, will believe that I am betraying myself in such causes and values that I have espoused over the years. Why? Because he's a gay man. So he's supposed to be a progressive liberationist, but as we're going to discover, not so much. I've been given huge grief already, simply because I'm standing here next to Professor Peterson, which is the very reason... Allies like this. ...that I am standing here in the first place. I'm standing next to someone with whom I have, you know, differences, shall we say, in terms of politics and all kinds of other things. I feel for Peterson here, man. They picked this guy to be your ally. Precisely because I think all this has got to stop. This rage, resentment, hostility, intolerance. Above all, this with us or against us certainty. Certainty. Pay attention. A grand canyon has opened up in our world. The fissure, the crack, grows wider every day. Neither on each side can hear a word that the other shrieks, and nor do they want to. While these armies and propagandists in the culture wars clash, down below in the enormous space between the two sides, the people of the world try to get on with their lives alternately baffled, bored, and betrayed by the horrible noises and explosions that echo all around. Okay, there's some... Now pay attention to the way he's painting the world. Now there's an elitism here. There's the little people of the world. They just want to be left alone to go about their lives. And I think, you know, in terms of what they're actually talking about, he's on to something because moralists, especially purifying moralists like the progressive liberationists in this cause, get increasingly annoying. And that's basically what's been happening in the culture. It's time for this toxic binary zero-sum... This guy's a brilliant communicator. They have toxic binary. These are terms we usually associate with the left. Now he's employing them from the con side. Brilliant. Brilliant. He's... Oh, gosh. He's articulate. Now have I just insulted him? No. He's articulate. Have I said this because he's white? No. He's articulate. This is a brilliant communicator. I think Dyson is a brilliant communicator. I've got issues with some of Dyson's content, and I've also got issues with how he uses words and the way he's bringing the church into this. Madness to stop before we destroy ourselves. Peterson didn't get any applause lines. Dyson got some. Fry will get the most. I'd better nail my colors to the mast before I get any further in this. It's only polite to give you a sense of where I come from. All my adult life I have been what you might call a lefty, a soft lefty, a liberal of the most hand-wringing, milk-sop, milk-toast variety. Not a burning man, the barricade socialist. Not even really a progressive worth the name. Now in some ways he's giving a sermon here too, and he's giving it from the podium, but he's playing his own shtick here, and he's pretty good at it. I've got marches, but I've never quite dared wave placards or banners. Am I a loathed member of that band, an SJW? Dyson puts his paper down. He's not going to take any notes on this, because he's not here for him. Now a little bit later he's going to appreciate the fact that Fry is scoring some points here, and so Dyson will come after him too. A social justice warrior. I don't think highly of social injustice, I have to say, but I character myself mostly as a social justice warrior. As a preacher, that's a brilliant name. My intellectual heroes growing up were Bertrand Russell and G.E. Moore, liberal thinkers, people like that, writers like E.M. Forster. I believed, and I think I still do believe, in the sanctity of human relations, of the primacy of the heart and friendship and love. Okay, now you're hearing his religion. ...common interest. These are more personal interior beliefs than they are political exterior convictions. ...or getting into the realm of the sacred self. ...more a humanistic version of a religious impulse, I suppose. I trust in humanity, I believe in humanity. I think I do, despite all that has happened in the 40 years of my adulthood. I am soft and I can easily be swept away by harder hearts and harder intellects. I'm sometimes surprised to be described as an activist, but over time I have energetically involved myself with what you might call causes. I grew up knowing that I was gay. Well, in fact, from the very first I knew I was gay. I remember when I was born looking up and saying, that's the last time I'm going out one of those. I'm Jewish, I'm Jewish, so I have a natural... I was a horror of racism. Naturally, I want racism, misogyny, homophobia, transphobia, xenophobia, bullying, bigotry, intolerance of all human kinds to end. That's surely a given amongst all of us. The question is how such a golden aim is to be achieved. My ultimate objection to... So in other words, he seems to be saying that his ends are in line with the pro side here. He's actually engaged in the debate very effectively. Correctness is not that it combines so much of what I have spent a lifetime loathing and opposing, preachiness with great respect. Clever. This is where Dyson should start to get nervous. Piety, self-righteousness, heresy, hunting, denunciation, shaming, assertion without evidence, accusation, inquisition, censoring. That's not why I'm incurring the wrath of my fellow liberals by standing on this side of the house. My real objection is that I don't think political correctness works. I want to achieve, I want to get to the Golden Hill, but... He's got a similar eschatology. I don't think that's the way to get there. I believe one of the greatest human failings is to prefer to be right than to be effective. And political correctness is... Now that's... Again, if you listen to this, map out his religion. I'm always obsessed with how right it is without thinking of how effective it might be. I wouldn't class myself as a classical libertarian, but I do relish transgression. I do relish transgression, and I deeply and instinctively distrust conformity and orthodoxy. Progress is not achieved by preachers and guardians of morality, but to paraphrase the Evgeny Zemlyatin, by madmen, hermits, heretics, dreamers, rebels, and skeptics. Key phrase right here. He's laying it out for us. And applause. I may be wrong. I... And again, you've got to say that because of what you just finished saying. I learned this evening. I really do think I may be wrong, but I'm prepared to entertain the possibility that political correctness will bring us more tolerance and a better world. But I'm not sure, and I would like this quotation from my hero Bertrand Russell to hover over the evening. One of the painful things about our time is that those who feel certainty are stupid, and those with any imagination and understanding are filled with doubt and indecision. Let doubt prevail. Very clever, very gifted. What is his religion? Fry is Loki. Fry is, in a sense, the sacred self. The personal is all that matters. If progressive liberation is useful, cool. But that's not what he's there for. Resist any larger system. Skepticism. Fry's rhetoric will be able to resist Dyson's because Fry lays it out. No church, no dogma, no preaching, nothing. Leave me to myself, and don't get in the way of what I want. The heart wants what it wants. Fry is finally on no one's side but his own. Now, if you watch the Avengers or the Thor movies and you pay attention to Loki, Loki is the god of mischief. What does that mean? If Loki is on your team, he won't be for long. Now, you can't even, you can't even be on your team for long. You can't even be assured that Loki will do what is in his own self-interest for very long. He is that mischievous, he is that committed to chaos. Now, Fry isn't committed to chaos. He wants to be left alone. He is, in a sense, the far end of the individualism. But now, and this is where the, this is where the identitarian scheme falls apart for the progressive, the progressive liberationists, how can they attack Fry? Well, they're going to have a hard time attacking Fry because Fry is part of one of these oppressed classes. Now, nobody on that stage is looking particularly oppressed. Of the four of them, my guess is that Michelle Goldberg probably has the least amount of money. Think about that. This is, you know, that Stiffen Fry basically taunts his relationship with the Queen. Fry is finally on no one's side but his own. Tribalism of chaos and convenience, he's Loki. He speaks for the religion of the sacred self. What is finally important is for me to express what is in my heart and for me to be able to follow my own lights and do what I believe. Now, he says he's not a libertarian, but he's not anything beyond what he is and what he imagines he should be. So he is, in a sense, poor Jordan's son. In a sense, poor Jordan Peterson has Loki on his side and Loki will be doing Loki type things. He and Jordan Peterson have individualism together, but Stiffen Fry is further out on the individualism. The moral of the story. A religious analysis can help you understand and anticipate. Look at the stupidities of Soviet Marxism and Nazi racism. You can make good arguments that it was their ideologies themselves that brought their downfall. Read Snyder's Bloodlands, which goes into the story of both Stalin and Hitler and the area between them in the early to middle parts, in the early part of the 20th century. It is an amazing book. It is a difficult book. But this is the difficulty that the progressive liberationists will finally have, which is that they can stay together as long as there is some supposed great evil. And so what brings them together on stage here is Jordan Peterson. But once they no longer have this combined evil to face, this is why progressive liberationists tend to continue to imagine that they have to keep the patriarchy alive to fight it. They have to keep a certain kind of racism around to fight it, because once that enemy is gone, they will now turn on each other and their coalition will come apart and it'll be chaos. So this is the nature of that religious ethos. Truth is knowable, but challenging. There is something to reason, again, via C.S. Lewis. We are bad at it, again, via John Calvin and our noetic fall. If you don't own your own implicit religion, it will have you. And that's in a sense what we're seeing. What happens to Dyson when there's no longer the white man to push against? What happens to Goldberg when there's no longer the patriarchy to push against? They fundamentally are negative movements that draw their power from pushing against something else. And the reason you can see this is because they lack what it takes to actually build a cohesive whole. Women cannot live without men. And in a sense, you can find this all kinds of ways. Women often want the bad boys. Well, what is going on there? And women keep defecting from various waves of feminism. Once you no longer have the enemy, it falls apart. And that happens in both cases. And so what you have is that your progressive liberationism will never finally fully reach its eschatology because it's dependent on the enemy to actually hold itself together. And so what you have and what we have now, the more power these groups get, the less effective they become because they draw their capacity and their effectiveness from the groups that they're pushing against. And you could say similar things, especially for Nazis and their war against the Jews. What would they do once the Jews are gone? Well, then you move to another ethnic group to back, you know, to work against. What would the Soviet Union do if they didn't have capitalism to keep pushing against? These are basically negative groups that derive their power from what they push against. And this is in a sense where the West won because I don't think the West is negative in that same way. They actually have a more cohesive, more balanced, more diverse system that stands on its own, which is probably why it wins. Now, what I think Peterson should do is, in fact, a better approach for him when he's talking to these groups would probably be to go underneath them. They say patriarchy is bad. Oh, no, it's worse than just that. Racism is bad. Oh, no, it's worse than just that. Peterson can do that. And Peterson does that a little bit, but he doesn't stick to it. He gets triggered. Part of the play here, which you can learn from Frye, is the self-deprecation using humor, coming at it from below and say, You think you can resolve the issues of the African-American community by dealing with the white man. Listen to Glenn Mowry. The white man is not going to save you. He won't. That's in a sense you borrow from Ta-Nehisi Coates and you say, yeah, it's dark. It's in fact darker than you think. You're not going to win this by winning political battles in America and getting all the white people to have privilege co-op. Because, again, as John McWhorter makes the point, he says, you can do that all day long and it's a religious exercise. And McWhorter says it's basically, it means nothing. Because all that happens is you say, hey, white guy, you're not owning your privilege. Oh, I'm sorry. You're not owning enough. Oh, I'm sorry. You're not owning enough. Oh, I'm sorry. And it never goes anywhere until a certain degree of the white population gets tired of it and they're like, oh, I'm sorry. And that's what Fry mentioned. Peterson does better by saying it's worse than that. There's a better way to contend with progressive liberationism. It is finally a religious hope. Its eschatology doesn't hold together. It's finally a negative dynamic. They're going to have to break a few eggs and the more power they have, the more power they have. The more power they have, the more they will become the oppressor. Implicit in the narrative is that if you have been oppressed, once you're the oppressor, you won't oppress anymore. That has never been true. Because what we've seen again and again with revolutions, the people who were oppressed usually decide now it's time for payback. How does that go? You just fuel the people who were oppressed. How does that go? You just fuel the revolution, which is why, again, in Jesus' revolution, Jesus doesn't go and say, we're going to kill the Herodians and the Romans. Jesus says, I am going to sacrifice myself. And you are not, in fact, you are going to kill me, but I am going to rise again. That's the Christian story. That's why it has so much power. That's why it perpetually beats revolutions, even though Christians die. There are too many facets, as Jordan Peterson points out, and there's a near infinite number of aspects around which oppression, privilege, and victimization can cluster. And this is why we see LGBTQA, so on and so forth. And the longer this goes, the more the beginning of the alphabet of this string of letters begins to feel alienated. Watch Andrew Sullivan and where he's at and where he's going. So in a sense, Frye comes in and Frye says, yeah, I'm against all this. Let me be me. But OK, that's the radical individualism. Where can there be an us? Well, if you're Stephen Frye and you're, you know, fabulously wealthy man who enjoys the community and the company of the Queen of England, well, yeah, I suppose you don't want people chattering at you and you don't want to curb your speech because other people might be offended. You just want to be all by yourself, expressing your individualism as you are yourself. There's the dynamic, as Peterson noted, between the individual and the collective. And there's always tension between those dynamics. But you have to work that in a way. And I think Peterson is right. Each individual is part of multiple collectives. And this is why, finally, if there's too much collectivization, it breaks down. I think that's my last slide. Nope, I didn't talk about Jordan Peterson's religion. I've got doubts about his religion, as I've said in how many of my videos. I agree that we've been blessed in the West and I agree that Western civilization has been blessed by the wisdom of the Bible, but I can't live within his epistemological box. And if you want to know again, some of my stuff, see my Divine Lobster video. And I'm finally with Dostoevsky and the resurrection. Because what Peterson is pushing against are these utopian eschatologies on the left that whenever they arise, they get tyrannical. And I think Peterson is right on this because they don't have enough within them to compensate for the tyranny. And what we've actually seen in the West in the 20th century is, I think, some good movements that have said, hey, we have not treated women as they deserve to be treated. They should be given equal opportunity to men. Let's move that forward. And we have. We have not treated former slaves as they should have. Let's see if we can make this better. And we've done, I think, with respect to race relations, we've addressed the low hanging fruit. But I don't hear Dyson giving any indication of anything solid and concrete that is actually going to move the ball forward for his own community. In a sense, what I see him doing is giving in sort of a white guilt minstrel show that, you know, oh, call me a racist some more. Tell me about my privilege. Make me feel guiltier and guiltier. And as John McWhorter says, this does nothing. That the kind of white folks, Ta-Nehisi Coates is right on this, white folks are not going to fix the black problem. The problems in the black community. Does that mean white folks are without guilt? No. Does that mean that white folks don't have more to learn? No. What that does mean is that you can, as Glenn Lowry says, you can keep waving the bloody shirt of racism and you will silence white people. But that's not going to do anything. And since the civil rights movement, not a lot has happened. In fact, a lot of the numbers are grim. And again, Glenn Lowry, he's an economist. Have him look at those numbers. Now he's more conservative politically than I am. I'm probably closer to McWhorter. But they're having a conversation. This is a conversation we need to have. And what Dyson does here does not help us. And I think progressive liberationism is a Christian heresy. And I think the degree to which elements of the church are succumbing to this heresy, they will fall because it can't last because it's fundamentally a negative religion. So this has probably gone on way too long. I got triggered in a few area. It's been very rambly. I'll be surprised if anybody looks at it, but I'm going to post it. So here it comes.