https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Th5YiIB8huM

 The city's the man who does not want you, Council of the wicked, for a standing wave of scissors, or to sit in the seat of mockers. But his delight is in the love of the Lord, and on his law he meditates day and night. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit in Caesar, and whose leaf does not wither. Every faith he does prosper, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit in Caesar, and whose leaf does not wither. Every faith he does prosper, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked. John and his wife are spending some time with John's mother-in-law, so prayers for her would be welcome. Thank you very much for coming this morning. So yesterday, because I had a meeting of which probably three hours of my attention were demanded, but I got to Southern California at 730 in the morning, and I had to leave at 8 o'clock at night. So I had lots of time to read and I watched some videos, and I really had a very enjoyable, slow day. I made a couple of little videos for the membership section. I had a little dog training video in there, and then just some thoughts about, thoughts about conferences. So, yeah, so some of those are in the membership section, and, but I wanted to begin. I'm going to play with some new things in StreamYard today. I'm slowly learning how to do this. The title of the show comes from the fact that there is something, not Hermes, something new has come into the corner. We are being studied, and we are being studied by permission. Clara, in fact, sent me an email on February 20 asking for permission to study us, and it was like, we're all putting this on YouTube. Study away! She is a graduate student in sociology, and let's hear a little bit about how this whole crazy thing started. And so Chad, Chad is sort of the bleeding edge of the corner in many ways. If there's an idea, Chad is about the lightest trigger in the room, and he will start it. So he jumped right in. Some, some very special guests. We have something, a new, a new series that I'm starting right now, or that was started over here called the Friday Morning Frameless. I have no idea what that means, but it sounded like a cool thing to do. And so this is that episode. Today we have Lance, y'all. Now a number of people in the comments section noted that, uh, flameless, brainless, uh, brainless, blameless. Chad, you can do just about anything with your channel. Hello Lance, say hello Lance. Hi Lance. We have, uh, the General Grimm down there. Say hi, Grimm. And we have Clara. Now Gris is a pretty, um, if you're gonna, the link will be below. You can find it on the Friday Morning Nameless. Um, I have to adjust my camera. Oh, there's a little better. No, it's even worse. Um, yeah, I know some of you are worried with all the branding that somehow we're going to have high production values. Fear not. I will sabotage the high production values on a very regular basis. Where's my garbage stick? Where's my garbage stick? Oh, here's the garbage stick. Okay. Well, as long as I sit right. Well, anyway, so Gris is pretty shy. And so if you watch the video, the conversation doesn't really get going for the first hour. And that's pretty normal for a conversation. I've mentioned before, I had a pastor friend who always had his clock behind the people and he would always set his clock forward because if the appointment was for an hour, he knew that he wouldn't actually get anywhere in the conversation for the first 45 minutes. He just turned the clock. They'd all feel late and they accelerate them. So anyway. Clara. Hi, Clara. Okay. Okay, guys. This is going to be very strange. I have no idea what is about to happen. But I would like you to get to know Clara. Clara, would you like to introduce yourself and tell us all about what you what you why you are here. Well, hi. Here is kind of it's an existential question beyond me, but I am really grateful for you having me here. I'm a sociologist. I study how people move into and out of their religious identities, other identities. And I'm really interested in kind of seeing what's happening in the corner. How people got here, what they do, what they might do next. Yeah. No, how did you find Clara? How did you find PVK? I actually started this project a long time ago. I sit in a coffee shop and I do maybe what you might think of as randos conversations and talk to people about these things. And one of my friends there at the coffee shop, I kind of sort of drew the connection. Excuse me, has been telling me about this community for a long time and then introduced me to this world. Yeah, yeah. So I ended up getting an email from from Claire and she says, Yeah, so my friend Sourdough Neal sent me her way. And so I, and I'd like to talk to you. I was like, oh, this is really interesting. And so I called Neal today to ask him about you a little bit. And he's like, oh, that's so cool. She's going to, you know, come on and stuff. And so Sourdough Neal gets his name from from yours truly down here. Amazing. I eat his bread. So is it good to see that? I met him over the weekend. I went to his church actually. And then Chad goes on to describe how much he did or didn't like the Orthodox Church and I'll leave you to that to go find it. Chad being the Lutheran that he is. So she has in fact come into the corner to study us. And I know some of that is going, some of you are going to be really disturbed by that. I think it's actually a good thing. And when she wrote me and sort of asked permission to watch our videos, I was like, it's on YouTube. You don't need any permission to watch our videos. And I guess she's got their real strong rules about who she can study and how they are studied. And I guess all of that is good. So I told her, please study away and find out what you find. And what followed in that video was something that many of us have been looking for for a long time, which is sort of an onramp into this little community because many of us have people and we value it and we would like to introduce people to it. But we have absolutely no way to do so. We have now again, what John Vervecki said to what he said to Jordan Hall, he thought, he thought fancy Vervecki words was a put down and fancy Vervecki words is by no means a put down. Fancy Vervecki words is a loving term because we fancy things are often things that are gifts. And John Vervecki gave us these fancy words as a gift. Would you rather get a plain towel as a bridal at your bridal shower or would you rather get a fancy towel? And so we have fancy words from John Vervecki. And but we have all this struggle of in-house language, which is what happens when any community gets together and they start to know each other and you know how twins develop their own little secret language. Here we have our own little corner language. And just as with Christianese and churches, this corner language becomes a problem. And so one of the things we're always looking for is a way to be able to introduce ourselves and explain to people what exactly what we are doing. And what this opportunity, what this sociologist studying us gives us an opportunity to do is to be seen and to be explained back to us because the truth is we really don't know what we're doing. And so what proceeded on this video were actually a lot of really good explanations. And I'm not going to play it in order. Like I said, it takes a little while to get going. There were some really nice introductions to Grizz and to Chad and to Lance. And I don't know if I'll get to them. But by way of explaining, as the video reached its end, they really did begin to explain to one another what is going on. Absolutely. And so like the conversations I have with people here, I don't have a lot of people in my real life that want to have these types of conversations. You know, the one thing I would say is I didn't have like I realized I just realized this a couple of months ago. My meaning crisis was when I was watching it really hit and started to happen with all this culture war stuff. I was just seeing that this political stuff was not getting fixed. Like I just something was broken, you know, and I just could tell that something was was wrong. I had enough. I have faith. I have faith in everyday Americans that we've given a chance to vote. They'll try and keep some what they'll give normal people the opportunity that they'll be able to keep it somewhere in the center. You know, and then I was kind of a political walk. So I knew certain counties so I could track certain counties and when there were certain trends or whatever. And on that election night in 2020 when I went to bed and then I woke up at six in the morning and I saw all these weird anomalies like the one would happen was in your state, Wisconsin, Chad, where they dropped 100 percent of all these votes. And the vote went like this and went to 300,000 overnight. And I realized they stopped all the voting. And when I woke up that morning, I knew immediately, oh my God, our vote, our votes don't matter anymore. And I knew only knew that because for 20 years I had trapped at this real detail level and I saw these anomalies and I saw them forcibly kicking people out of polling stations in Philadelphia. And I'm like, oh my gosh, wait a minute. This thing I had this faith in the United States. I had this I literally I had this faith that this thing. Now, what he said right there is he had a faith and that then becomes that then becomes a theme in this that this is a story of domicide. This is a story of the end of mass media. This is a story of no longer being able to orient. And so what we do when we are disoriented by these screens, by the fact that we've got dissonance, we don't know who to trust. Should I be Team MSNBC? Should I be Team Fox? Should I say I don't believe the mainstream media because both are mainstream? That that goes into I've got Lyons disease and the doctor can't help me. I've got long COVID and the doctor can't help me. I've got the strange disease and the doctor can't help me. So I'm going to try the Lyons diet or I'm going to try a vegan diet or and everyone is sort of lighting out for the territory because the authorities in the world cannot be trusted. The priest that I went to abused Children, the pastor that I was speaking the word of God had sex with the youth group leader, the on and on and on. Trust has fallen and our most basic way to trust is building conversation, reputation over time. And we've got to do this. But now we find ourselves not in a village where we're going down to the stream to wash clothes together or going out to the field to harvest the field together, where there's a good healthy gossip network that is sort of keeping reputational tabs on everyone. And everybody has been known from the things that they have done since birth. In fact, so much of American society has been about escaping our reputations from birth because they are both they both bind us and blind us and imprison us. And it's very difficult to if you've ever been in a small community, you know, it's very difficult to transcend that self you used to be. So now we're all chasing jobs all around the country are all doing different things. What do we do? Wasn't so corrupt that they literally would not give the regular people their opportunity to speak. And it became so obvious. So my meeting crisis was this was right before I hit the bridges. The meeting is, you know, I had to try and figure out like, oh, this this this thing is much more corrupt than I ever thought that it was. And this wasn't just one political party. I mean, this is just the whole thing was so far corrupt that the people were going to be able to have their say. And that I had to agree with like I because I I just had this faith. And so, you know, one of the things that really happened to me is that I needed to have that political thing totally smashed in. And that was a good thing. Like that was in some ways it like almost the USA was an idol like this belief in. Of course, we weren't as good as we needed to be. And there it is. The USA was an idol and it got smashed. But I need to I need to live within something. I need to live within a worldview and I need to live in a worldview and a sense making network that can be trusted. And so this is exactly what's forming all over social media is everybody is trying to form new little sense making networks that that can be trusted. But there was this ideal that was out there that I I believe my whole life. And so that that that was my meaning crisis. And what I realized was I didn't want to keep I didn't want to keep having the same conversations where people are just doing this. That's not going to work. And that wasn't the solution. And so when I and that, of course, is what we saw on YouTube and how many different ways we see the political this we see the religious this we see all of this going on. And, you know, even today. And so even today. Well, this, of course, gets attention because we as you know, we as creatures in Patterson, when you know, two kids would fight and then one kid would lose and then the moms would come out and fight and then everyone in Patterson would show up for the moms fighting in the street because we're just all drawn to this. And so in this attentional economy, it's click, click, click, click, click until finally this becomes maps territory. And it's like, yeah, that ain't going to work. What are we going to do now? Really liked about coming in here. The first thing that I was drawn to is people were having conversations about tough things, and they weren't stuck in the political like they weren't arguing about red, blue stuff like they were talking about really interesting things and going back and forth. And there was good faith dialogue going on. I found that first that that fascinated. But then the deeper I got to know when I got to meet these people. These are amazing. Like there is amazingly smart people, some educated some not there was all this wisdom and there was all this stuff it was this was it was quite fascinating to me, really what was going on. Meaning crisis. Conversation. And so of course we have to you can't live without this. That's sort of the sociological analog to personal neolism. And then I was people were having these depth. Okay, and there you have the Christian deconstruction. There you have churches within the box and YouTube within the box and they just keep hammering the same things in the box. Maybe they get a little better. But basically, it's all about the box. And then you run into something that just makes you doubt the box. I forget who it was. One of the randos conversations. Oh, that's right. It wasn't. It wasn't shared. The best red was conversations are not shared. They can't be. They just can't be. But this woman told me with her Christian deconstruction, you know, Peterson had verbalized it perfectly. When her pastor had moral failure. She not only lost faith in her pastor, she lost faith in institutions of trust. And so she descended into domicide and neolism conversations where I was able to take what was a lot of wisdom and a lot of things that I had. And I was able it took it to the next level. And so the depth of what you can contemplate here is something that I've never experienced in any other group or community that I have. And so when you can do that, it's amazing. And I'll the one thing I have a good friend, Jess P. Who's a part of this community started talking about where if you have these big hairy questions and are not getting the answer in your life, and it's lots of different types of big hairy questions that you have to answer. So some of you saw Bowtie Brian on the Freddie and Paul show. Bowtie Brian has made his way up to Sacramento twice for estuary and for church and for the Freddie and Paul show. He got the full treatment. He got the Living Stones hat trick. And in the estuary group, he said, so Bowtie Brian and his buddy Sean, Sean's video will get released soon from the No Wait No Ads. They started the largest, one of the largest homeless shelters in the country, and they are providing full wraparound services. It's a big catch word in California. And he talked about wicked problems. What are wicked problems? Wicked problems are the kinds of problems that there's no answer to sort of in the modernistic. I'm rephrasing him in the modernistic way that we think our answers how we have been formed by technology and technology has said this is this is what we are. This is the modernistic answer. This is the solution. This is the policy. This is the drug. This is the technology that will fix homelessness. And you realize that there is no such thing. And so wicked problems are are can only be addressed by wisdom. And again, wisdom doesn't dispel the problem. Wisdom allows you to enter in with the spirit of finesse and you begin to be able to work the problem. Come together when all of a sudden something clicks like you understand it like something makes sense when that comes together and you just said that's healing. Like when you can integrate something, you know, where you had this disconnect or maybe you didn't know it exists. But when all of a sudden you can integrate something and you have that aha moment. And what that is is like once you've learned something, you'll never you'll never be the same again. Like once you know something and understand something at some level and those tumblers go together, we every now and again we have some of those moments and those are those moments to where like so that'd be like that spark that moment that Jess would call. And those moments are always are almost always they're interpersonal. Sometimes you get that insight and it gets triggered by watching a video. Jordan Hall said something to someone. I won't repeat the source. But he said something to someone. I probably shouldn't said Jordan Hall. But anyway, he he was he was reflecting on the Symbolic World Summit. No criticism of it, but saying basically. It's not about another idea, and I think this is the key to understanding Jordan Hall's conversion movement into Christianity, his desire to get baptized, his desire to get married to his partner on a Wednesday night and have the potluck be the reception, his desire to live it because here is a man who has been feeding on ideas for all of his life. And he realized that the solution is not an idea. You have to live into the solution, and it's a move of wisdom. It's a move of wisdom that addresses the wicked. It doesn't mean that suddenly everything will be great, but it means that in the journey you will grow. That's healing, you know, and I think I think a lot of what I've seen happen. And that's right. That's healing. And with people too, and I've seen transformation and I've seen people move from they were once way one way and now they're this way and they talk about the struggle they had and now they're this different way. I think that what happens in this little corner is people engage in these conversations and those things happen. I think what you see is a lot of healing. And so we talk about big weighting heavy. And that's exactly right. And that's the the corner is both larger and smaller than we see. Because somebody mentioned in the comments, yeah lurkers can't be studied. So keep on lurking. There's, there is nothing wrong with lurking. Joe said in the question and answer from the Symbolic Words Summit, which was great, the last question and answer, you talked about sacrifice and I would, you know, I expect at some point those videos will come out and then I'm going to want to talk about misery, deliverance, gratitude, because sacrifices and the gratitude part. Sacrifice is the response. But what's happening, why certain of us are really addicted to this is because we are being healed as we do this with each other. And what are we being healed from? It's not just one thing and we're learning all the things that we're being healed from. But we're leaning into it more and more. And then the other time that's happened is I've also I've met Chad in real life. I haven't met Grim yet. I got to get that taken care of. But I've had conversations with people offline where we've reached out and they seek me. I saw other people out where you start developing, you know, you know, relationship and you can get a real private conversation. You can get really vulnerable with one another, you know, about struggles you're having and those sorts of things. So I think that sort of thing that happens is for me what I think a lot. It's a part of the magic about what this little corner does. And you can see her taking notes because this is this is what she's here for. Because this is what we're all looking for. We're all looking for healing. We're all looking for come to me, you who are weary and heavy laden and I will give you rest. My yoke is easy. It's a yoke. My yoke is easy. But my burden is light. This is why you memorize scripture, because you can pull it up when when it needs to be spoken. Now, Grizz continues with this and Grizz doesn't say much. He's mostly smoking and having his whatever he's drinking in his cup. But he's, you know, as usual with Grizz, his words when he when he really like I skim through. She had something to say about his show, which I think was and I'm going to talk. I want to talk about that later if I remember. But I skim through his program, through the branding and everything, because I'm always looking for the nuggets. It might come sometimes when he's adjunct professing or when he's but there's usually his show is kind of like a church service. There's music and there's branding and there's announcements. I just I'm a good Protestant. I just wait for that. The little piece of the sermon where that where the gold is hidden. Oops, this one. I'd like to ramble for a couple. Please. You say what what the what are the things that brings the people here, I think, are our commonalities. And a lot of those commonalities are I think it's people who have been wrong for extended periods of their lives before, like for a matter of years and come to the realization that they have been wrong. And I think that it's people who have noticed the polarization and corruption of their information sources and have come. So they come with this package of what they believe and what they thought. But they're they're open to the notion. Now, again, part of the reason when I do videos, I don't just like many video editings, they'll just go to the one person who's talking and you lose the rest. And there are good reasons for that. But I like to keep everybody up because I like to keep watching all of the parties because I want to know their reaction, because that's actually what happens in real life when we're having a conversation together. We're not just watching the person who's speaking. We're watching each other. That they've been deceived. And basically, we all they've thought, but they're they're open to the notion that they've been deceived. And basically, we all start wandering around together. Looking for what's not deception, because we're in the new. This is an unprecedented time for humanity when all of information is at our fingertips and we can compare and contrast the different beliefs, systems and see things, why they are the way they are. We can follow the purchases of stock companies and find out that BlackRock and Yada Yada just own each other. And together, they own everything. And and all of this, we're all coming into this information and it's way too much information for any of us. So we come together and we're trying to figure out what's going on out together. And I see it as a sea of information and and I call it the fire and flotilla, because like fire ants cling to each other in a flood to make a raft. And that's seemingly what we're doing with these channels and being together in the comments and such. So I think that we're all in that context, the modern human context together. And our trusted sources of information have become less trustworthy that we're now trying to find again the human connection, particularly when we notice that when they clamp down on us, the human connection is what they're trying to sever. So that makes us cling to it and each other tighter. And I thought that was so key. The human connection is what they're trying to sever, whether for. Whether for. People that's intentional or not, if there is a. Consequence of modernity consequence that there's there's fine books written about this on the Industrial Revolution. One of the things that the Industrial Revolution did was rip apart the agrarian fabric of society urbanization. Now this obviously is as iterations throughout history, because you can see, for example, with the Roman Empire, you can see urbanization happening. And then with the sort of the fall of the Western Empire, you collapse back into an agrarian and about the time of after the Black Death, of course, when you'd have plagues, people would head out to the countryside and spread out. So plagues sort of kept people moving back and forth, back and forth with this. And then industrialization sort of brought people together. And for good reason, because life was better in the city for many people. But of course, there's always tradeoffs. So but then plague people would go out. Well, with industrialization and sanitation and modern medicine, we've been in a long centripetal pole. Or is it centrifugal? It's a centrifuge. It's bringing it all to the middle. A long centrifugal pole. And this is what's keeping us together. And it's it's also straining and ripping the units of the family. Harari talks about this in his book Sapien, where basically we exchange institutions have been government institutions, sometimes church institutions, various institutions have been safety nets and replacement for familial institutions, because familiar institutions are by no means perfect. But there's been so much strain on these very organic, deep, ancient institutions among us. And when I say that these implicit institutions that now that we're in a process of domicide, where many of these formal modern institutions are failing. Now we're just left as refugees. If we come to see that, at least, and who knows how much of what is coming together has been directed together by the algorithm, simply because we managed to have three hour videos that keep people watching for three hours. And that's what the algorithm likes. But now now Lance continues. People that have come here have had something, something they thought, how maybe a position they held deeply, that they've come to change, that they've come to learn something new, and it had had some, some new revelation and that takes a, it takes a bit of open mindedness to do that. I think that what helps you do that is if you've experienced some sort of crisis of self. And, you know, you're, you're asked, like I said, you're asking the big hairy question and some of those other things, I think, and not everyone who comes in our little corner is open minded. And there are certainly some people that probably haven't changed a whole heck of a lot. And then there are others that have had massive transformations. So, you know, so one thing that happened to me, I talked about calling out BS, so here's the, there's a few transformations, but here's the transformation that happened to me. I was a charismatic evangelical house church pastor, right? And I come in and somebody asked me a hard question. And this is a theological question, but I don't know if that matters to you, but they were basically, it's around this concept of the penal substitutionary atonement theory of Christ's crucifixion. It's basically God was pouring his wrath down on, you know, whatever. And so he had to pay the price for our dirty, dirtiness and everything else. And I kind of, I had some milieu in that, I was Methodist or whatever, but anyway, there was this conversation and a good friend of mine who's a really good friend now, Luke says, what are you? Like, are you a pastor or something? Because I was annoying him the way I was preaching, kind of being preachy. And then there was a woman named Sherry Souter who asked me, he's like, why are you so sure? And I listened to that. And then one of the things that connected with me is like, I realized I needed to listen to that thing. And she didn't say it, she didn't say it in a mean way, but she also said it in a stern and honest way. Right. And I immediately sensed it. So what do I do? And I think a part, again, a part of the dream of why we see interest in orthodoxy, well, partly because orthodoxy is sort of the hot new chick on the American church scene, even though she's not new at all. But again, it's this. Someone what video was it? Oh, it was it was the other video they're going to play some of today. So, yes, Monica, I am I am I am doing some I am doing some I am doing some commentary on these videos. Orthodox. It's the same impulse that's fueling different kinds of fundamentalisms and it's fueling complementarian churches and reactionary churches and deeply conservative reformed movements. It's a going back. It's a it's an attempt to to stop the domicide that's been going. Now, I'm going to switch to another video that was that was a symbolic World Summit recap done by Pete at Strange Theology had Christian and had Justin on there. And Justin recaps something that was said there. By Martin Shaw, by all accounts, Martin Shaw was the belle of that ball. Not that not not that the other things weren't great. But for many people, Martin Shaw was sort of a revelation in that group. And you can see why when Justin sort of retells what's going on there. Context of the digital world. Now, the idea is his OK, right there. Yeah. That was one of the things he said, you know, in his first talk. So be famous for five miles means like you should be known in your for whatever it is that you give value to the world. Let's say you're like him. You're a storyteller not to be world famous necessarily because there's something different than being like respected and being famous. Because once you're famous, then you're being projected upon your your, you know, it's mostly projection, you know, not real engagement. And I think people notice this when they pop above a certain level of status online and all of a sudden the people they're interacting with. It's all projection and it's not real. You know, so you want to I think want to be right under that. Not so big that that but respected in some sense in terms of what the value is that you can bring to your community. And so famous for five miles in our world might mean just showing that you have something to say, you know, so starting a YouTube channel or doing something participatory. I notice it on campus when when someone makes a good little documentary or film, they're famous on campus. They're not famous. It's not like someone off campus is going to be like, oh, that short documentary you made as a student is amazing. But like within their community, they're famous for five miles. And so this is the point. Martin Shaw said that when you're not when there's no avenue to become famous for five miles, that's when people start to go into destructive behavior of like wanting to be an internet celebrity like kids, an Instagram influencer. Right. Because there's no pathway towards gaining the respect when you put work into something and you want to get a little bit of respect back or appreciation or whatever it is for you for for the time and effort that you put in. Then you're going to say, well, I can get the dopamine by what's the name that the young kids use? Thirst trap. I can put a thirst trap out there and and then I can get all that, you know, but the dopamine. Someone should tell him a little bit more about those thirst traps. But that's, you know, when Mary Harrington talks about the Instagram to OnlyFans pipeline, well, that is a thirst trap. And I don't watch much Daily Wire, but I don't even know that the young woman's name that's on Daily Wire, she had a thing. She had a thing where she was she had some video of a woman who was, you know, doing porn. And this woman was talking about how this destroyed a relationship with her parents and, you know, destroyed relationships with boyfriends, just destroyed, destroyed, destroyed. And so I love this thing, not famous for 15 minutes, famous for five miles. And maybe on YouTube we can have famous for 500 subs. And that's it. Famous for 500 subs. And just, you know, that's that's all you need. And yeah, hierarchies are going to form. Status hierarchies are going to form. Some people are going to go. But again, Jordan Peterson's story is in many ways a cautionary tale. Now, some of us might say, oh, I wish I had six million YouTube subs and a bestselling book that on brought millions of dollars. And who knows what his contract with Daily Wire is valued at, yada, yada, yada. But don't forget that it nearly cost him his life. It nearly cost him his wife. But for the grace of God and her healing, it it cost him two careers, two careers that he loved, two careers that, you know, I appreciate what Jordan is doing. But almost all of us in this corner that have watched a ton of Jordan would say. Jordan, those classroom lectures of Jordan's 2016, 2017. Those were those were the best. You know, it's those were. Those were those were amazing. Can he do better than that? Well, it's hard to value things. But so famous for 500 subs, maybe the system is there for a reason. It's not like, you know, it's just maladaptive when we're addicted to the dope. You know, so so I think that having and this is where Paul I Paul Venterclay has a lot of wisdom, I think, is like, let's curate a little bit of a community where you can be famous for five miles, not five physical miles, but within a certain sphere of a small community. Yeah. And so put value out there. And that's exactly what I see happening. You know, you look at Chad's channel, about 500 subs, Grizz, 1.27. You know, even some of the channels that have been around a little longer and have done some things that would give them more reach. Karen Wong's channel, Sevilla King's channel, a bunch of these transfigured Sam's channel. Some of the people in this corner that we have seen are at least as brilliant as the people who are going on. They're far more brilliant than a lot of the people who go on Rogan or Chris Williamson. And they're far more grounded and they and they do much more. So don't despise the little channels. In fact, I think I think famous for 500 subs is is a good, good place to be. And I think as we travel this, we have to really continue to watch the practices that we participate in. Now, this next clip from from this conversation is Pete talking about conferences. And because sure, and I was lanced at a little live stream this morning and. Scale will happen. And what you have to figure out is how to scale properly and nobody scales perfectly. And scale is the demise back when I got to North America in the late 90s and the denomination was really pushing the seeker movement. And the whole missions people were sending me free books and for pastors to talk about. They were sending all of these business books I read. I don't can't tell you how many business books I read in the late 90s. And we were, of course, supposed to apply this to church. Now you look back on that and you think, oh, boy, partly because, you know, good to great was it good to great. That was like the story of Hewlett Packard. And it's like, ah, Hewlett Packard. But when I think sorry, Hewlett Packard, when I think at what's at the top of the the PC hierarchy, Hewlett Packard does not come to mind. And these business sort of businesses sort of rise and fall. Same with Pixar. Same with Apple. And and they almost always hit scale. And people climb to this is this Peter principle they climb to the they basically climb to the level of their inadequacies and their lack of competencies. And that's where they that's where they peak off. So these things obviously still apply to churches, but that's why scaling has to it's both organic. But if it's cancer is basically growth without proper proportion. And so this is what Pete had to say about conference and friends or something like that. Who ends up by myself? I don't know what it is. I don't know why I give off the air or something of like being a loner or I just I got a scowl on my face or something like that. People I don't know what it is. You know, I've never and I go to like pastors conferences and stuff like that. So think about that in the context of like going to a pastor's conference, but still feeling very much alone. This summit was not pastors are some of the loneliest people I know. Men are lonelier, generally speaking than women. But pastors can be very lonely by virtue of their occupation and their job. Now, Monica said in the comments, she said scaling requires team. One of the one of the things that came out during the symbolic summit was that before the summit, teen Jonathan Peugeot nearly had a train wreck. And. They had a train wreck because you can find how many people quitting YouTube. I've commented about this in the past and previous videos because they got into this because they were an artist or they were playing with this and they met the level of their incompetency. And usually the way out of it is to have a team. But once you have a team, the team has to be managed and not everyone who's an artist is a good team manager. And then there's legal entities. And I very much recommend Phil Visser's little book on Bob the tomato because Phil Visser had a clever little idea. He liked puppets and then he got into computer animation and computers were new and he had Larry and Bob and Veggie Tales and VHS was new. And so they were selling VHS and everybody simply assumed that DVD was going to be like VHS. But it wasn't because of course, what was changing at that time was also the distribution networks. Now Netflix looked a little further ahead. But. Phil Visser was having all of this success and then people like you got to make a movie, you got to make movie. All the experts said you got to make a movie. And so then he leveraged almost everything to make a movie. What he didn't understand was that the Christian bookstore market was changing. Christianity was changing. The media industry was changing. And basically they put all of this money into growth and to scaling up to do this movie so they could continue to scale. And the whole thing collapsed and he never had good legal. He never had good legal advice early on. And his IP was in his company. And so when his company got bankrupt, the same people that own how many other defunct cartoon characters like Casper the Friendly Ghost now owned Bob and Larry. And so Bob and Larry became a cautionary tale bought owned by the same people that don't Casper the Friendly Ghost. And then they tried to do with that. And then they'd hire. I mean the whole thing. So Christians and Christian ministry and media ministry is all part of this. We keep talking about Christian YouTube and you've just got to figure this stuff out. OK, back to Pete's back to Pete's story. I don't want to start it from the beginning again. I've always been the person at a conference or something like that who ends up by myself. I don't know what it is. I don't know why I give off the air or something of like being a loner or I just I got a scowl on my face or something like that. People I don't know what it is. You know, I've never and I go to like pastors conferences and stuff like that. So think about that in the context of like going to a pastors conference but still feeling very much alone. This summit was not like that. Well, think of the consumerism thing that I was talking about earlier. The idea of having a product, selling the product and then people come to buy. So there's a real sense of like, well, the product is the book table and the whatever, whoever the speakers are. And then you're going to take that information. You're going to take it back to your home right now. Now, part of what makes Justin so valuable in this corner is that he works in the industry. What is the industry? Well, the industry is Hollywood. The industry is the mass formation network, not the news industry, because that's a little too direct. It's the worldview shaping industry. And so Justin, being part of the industry and being a smaller player and it completely understands the waves that come in and go out. And at the same time, he teaches in a Christian college. My conversation with Nate, I mean, part of the reason I sort of release a part of the reason I release videos, say a conversation with someone like Nate or Aaron Rand a little bit after is I like to spend a week kind of thinking about the conversation. And then sometimes I make clips about it. I often I just don't have time to make clips about it. But so Nate, Nathan Jacobs is also increasingly deep in the industry. And so we talked about gatekeepers. We talked about a bunch of things there. And part of what has happened in a similar way to which the Protestant Reformation provoked changes in the Roman Catholic Church and the Orthodox by virtue of a whole variety of things sort of sat that out. They have other dynamics that, like I said, I got to do a lot of reading yesterday. They have other dynamics that most of us in the West are blind to because we just don't know the stories. But just like what happened with the Protestant Reformation in the Roman Catholic Church, the main formation, spiritual formation engine of the West was the church. And that in many ways was supplanted in the 20th century by the industry. And of course, evangelicalism, which is the ultimate me to try to keep up. And so we have Christian rock and we have Christian. We have Christian Christian this and Christian that it's all me to me to me to I'm going to do it like you. And it's usually almost always worse. Not always, but often. And so conferences, same thing. And now Justin's like, yeah, I can critique the little me to Christian thing going on here because I'm watching it happen on the big stage. Kind of a thing. That's I feel like that is a lot of conferences. And also when I go to academic conferences, same thing. It's like, well, I'm here to present my paper because I'm trying to get published and do whatever it is. Whereas here it's very participatory because of that curated online space where everyone's kind of participate. So the book table isn't really it's not like we're here to sell books. Like if you go to the Conference for American Society of Religion, I think it's called AAR Conference. There is a massive thing. It's like a book fair and just like tables and tables of books and publishers and it's real networking, networking sort of thing. It's like here, you know, I'm going to sell you my book and whatever, you know, that that's going on. Whereas this is not like that. It feels more like a an invitation to participate in some way in a communal activity. You may have missed this. You may have missed this. Jonathan said that at the very beginning of his first. It was either the beginning or the end. He's like he was doing it for himself, but he was also doing it for the people that were coming. I want this to be about connecting people that are artists or that are creative people or thought people. He made that statement. I think the interesting thing, but they didn't the structure that they built that they did some intention because. And now while it's it's very true. That again, this dynamic that in some ways the it was Justin talking about a couple of guys on an orthodox. Oh, it was it was at the conference. He said, you know, the the orthodox priests went out for a smoke and they basically said, yeah, we sat out the whole Protestant Reformation. And so it's sort of like how the Irish saved Christianity. We have this old knowledge and we're able to bring it back onto the stage. And I think that's that's part of the wisdom of the appendix. That's part of the wisdom of the deeply conservative because the deeply conservative, they don't save everything because they can't. But they do save some things. And that means that you actually have a tremendously old institutional memory so that you're not always captive to the moment. But the downside of that is you also don't have some of the wisdom that the people who have been paying a heavy price for keeping up with the new thing have had all along the way. So, again, there's just all these tradeoffs. You could have lunch there. They brought in food trucks that were right outside the conference center. The structure that they built that they did some intention because you could have lunch there. They brought in food trucks that were right outside the conference center. You could sit that you could immediately leave and go sit down. And there were platform people hanging out in those spaces, too. And then I love that, you know, again, just watch language develop platform people. Who are the platform? Do the platform people come out? One of my earliest memories of Calvin Sem was a vigorous debate broke out at the seminary retreat. And if you think you want to see an awkward group of people go to a seminary retreat, which is really hilarious because most of them are going to be pastors. At the seminary retreat, this and it was my friend who's been on the channel, Kevin Adams basically stood up and challenged the faculty that they don't come out to the student lounge for doughnuts. And particularly prickly professor stands up and says, I don't see the value of having students see jelly, you know, a jelly doughnut dripping from my face. The other part of it, though, is but there wasn't like a hugely intentional effort to force that on people. Whereas I've heard Paul of the conversation I had with Paul VanderKlay about that was having built in community structures as a part of like estuary protocol, kind of as part of a conferencing. But Pete, I guarantee you if you had gone that that would not have been your experience because we would have. We would be having dinner. Yeah, you would. Yeah. And it would have been more than that. I mean, because that happened because if you had seen other people you could enter, you know, that you've been on, even if just sharing a stream once or twice with somebody is actually pretty powerful. I mean, I think I don't know if I had shared a stream with Nate Heil maybe once or twice, but I felt like we kind of knew like there was a knowing there was a knowingness and and and a lot of what's happening in this corner is we are sort of hiding. We are sort of hijacking these technologies and spirits that have been hijacking us. And one of them is the the silver screen effect where you have this illusion that you know someone. I think he's going to talk about it with Malcolm Muggereg, I don't know if I clipped that part, but you have this illusion that you know someone you don't really know them but you know them a little bit. So what that's meant at these conferences, which I heard again and again and again at Chino, which is there's no small talk that you know at least someone a little bit so that you can begin the conversation. Again, it's all these trade offs. You don't really know them, but you know them. It's sort of like, you know, I put the where is it? I'm so dyslexic. I'm going to go the other way. Gosh, I'm. Oh man, it's terrible. The virtual I put the virtual not alone bubble up for the live streams. Why, why am I including some of Grizz's branding because, again, we want people who are 500 subs famous or 100 subs famous or 50 subs famous. We want people who are who are famous. We want people that are more like Tom Bombadil. Now you're going to need your Gandalfs, you're going to need your Aragorns, but you also need your Hobbits and you need your Tom Bombadils. So I want to point to this. You know if if if people are no longer watching my videos because they're watching Grizz and Chad, that's a success. You know, a role that I've played is my channel is a little bit larger. I've got a little bit more status in some areas. YouTube will promote my videos a little bit more. But then I can help you know, that's the whole idea behind an estuary and a title pool help people find their niche and. Chad and Grizz and all of these 500 sub channels or 1000 sub channels or even 5000 sub channels. They can find their little niche so they can have their community so they can do their sense making so they can. I mean multiple layers of need so they can have a home. And yes, is it second class because it's online? Yes, but a second class home is better than no home at all. And that is what people are facing. Long before I got into YouTube. I was I was recording my Sunday school classes. I've got audio recordings of my Sunday school class that go back a long ways. And then I was just playing with podcasts and it was put it out putting them out on podcasts. And because I wasn't on YouTube and of course the power of YouTube is a big discovery engine. Not a lot of people discovered it, but some people did. And so that little video that I posted went back when I had hair. A little video I posted was because I would put out my sermons and just five or ten people would see it and watch it. And so many of the people that would write to me were functional hermits. What do I mean? They lived in their house. They would only maybe go out for necessities. They didn't have friends. And so you they their friends would be on the Internet. And before that I would go to people's homes and the television was on and it was on all day. Why? So the silence of the home wouldn't crush them. And it was it was it was mind numbing daytime TV. Why do you think you all know what a soap opera is? Why do you think soap operas are there? And before that it was radio and before that it was books. But this is that this is the domicile and the destruction of these familial networks. And don't get me wrong, we still live in the age of decay. We still live among sinners. And these these what what families require of you is to figure out how to actually get along. And if you succeed, you will grow in wisdom and strength and character. And if you fail, your life will be destroyed. So in some ways we've sort of had five hundred years to flatten the curve. And so in a sense, we have people who are less capable of deeply productive relationships, but also fewer people who are destroyed by each other. So we'll also think about it like this, because let's say you and Nate Hile haven't shared a whole lot of the same time together on like a live stream. But Nate's listened to your videos. You've listened to his maybe. And so in a way there is that that sort of it's not just one side of the conversation like I was talking about with Justin's experience. There's two sides. Like it. And yeah, I'm sure I'm sure he's listed to your. Well, yeah, and there's and that's the weird thing about time with podcasts that with your found time. And I think this found time dynamic is the same. I think it's if we can do verve, if I can channel verve and say exaptation and things like that, we used to harvest the field or work in the shop or wash the laundry. And we were doing something with our hands and we were talking with our friends at the same time. It still happens if you work, you know, loading trucks in the lumber yard when I was in college. So I worked my way through college working in a lumber yard. You're you're loading a big load of lumber for someone you're you're putting together skids of wood. And, you know, sometimes you'd have to do it by yourself. But if you're like doing a lot, you'd have somebody do and you talk while you work, you talk while you work. And basically what's happening in this corner is that we're talking while we're working. And so one of the things that I did in the Bridges of Meaning Discord server was I had the open studio because I set up a I set up a camera and I was sitting here working on sermons and I was virtually not alone. And that's where people would jump in. Now, the difficulty I had was I had a degree of status that would people were coming in to see me and to talk to me and to sort of get a randos conversation on the side and I couldn't get any work done. So I had to stop that. And this is the the hierarchies blind and blind because to a degree I became a platform person. And that's why, again, it's better to be 50 subs famous or 500 subs famous because because then but there always will be hierarchies. There always will be the hot girl. These dynamics will always happen. You have to make your peace with them. But I think this this capacity that we have to I talk to people all the time. When do you listen to my stuff? I ask when I'm doing the dishes, when I'm doing yard work, when I'm driving. Chad does it when he's working on tile. One woman said early on, I grew up, I grew up with Ross Ross Limbaugh's voice in my home. And now my my kids are growing up with your voice in my home. And I thought, oh, boy, but this is this is what we're doing. And so why this is an adaptive function of domicide, what we are doing in this little corner and what we are doing with podcasts, because, you know, yesterday I had I don't often because of my schedule and because of my priorities, I do a lot of audio books. And when you listen to Chad talk about his story in that video, I do a lot of audio books because my eyes are busy and my hands are busy. And to read, I need my eyes and my hands and I need things to be steady. So yesterday I had a lot of airport time and restaurant time so I could do some reading. And it was lovely. I really enjoyed it. But I'm just doing audio books and I'm doing podcasts because I'm doing this and I'm doing that. And it might be when I'm seventy five, eighty years old, I'll get my eyes and my hands back just as my eyes and my hands are failing. But we'll see. Now, this is a really precious little moment in the conversation about a lot of time. Does anyone have anything else they'd like to hear from me before I go? Can I just say I'm really sorry. I called your channel impenetrable. Early on, Chad asked, you know, what Clara was finding and she said Grizz's channel was impenetrable and I have said it's unwatchable. And but in the best way, everybody's family is impenetrable. Everybody's marriage is impenetrable. If you're if you're sitting with a particularly unhappy couple, it can take you a very long time to actually they'll tell you what they're unhappy about. But why are they unhappy? It takes a ton of time. Because we're all impenetrable and really good communities are impenetrable. Now, Grizz is sort of smiling and then Grizz is about to say something really profound. He loves that. He's now probably the theme. There'll probably be the theme of his next live stream. When you figure it out for yourself, it's yours right there. And so it was said in the Justin Christian Pete podcast talking about Martin Shaw. Why? Good storytellers hide the gold, but they leave you enough hints to find the gold. I do this with training the dog all the time, because if it's too easy, we get bored. And what did Grizz just say right there? If you find it, it's yours. And that doesn't mean that everybody should watch Grim Grizz's channel. Grim Grizz's channel is full of gaming stuff, insider stuff, Dungeons and Dragons talk. They have savings throws. They have Harry Potter language. There's a generational aspect to Grim Grizz that I can't penetrate because I'm too old. But at the same time, once you find it, it's yours. And that's a trigger in this. And this is behind Jesus parables. It's behind good storytelling. It's behind all of this. And it's behind all of this that don't say it plain, speak in parables, because when they find it, it's theirs and they won't forget it. Because if you just tell them, they will forget it. And so that's part of the genius of it. Little bit more background. Again, part of what we are seeing in this conversation is her. So when Claire is coming into the corner and doing these talks, and again, contact Gris, or rather contract Chad or Sourdough Neal. If you want to talk to her, she's very interested in talking to the women of the corner because, of course, you know, that's, you know, and so you women who want to talk to her. And it doesn't have to be recorded. I mean, she's writing things down. She's taking notes. She's studying us. It's been five years. I got the sense that it seemed like the culture at large had been becoming more and more susceptible to enchantment, which I think is a good thing. So I started noticing people are becoming more interested in spiritual matters, whether it would be whatever. I don't care what side of the whatever, but they seem to have spiritual questions. And I often wondered, well, is it actually that that's what's happening? Or is it just because I'm in recovery and constantly talking about God and all this stuff that I'm having this blue car effect where I, you know, you constantly see blue cars when you have a blue car. So. So the question is, is something like. I want to know what you're experiencing upon as somebody who's who's newly tripped over this space. I want to know what that's like, because I don't know what it's like to trip over this space. Because by the time I got here, like there wasn't all there was a PBK. So I don't know what it's like to trip over this space. Exactly. I can tell you what I. Now, this this was very helpful because, again, you know, when I when the channel started going, people like, well, start Eclipse channel. It's like. Part of what fueled Peterson was. Sort of a hive mind dynamic that Peterson. Probably didn't know what his good stuff was, and still it started coming back to him. And so people all over the Internet were making clips channel of Peterson and Peterson was smart enough to the stupidest channels out there are the ones that are restricting the clipping. It's like, no, I mean, if someone's just reposting as a whole, no, but if someone's commenting on it or messing around with it or doing something to it, they are adding value to it. So one of the one of the genius things Peterson did early on was let the clips fly. Now, YouTube. YouTube is running a very dangerous game for itself because I just got a video YouTube in the studio area always promotes these videos. Help me be a better content creator. But what's happening right now is the last thing we need are content creators. And the best way to colonize this platform is with real people, which is what it was supposed to be about anyway. But again, it's the same dynamics with the conference. It's it's you've got it. You've got to keep the hierarchies in mind. You can't just say, I hate hierarchies. OK, you go yell at a field all by yourself. No, you've got to work these tensions and and competency is always working these irresolvable tensions, these wicked problems. And that, in fact, is the generation of wisdom. So so Peterson let the clips fly. And so then when I started, it's like, no, I'm I'm going to wait until people start playing with my stuff. And part of the desire to do Randall's conversations was just simply feedback because feedback in church is horrible. And so it's so funny when MJ is like, I wonder if the pastor is doing surveys. Now, a lot of the feedback I have to discern just by watching. And that's difficult because I've got this little camera up there now with this live stream. I've gotten better. I can kind of keep an eye on the live stream as we go on the on the chats. But feedback is very difficult. And so what's interesting about this is just what what we've seen is just like I sort of talked about waves of the Jordan Peterson phenomena. We're seeing waves of the corner and a new wave kicked off about four years ago. With these new kinds of channels and a rush of new channels and a rush of people kind of coming in and doing different things. And that way was different from, let's say, the wave that had the meaning code and transfigured and and some of these other and Randall's United. So we're seeing a maturing. We're seeing a different wave come in. And again, with every one of these waves, there are always tradeoffs. There are wins and losses. It's the same with sort of the the bridges of meaning Discord server, you know, four years ago or so. So there's no going back and there's always tradeoffs. And so then as you evolve, you try to sort of maximize the cost of the tradeoffs. I'll tell you what my experience is like now. Excuse me. But I imagine my experience with tripping over I didn't get to trip over this little corner of the Internet. You know what I'm saying? I got I tripped over Paul VanderKlay and Jordan Peterson and, you know, Joe Rogan. That's you know, what do you mean by that is like in the early days, you know, you know, you're not going to get to the bottom of the world. And what do you mean by that is like in the early days, people were coming around because they kind of came through Paul. And so there weren't all these other people with all these YouTube channels. So everyone kind of would like watch Paul's video today or they might watch Peugeot or Peterson video. So there was this there was this smaller amount of content and then everyone would kind of was kind of like, you know, like, is there were probably maybe only two videos out that were kind of part of the quarter. So that day would be a lot easier to like just watch a couple of those videos. And then what was really cool is because everyone it's kind of like when I'm old enough to remember when there were only four channels pre cable, everyone watched the same thing. So when you went to school, like when Michael Jackson did the moonwalk first time live on the Motown Live or whatever, we were off at school. You see that? Yeah, I thought that was amazing. Like everyone watched Michael Jackson. Oh, boy, did I mess up. Live on TV. So there was this since when you first came, it was a lot smaller. And then there were always there were people doing something. And now you have all which, by the way, it's great. Now you have all these people and all these different channels and this stuff is just kind of exploded out. So to try and come in and get your head around Grim and then what's this? Who's this guy in this Ladoochador mask? Like this is crazy. What's going on with that? And then we got Paul. We got all these other sort of people. People are doing these just chattings like what is this? And so kind of put a fine point on that. It is a it is a lot to take in right now. Well, the closest I have to tripping over the corner is right after that whole thing where Paul VanderKlay was doing his commentary on the Jordan Peterson, John the Peugeot conversation. This channel called Randall's United. They also did a conversation. And that but like so they had a whole bunch of videos, but I never heard of any. I never knew what that was. And I'm watching these guys. I'm thinking like who do these guys think they are? Like like and also who the hell are they? And then Randall's United were bridges of meaning. Discord members. Yes, I love I love it. Who these guys think they are? I mean, Chad earlier in the video says I came across VanderKlay and I thought he's just a grifter on Peterson. So click away. And then of course Peterson went away and he's looking for more content. And then he listened and is like, oh, and then he emailed me and then I wrote him back. And you know, here we are. So who do these people think they are? And by the way, who are they? We'd have conversations and then it would be posted on because Paul called it Randall's Conversations. Right. I have to give credit to Cassidy. Cassidy was the one who named the Randall's. So the Randall's United became where these individuals started doing these conversations and recording them and then uploading it to the Randall's United. Yeah. And those were they are still very good. There's I think there's almost 700 videos over there and they are fantastic. Clara, you have no idea how much work you walked into. You are not going to be lacking for resources. I was very inspired by that concept of posting of anybody can post videos on that channel. I was inspired by that to do that here, too. So that's the other thing we're always we're always kind of like, you know, it's like trading ideas and in like all of my production on this channel now. Almost all of it is inspired by the grim gris is virtually not alone. I mean, things like this, you know, no, we don't do that. Things like that. That's something that, you know, just excuse me. I have all this stuff is inspired. We've all inspired each other in some way or influence each other to pick up these little tools and use this. So it's very cool. It's I like to call it like this is play. We're playing, but it's a serious deal, too. So, OK, now the question is, as somebody who is newly found this, like what what is your experience like? What are you seeing? Wow. Yeah. So I have to I have to have to confess here. Salad O'Neill told me about all this stuff like over two years ago. He's like, yeah, you're kind of doing what they're doing. And I said, this is a lot like there's so much I started looking up Jonathan Peugeot and Jordan Peterson and all these people. And I'm like, it's just I didn't quite understand the significance of what was happening. Let me know, Neil, if you want to say something. No, keep keep going. I got plenty of understand like sort of the meaning that if you sit in and sort of listen to some of the content, you're like, wow, these people are really kind of cultivating this. You know, this really rich, really rich. And then I guess you got T-Grab on there and you're kind of like, he's a scapegoat. OK, sorry, man. We've all been there. And you got people saying we've all been there. We've all been there. So I don't know. I don't know, because like like the last time I was kind of tuned into this world was probably, you know, mid 2010s. Right. When you had Chris Hitchens and you had the new atheist Sam Harris, you had Richard Dawkins, these people kind and Daniel Dutt kind of like jerks. But now you've got all of this pushback. And I mean, that's how I see it. You kind of you get all of these people really sort of coming into this rich and meaningful conversation after not maybe not being satisfied by that. And then maybe a whole lot going on that I just haven't figured out yet and don't know what's happening. So I think I'm missing a lot. I found it fascinating that she connected it with the new atheists, which, of course, is what Justin Briarly is doing now. That that that better be you, Gavin, behind that cat or I'm booting you out. I'll tell you that right now. Can you hear my voice? Oh, gosh. What have I opened myself up for? I can change it. I can go off the. No, as long as I because because because, you know, I don't want any any you know how things can happen on the Internet. That's that's part of the reason that we we don't do anonymous. But anyway, I'll change it. Nice to meet you, P.V.K. That's pretty good. I think actually I think it's a lot more simple than like it's this is what's interesting about it for me. This is why yesterday I was thinking about. So so I woke up yesterday, I was just like just a funk. I was not in a good mood. I was feeling I love this part of the video disconnected. Part of it has to do with I for last probably month and a half. I it was the weather was really cold and I can make up excuses, but I stepped away from my daily practice of walking the dogs and and during my dog during my dog walk. I was doing some different prayers and stuff like that that were really helpful. And and it's just so weird how something so simple can just get me connected. Well, I wasn't doing it and slow. And and so I'm coasting the problem coasting is you're always going downhill when you coast. First of all, the great thing is spiritual disciplines are wonderful if you do them. And the second thing is that great a that great a affirm that's just so typical a you only coast downhill. I love it. So if you guys want to talk or make a point, just raise your hand and I'll pause. So I'm coasting along and. And I just you know I'm I'm I'm naturally a discontented person like I'm just a malcontent. And so what ends up happening is I'm just feeling a little disconnected and yesterday morning. It's kind of like I was just woke up and I'm just like God damn it, dude. I got a momentary lapse of nihilism, you know, and. And it comes and goes. That's where now here's where faith is. I know that's just going to show up and like I know I can get out of it and it's not a big deal. But it doesn't mean I can't stop myself from feeling. So I wake up, I get up, I call Gavin. We're doing our morning thing. I even tell him by the end of that. I just feel like shit. And I don't know. And he doesn't try and fix me or anything like that. And then he just is up there, you know. And then I get to work. I'm working. And on comes Luke Thompson on the Grail Country stream. And it's pretty cool. And then, you know, that's always a really nice thing to listen to. I love Luke and I often talk to Luke in my. Again, these are we are women at the stream. We are men harvesting and crap. I got to go. I got to go put up that barn, but we're going to put up that barn with each other. And we get there and we lift each other out of our individual funk. Private time and stuff like that, too. And then, you know, Gavin starts telling his story on there. I'm like, oh, this is really cool and stuff. And then and then Grim Grizz show comes on. And all the while I'm tiling this bathroom and Grim Grizz show comes on. And it's a hilarious show. And I get to look engaged a little bit in the hive mind, which is the comments section in case people don't know that. That's the live chat comments, comments sections, the hive mind is a great show. And then I'm like, oh, shit, Neal's got a conversation that's got released with Alan. So I on the channel, I'm going to listen to that. So I've listened to it and I'm listening to it. I'm like, this is such a really good conversation. It's like really good. And then like and part of what's happening is we're not listening to the big channels anymore. I listen to big channels if some of you talk about it or send it to me or share it on your little channel. Otherwise, I'm listening that that's these are the famous five hundred, you know, the famous five milers here. And because I value what you have to say. Yeah, it's good to meet you, Neil, Neil. And I haven't even, you know, really, I got to have Neil on for a conversation because Neil, you what you've been doing on Chad's channel is just amazing. I regularly I see your insights and it's like, wow, because that's why you've been showing up in videos. But I haven't even had much time to make it. So thanks for being here, Neil. I've learned a lot from you. You're not my Internet pastor, but I've learned a lot from you. So and it's pleasure to meet you. And yeah, it's it's been a pleasure slowly, gradually, steadily coming out of the lurk. And I would say I now have two or three people that I would consider not only friends, but friends that probably know me close to as well as, you know, not the innermost ring of people in my life, but probably that second ring. And so I have two or three people in this space now that know me that well. And is that all illusory because it's all virtual? We're going to find out. But I don't think so. So, yeah, yeah. Did you want to say something, Cal? You unmuted. No, I'm just happy to be here. All right. Right after that. After that, Christian Baxter, this new this new baller comes up and he releases a conversation with Mike Plata, who I have who I have scheduled in the next month to have a conversation with. So I'm like, I'm going to listen to have these guys talk and holy shit. Mike Plata is outstanding. I'm like, wow. And while all this is happening. I just think. How did this happen? Like, how do people. How did we get to be? How did we get to have this? Like, we don't understand. And maybe I'm being dramatic, but I don't think we understand. How the potential that's that's sitting here. I don't think we do. You know, I've spent the last 10 years coming up on 10 years of sobriety. I've spent a good portion of that studying the history of alcoholics and I love alcoholics and I've often wondered what it would have been like to be those to be those guys who who helped found be the founders of AA. And I think I've fought that for a very long time and fascinated about how how cool it had been to be these two drunk sacks and help me stumble over this thing and then watch something grow before your very eyes. And then, and then here. I'm listening to my friends. I had every one of these guys phone numbers. These guys, and they are just like, enjoying their time having meaningful conversations and I think maybe it felt like this. Maybe it maybe Bill and Bob and those early AA or old timers or those early guys. Maybe it felt like this. So I don't think we understand the potential. Now, I could be, I could be speaking out of my ass and just be really dramatic. But I don't think that that's the case because if this was just some fly by night bullshit. It would have died a long time ago. What I think it's that that to me was a holy moment. That was a holy moment. You needed your savings throws against it. You needed the heart savings. Pulling out my heart. I don't know you got any I got another clip to play but anybody want to say something about that clip. I would say I guess I've never quite admitted maybe how therapeutic it all is because I'm deeply suspect of therapy or the therapeutic just unless it comes along as a secondary effect of something that I'm doing as meaningful. I touched on that earlier. I forget who was saying it or Lance was saying it. It is therapeutic. We are doing this. That we human beings have a bent towards our healing and our destruction. It's we have them both. But and I think the reason why when you think of the things that give you that feeling like hanging out with your friends, right? You know, doing something else right that you know, let's say that you and your friends go out fishing or something like that. It's the fun. I mean, yeah, there's the fishing and if the fishing goes well, it's fun or it's but that's that's almost like the pretense that you need in order to like be with one another. You know, what is the what is the the stereotype is that, you know, women do this sort of face to face friendship and men do, you know, shoulder to shoulder side by side friendship and which makes this is an interesting phenomena given the fact that we sort of do this weird virtual face to face stuff. Yeah, yeah. So no one told you it was going to be this way. Your wife's a joke. You're broke. You watch YouTube all day. Pastor Paul Van de Klay, you have yet to address your that you've been challenged in the April 1st April Fool's Conversation Cage match. You think you're man enough? I do. And I like your commitment to the match at this time, sir. I will I will meet you. I will meet you on the 1st of April. Grim Grizz. I will I will meet you and you will never forget. Legendary. Will you meet us both? I will I will meet anyone you want to bring into that arena. I got to turn that mustache upside down. Turn that frown upside down. You got to turn. And as a final bit of accountability stalking, I've been teased that there was going to be a Defense Against the Dark Arts conversation recorded or not between Kale and Paul Van de Klay. It's on the schedule. All right. It's on the schedule. He's hard to get into, Grim. I don't know if you know this or not. He filled this he filled this whole thing with randos and then bore the burden because he was so blazed. Can we can we like get first of all, stop singing to us from a different branch. You know, this is our branch and that's your branch. We got to keep the branches separate. So can we get a different I don't I think I need another layer, you know, not just we've got sort of like the big accounts as you like to say, Paul. And you've got the randos. But like, what about like, I don't have any subs because I don't do my show. So like, is there some sort of in between thing that we can get here? I need status, man. I need some status. You need him to lend you some agency. I think I think that's how Grimger is put it at one point. See, that's one of the regrets about my performance at the summit is I didn't walk away with the daily wire contract. But we have to imagine we have to put ourselves in the situation where like if the daily wire sends staff and a budget, what would they send? What would they use? How would they work it? Like if we were working with CAA instead of a parallel to CAA, how would we be doing things? And I think that we're at that point. We've become self-reparational enough to permanently exist. What if people were just volunteering out of the goodness of their heart to work with you, Grim? And what if they just gave you the things that you needed without expecting payment in return? What if that was possible? Wouldn't that be? That I don't have the knowledge of the structure of the positions that they filled and what they would do. I know we need a storyboarder and like I can see some of the positions, but like I love the official professionals, what positions they have. So I can mock their structure. You need Paul to ask for the org chart. Paul, you need to ask them for the org chart. Daily Wire folks, please send us your organizational chart. They can knock out the mains. We don't need to know the people, just the structure of the thing. I want to know if they signed you for Daily Wire, would I stop watching you too? Well, who stitches the nostrils. Clip it, clip it and press it. I haven't had the opportunity to sell out yet, but I'll let you all know as soon as I do on behalf of the sacred order of foolish transparency. All right. Well, I see the assassins have failed. One more clip. Jonathan Peugeot, Jordan Peterson talk about this stuff all the time. It's like what you attend to, like what you what you focus on, like is going to manifest itself in your life. So if you're out there consuming all this junk that's out there, you know, I mean, you you take on this sort of thing and to be able to just participate in here, these conversations, which are so unique. Right. And then people ask like, again, they ask really hard questions. People are willing to think out loud, you know, and you're sitting back there like, oh, my gosh, I've always thought about that. I didn't have the guts to ask her or whatever. Anybody talk about that with or whatever. There's this it's it's it's it's to me. It's almost like a Chad talk about it's like it's counter program. And kind of that's how it's worked for me a little bit in that I'm not getting sucked up into this other thing. And when I have time and there's been peaks like I've had time, I've had more time to focus and other times I'm super busy where I just can't keep up at all. Like that was for a few months where I just couldn't really I watched very little or whatever and was kind of a little bit involved with it. But when I actually am participating more and listening more and being a part of this community, like my spiritual life is better, like spiritually. I'm I'm a I'm a better person. It reminds me of these things that can get me into action in terms of practices and so on and so forth. And Bernardo Castro had this amazing book called The Is It The Mass Formation Psychosis or whatever. Anyway, he's talking about like what's going on right now is that what we need to do is we just need to speak. And really what we're putting out our beacons of light and people will find their way here. And I think people come here for a lot of different reasons. But if you really want to kind of come down when you think about let's just take the Christian angle. Jonathan Pagio is clearly talking about Christian things in terms of a symbolic way and so on and so forth. Jordan Peterson really started to kick off. He had a biblical series and he's contemplating all the hairy big hairy questions about God and so on and so forth. Right. In Catholic Genesis and then he had his Exodus thing like that's what he's obviously we're here because there's a pastor in Sacramento named Paul Vanderklee, who's clearly a Christian man. Right. So even atheists or people who deconstructed or people who had left the church and been hurt by the church or whatever. All sorts of where people come in and maybe they're struggling in some aspect or you know or maybe they are Christian, whatever it is. There absolutely is a Christian element to this. Our desire is that like if T. Brog won't like I don't know if he first showed up like everyone because he was in the comments, you know, making a lot of comments. Many finally showed up on the screen and literally people were cheering and Grim highlighted this like when he finally came up and showed up on the screen because we Paul jokes is that we're running out of atheists. There's two reasons why we're running out of atheists. We're running out of atheists because a lot of the atheists come in atheists and all of a sudden they find themselves going to church. So there's that problem. The atheists are becoming Christians when they come in the school. And then the other thing is, is like certain folks, if, because we don't, we don't play if you're, if it's just, you won't come in and, and, and be able to have some sort of open minded communication eventually this going to frustrate you if you just keep wanting to do this, this, this, and we're kind of like, we get it. But were you open to saying this? No, this, this, this, you know, at some point that becomes here. And yet you'll see someone like, like Grim, and he's like he said, I mean, he wouldn't identify like that. I think he's on his new thing. But I think Grim's still on his journey. I think that he says that pretty explicitly, you know, for some of the stuff and he's still on his journey. And so, you know, there definitely is there there absolutely is the Christian. And again, if you're going to come through Paul Pastor, Pastor Vanaclay's, you're watching his YouTube channel. He's talking, you know, he has Sunday morning service, he's living still, he's talking, he was always talking about that. People are asking questions and he's talking about Christianity in this really interesting cultural monologue way. And it's incredible how he kind of paints this stuff around that. So there definitely is that draw that I think even if people don't realize that there's there's something about this Christianity that I think people are trying to figure out when they come into it. Would you think that's fair, Chad? Yeah, I think, I think. Yeah, like the. All right, that's my clip. That's that's all the clips I had lined up. So have we frightened Tigra away? Could be all the attention at this point? Could be. But one of the things you get used to as a pastor is people leave and then a few of them come back. You know, there's a story about ten lepers. Jesus heals them all. One comes back and you know, there is we we have so much the mind of a machine. And when Jesus is talking about this stuff, it's like this is how the world works. So we'll see. We'll see. I think Chad, when he was talking about the practices, like I've heard I've heard like Grimgrove talk about, I guess there's a branding where there's a, you know, something about self control. But our environment and our practices are so powerful, like we change our environment or change our routines and our practices and it looks like self control. You know, it looks like all of a sudden your mind starts working different. So I thought that was really interesting about the clip you showed. And I guess we're kind of doing that as well. Right. That's we're doing a practice of some kind instead of watching the nasty thing on Netflix that Kel mentioned at one point. Well, in Lance's comment, I mean, people are all the attention is about people deconstructing from religion and no longer going to church. Where's all the attention about people deconstructing from the political grift? I mean, there's a I mean, 2015 hit and it's like, I'm done. I'm done with the Church of Politics. I am just done. I don't want to have anything to do with any of you people anymore. And I might be subject to you, but boy, I'll tell you, I'm just done. And we don't see that because we don't leave the country. But people do leave church. Well, I think I think it's getting more and more boring with time. And that comforts me a lot. And I think I think one thing we stumbled upon here because I didn't realize this until I actually got involved. But I think Luke put out this idea initially. But what we stumbled upon here is we we are deciding to treat people as more important than ideas. That's what it seems to me. And I don't I don't see any other space on the Internet. Well, a good church does that. A good church says, gather them in. We're going to sort them out later. Gather them in and let's see what we can do. That's a good church. But we seem to be doing that. We seem to be gathering them in. People want to participate in that spirit. Yeah, so I've been thinking a lot about that, you know, the sort of the big tent model, Neil, you know, that why are we, you know, Paul, you know, I've been diving back into reformations as you were sort of talking about it last week, I think, and just going into it. And it's it's really sad. You know, it's profoundly sad. And I think we talked about this before, maybe Neil and you and we've talked about it, Paul. But, you know, the Christian was sort of talking about the walls are being kind of dissolved and brought down for a variety of different reasons, interdenominational and others. Hey, Luke. And, you know, you know, you go back and there's a reason why everybody dates the this like roughly 500 year period, right? Because, you know, you know, you're confronted with all the radical changes and explosions that happen between roughly 1475 and 1550 or, you know, whatever. It's like hundreds of years and it everybody, you know, everybody gets supercharged and puts knives and swords to each other's throats. It's like, what do you believe? What do you believe? What do you believe? You know, and it's kind of a question that is utterly just dumb, frankly, you know, broadly understood, you know, 100 years prior to that. And and so we this little corner for almost gives us maybe an experience of what would it be like if we didn't have the Inquisitor breathing down our neck? You know, what would what would it feel like if we didn't have the prince telling us what we have to believe because we live in a certain zip code? You know, what would it be like if I you know what? Like, you know, I jokingly say this all the time, but I really do mean it. Like we're all heretics, lol. And, you know, you know, yuck, yuck, yuck. So say we all right. And it's OK to sort of say that in now in a way that it wasn't OK to say that five years ago. You know, maybe the exhaustion you said, you know, the boredom with post 2016. It's like definitely not 600 years ago. Right. Right. Right. So I don't know, you know, in Paul, do you do you feel like this is heralding a new era in which a lot of those sort of drawn swords are being put down, you know, like put back in the scabbard or I don't know. Jan Hus, that didn't go so well. No, I know. No, you just don't know. So, you know, one of the beauty of the book reformations is he nicely shows that the Protestant Reformation was one expression of a far broader thing that was happening all over Western Europe. And then it it got expressed in many dimensions, some within the Roman Catholic Church and some outside the Roman Catholic Church. And it had deep ramifications, although all the way along. Even outside. You see, I mean, I think the point that he's making is that all of this is happening, you know, you know, it's almost like Luther comes in just sort of presses the button to say, yeah, like unity is not real. You know, this sort of this de facto sense of universal like we're really universal because, you know, and that's what I mean about the sadness. Right. That that, you know, it's almost like pointing out the father's nakedness. You know, it's just sort of this you can't like what you say it. You can't like unsay it. You know, and so there was there was no such thing as outside. You know, unless you excommunicated like actually like that meant way more than just like. I have a different idea. You know, the whole idea of banishment is is is is it's real, you know, but it's not for us. You know, I don't know. Being incommunicative polities. Good. Welcome, Caleb. Hey, man. Oh, Luke is made in the parents of P.M. You told me to. I'm here. Oh, man. Oh, man. I. You know, I think. That part of what's difficult is that there's so much going on at once and there always is. And we are we are an expression. We are definitely an expression of our time right now and of the technological disruption. But I think we can at least at this point up until this point, we've been a fairly sweet expression of it. I kind of want to prompt Luke like as Cal was talking, I was thinking I was thinking of a thought that maybe Lucas and Luke hopped in and it's like, you know, I was reminded of a testimony with a lady who had a backslide and she ended up, you know, at these music festivals. She meets with someone, you know, 10 years later, she's bringing four people to Jesus. Right. So it's like if you look at history through that, the kind of wider view, you know, something like a reformation and terrible things happening can can play into a bigger picture. That's beautiful. I think Lucas said things like that. I mean, it's a very Chinese farmer thing, or it's a that really reminds me of this. There's a character in that book that I just read Little Big who goes through this major heartbreak where this woman ends up leaving him and he ends up like a drunk and he's on the street for a long time. And he goes through this long period and kind of comes out of it. And there's a section in there. I can't remember exactly how the author says it, but he he had kind of a he said he learned through his period of drunkenness and being on the street that he just got used to people staring at him and he didn't really care what people thought. And so he learned these skills through just being a social reject that allowed him then later to be doing things and and and to have gifts that he would have never had otherwise. And so I'm glad the Lord is giving you books that help you understand me better. So, I mean, there's a, you know, that that really is a lot of work. So, I mean, there's a, you know, that that really is like it's that's my meditation of layers. Everything's a gift if you receive it as a gift. And so and deconstruction isn't bad, like to deconstruct from a from a false idol and a conception of God. I mean, great. May we may we all deconstruct when you're in it. It's sad. It's sad. Like to Kels point, like there's a sadness when you're in it. But, you know, from a in hindsight things you might actually see that it was good or very well. And there's losses of community and all that kind of stuff. But what if we develop what if community evolves to the point where people going through that process then aren't rejected by the community? Like, well, in that vein, in that vein, let's acknowledge that Caleb and John Adams and have joined the stream. Caleb first was so hello. Say things maybe actually. Hello, people. Can you hear me all right? Real quick. So, yeah, actually, I was wondering. Actually, I probably should let John introduce himself before I make a comment. Just say hello first. Hello. Perfect. OK, great. I was going to say I was wondering if deconstruction is actually typically necessary, though, because I know before this is maybe just well, for instance, I don't think I've gone through a particular and maybe I have to particularly dramatic deconstruction in the right. I think that kind of just built on top of each other over time and there are instances in which I had discovered, oh, this belief wasn't strong enough to build on, but I didn't necessarily have to deconstruct that kind of, you know, torn down what was not necessary. And just it's not like a deconstruction as such. It's more like just the building on top of. I don't think everybody goes through it. I'm reminded of doubting Thomas, you know, Christ says, blessed are those who believe without seeing, whereas doubting Thomas clearly had a deconstruction of some kind. We don't know. You know, we don't know the details of that. But I think to some of us, it's necessary and others, you know, blessed are you who simply are able to believe it's a beautiful thing when it happens. Yeah, but I think this space in general is made up of a lot of people who were in the darkness and at least believe there is a light. They might not have found the light yet, but they like they believe that there's a light. OK, well, I never deconstructed that way because I don't I don't even know. I don't even know what it would be like to not believe in God. I mean, I can't even I can't wrap my head around it at all, you know, which has troubled me a little bit sometimes. But but I've sure gone through doubting certain doctrines and faith and rethinking them and learning new things. But I don't that's just of course, like I just can't imagine not doing that. I wonder because there was a period in time which I could I felt I couldn't properly construct my beliefs. And so I had end up doing the sort of equivalence revolution, the revolution of thinking equivalent to deconstruction for me. That wasn't necessarily learning, like having to deconstruct and then build up again, but learning that I could build up to begin with. I wonder if there's something at least something like that that's necessary, necessary in my own case, obviously. But I'm. There is. Drag is in the house. Oh, T. Greg, I'd really like to have a one on one conversation with you and we could talk about the stock market and the random walk down Wall Street and why the stock market is an approximation of the real value of companies, which is an approximation of this space, the real value of what's being done in this space. Anyway, we can have. And you've been challenged to an April Fool's Conversation Cage match moderated by me with one Saul Ron Copperman. So we're waiting for your acceptance of that challenge much as possible. Vandekle accepted my April Fool's Conversation Cage match challenge earlier in this stream. I think it's officially the hot girl in the corner right now. He still is. Take it back. Take it back. I want to hear from John Adamson. I guess. It's hard to. Paradox is everywhere. And I have the hardest time wrapping my head around. Luke said he couldn't understand the universe without. Well, I've lived much of my life in that universe. And I wasn't most of that time. Not a materialist. So I didn't go into the whole science is God thing. In fact, I think that's a little bit shallow. But. It's the first two commandments. How do you stay sane? For instance. Are we going to have memory in heaven? Are we going to remember all the people that we loved? That we love because we were commanded to love. Then are now in hell. And love the God that set up. The system. Which eventually to that. And I'm. Am I. I don't know. God is merciful. But God is just. And. And yet. I was. I was just saying. I saw Jordan Peterson. A couple of weeks ago. And he said it before, but. Really hit me hard that. Just because. You haven't done things to. People that that are vicious and. Corrupt. Doesn't mean that you're not capable of it. It just might mean. You were just too weak. To exercise it. In other words. I deserve to burn in hell. Right. And it comes to the. The children of Israel. It was a covenant with God. But God. Adds you. Had to uphold both sides of that covenant. Because. God is the only one. That is perfect and holy and able to. Hold up the covenant. All we can do. Is. Take the gift from God. And believe. I'm going to make. I get any feedback from anybody. Make past the Paul go first. Yeah, yeah, this is mostly to Paul. Sorry. You're. I get plus four. Corn top. I didn't. Did I see it? Did I see an emoji? Just plus two. Just plus two. I often I often listen. John. Like if you if it were just you and I in your room I would I would be listening. And this is why. This is why we need in real life pastors because and why we do randos conversations because. To know the the contours of your. Struggle. Requires more context. He gave us mostly the. The theological language. But that's that's that's pretty generic. And the. Part of. You know, I also had some pretty good answers recently about heaven and hell. Part of. We we we we have sort of been lured into ways of framing and thinking about the world. And our language has sort of fallen into those traps. You know, I and for years I've said, you know, heaven isn't Santa Barbara at hell is in Stockton. Now that place in California because people know Stockton in Santa Barbara. They're not simply places. That doesn't mean places isn't a part of it. But you know, you really have to lean into Jesus when he says ask and you will receive seeking you will find knock on the door will be open. And. You know, the amazing thing is that that doesn't mean. Magic. It does mean transformation. So I don't I don't know that I have I don't know. Similar to what. Similar to what Chad said when he so described something that many of us can identify with that you wake up in the morning, you're kind of feeling crappy. Crappy. Maybe you you have too much work on your plate. Maybe you had a fight with your wife or your spouse or your friend or something like that. And you go into work and we sort of need each other to to buoy one another in these moments because the moments aren't the life. Even though life is somehow made up of successive moments. So. It's often the case that I wish I had. A solution. I love that conversation. You're you're Zach. You're you're kind of you might might mute you. Or maybe it's you that's got me. Yeah, it could be. Oops. Welcome to live Internet. Yeah. Well, maybe it isn't you. The one I forget the name of the philosopher. Howlin, Jacob Howlin. He said every time I hear the word solution, I can't help but put final in front of it. That's pretty dark. It's dark, but there's a lot of truth to it. Because one of the things that I look at is. With all of our sort of magical thinking. The New Testament would look like a very different thing. Because you have the son of God. Talking to people. And most of them don't believe. What's with that? Now you have these passages where he's healing everybody from their illnesses. And he's very popular. But it comes right down to it on Easter Sunday morning. The only people there are some women who are looking to embalm a corpse. What's with that? There are these aspects to the gospel that resist solutions. And. What I so often find in my own life is that. The burdens that I'm given to bear. Are here to change me. In ways that I really don't want to be changed. So we wrestle with God. You know, I can and I saw I know so little of you, John, I can see the I can see the the oxygen. And then suddenly my mind fills up with, you know, two people in my church right now who are on oxygen. And I begin to assume things about you, which may or may not be true. And then I try to speak out of those framework. But that's why that's why we need to know and be known. And why videos don't work in the way that we think they should. Zach, would you bless it mute? You see a little bit, a little, little microphone with the there you go. You've done it correctly. Thank you very much. I don't think. John. The judge is way better than us. And you just got to put faith that you'll be judged fairly because you can burn yourself up worrying about your own status. And I don't know if he's there. He's he's this whole thing is way more beautiful than we could have ever imagined because we are limited in that way. And so seeking you should find trust the judge and it's probably way better than you thought. And that's that's sort of where I go to, because I don't worry about God not judging rightly, because if God doesn't judge a right, there's no point to anything. There is. There's no point. If God is evil, there's no point to any of this. We're just all screwed in ways that are unimaginably bad. And so I don't go there. And if God's justice is a mercy, then it's all good. Yeah. I would I mean, I guess where I would encourage you is most of the most of the ways that people can sleep of his hell. I don't think they're accurate at all. They're based on far side comics and not even on text, despite that people want them to believe on that they're based on text. They're not. Nobody knows what you what happens when you die, despite what they tell you. So like all that stuff is much ado about nothing. What if you're judged for worrying? You know, I mean, just none of that stuff you can even control. You know, you just got to. You know, as Frozen to says, as my wife likes to say, take the next right step. I have to end this stream because I got a dog that's got to eat lunch. So this is where we need the 24 hour TLC network. I don't know if anybody's going to keep the stream going. Does Alan does Alan get to say anything? No, Alan can definitely talk. Enough. Enough. No, I just I love the Aaron Ren conversation. And yeah, I guess. Yeah. One thing I was thinking about is like becoming a Christian and all this stuff is it really makes you realize how my my decision, like my current decision making is realizing that my. How bad my decision making is on my own. And I think a lot of the lost wisdom that we have and Aaron Renn sort of talks about this is it's not that he has the solutions, it's that there's a mechanism for getting better answers that I think there have been doors that have been closed. And, you know, I think the corner participates in that. But yeah, it's frustrating. I think his talk on dating culture is a good example of lost wisdom because people used to do things differently than we do now. All right, Sandy, what say you? Are you got on mute? I never watched these live streams because I'm not used to work. I'm sick. I'm sick. I mean, the VIX are hanging out in the case. I was trying to type some answers to. It sounded like it was. I don't know. I was listening to a discussion yesterday or the day before. You know, talking about some of the judgment things, I was putting a very choppy answer into the text part. You know, I can get down to 30 words. I have no idea exactly what was asked, but I've been thinking a week past burying my ex-husband from his fifth stroke. He was so scared he was going to be laying where he was for about 10 years and nine months was as long as he could tolerate. So I'm kind of. But the thing is, I started out by saying he was an amazing man. He was also the same person that he was, which was the reason that me and the kids left him. But I still say he's an amazing man. And that's one of the things that I was trying to say in the text was that, you know, we look at God's judgment and we look at God's mercy. And when we start, like, it really grabbed me what you said, Dawn, about. I can't remember. I wrote it in the things that comes from head cold. You know, we talk about ourselves being worthy of hell. And the discussion the other day is like we're talking about looking at how we put into all of our different cataclysm and things that have been made up over the different spirits and so. You know, unworthy we are. So therefore we need. But I don't think that really faith and belief are just about me. I think God made us because he wanted us. And the day by day, whatever we bring. I understand. I understand the ongoing things of asking for forgiveness. I understand the ongoing difficulty of giving forgiveness, asking for forgiveness and a gamut of that. Sometimes I think those are the real lessons. And it's not whether we deserve hell or heaven or whatever comes after. Are we making the most of what we're doing right here right now? What's the chances I'd be laying here today listening to this? I'm enjoying it, by the way. But it's the end of life is difficult. You know, you get to see a thousand people that you haven't seen for 10, 20, 30 years. And every one of those. Every one of those moments that you spent with them, whenever that was, those things come to life. God does that every day. You know, like what Paul was saying, sometimes people walk away and sometimes they come back. You never know. I couldn't predict who was going to show up on Wednesday. You know, I couldn't predict whether I was going to be able to say what I stood up to say. And basically, to sum total of what I think down to it. We went through a lot of crap, some really tough stuff. We did really well as parents with a disabled child, even though we screwed up a lot of it. And the real question that went from very beginning of our lives to end lives is do we deserve this? Why people so up? Why do I have friends? Why does anybody love me? Why does God love me? I think we're all always going to walk that out right up until the last moment. And no matter what we do with it, I'm kind of good with that because I kind of think that's the really important part. You know, is just walk it out. And I'm chronically surprised at the people that are willing to show up tough like this. Or the ones that, you know, I haven't talked to for six months who suddenly pop in a text line. Hey, how are you doing? I was just thinking about you. That's what we carry forward. That's what I carry forward. I'm hoping that's what my ex carried forward. He's still left going, I have no idea why God loves me. I would try and tell him. We can't tell each other, apparently, because we're trying. You know, somewhere inside we've just got to go, wow, isn't that strange? God loves me. What am I going to do about that? You know? I think that's a good place to land a plane. God loves me. Can't tell you why, especially some days. Thank you, Sandy. I hope you feel better. I hope being here has been helpful, John. Thank you for coming in. Thanks, Bob. And keep coming around. So I'm going to land the plane. I've got a little bit of branding. How's that sound? The city's the man who does the work. The city's the man who does the work. The city's the man who does the work. The city's the man who does the work. The city's the man who does the work. The city's the man who does the work. He's not walking the counsel of the wicked For us and in the way of sinners Or to sit in the seat of mockers But his delight is in the light of the Lord And on his lawn he meditates day and night He is like a tree planted by streams of water Which yields its fruit in season And whose leaf does not wither Everything he does prospers Not so the wicked They are like chaff that the wind blows away Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment Nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous For the Lord watches over them way of the righteous But the way of the wicked shall perish The Lord watches over them way of the righteous The Lord watches over them way of the righteous The Lord watches over them way of the righteous Blessed is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked Or stand in the way of sinners Or sits in the seat of mockers But his delight is in the light of the Lord And on his lawn he meditates Day and night He is like a tree planted by streams of water Which yields its fruit in season And whose leaf does not wither Everything he does prospers Not so the wicked They are like chaff that the wind blows away Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment Nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous For the Lord watches over them way of the righteous But the way of the wicked shall perish The Lord watches over them way of the righteous The Lord watches over them way of the righteous The Lord watches over them way of the righteous The Lord watches over them way of the righteous This fast freddy jeep milty at all That's my old name jeep The Lord watches over them way of the righteous The Lord watches over them way of the righteous The Lord watches over them way of the righteous