https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=H3IIlGUHyEc

 Got it. Got it. Well, here we are today, and I have with me a very special group of high status youtubers. Soon to be. Special. I wanted, and we'll get Chris, the cow and at some point. I'm going to actually have a one on one conversation coming up with him next week, but you all have, I wanted to give you guys some, a little bit more visibility, because I think you're all doing special work. And I, I wanted to I wanted to be a part of it so I said shoot, I'm going to jump oh we lost Mark already. Look at that. There was two Graham grises there for a second. That's what happened. The owls are not what they seem. I think the three of you make a very interesting combination. Because well well Mark does have his dragon up now has got all these crosses behind him on the whiteboard. And how to describe the other two I don't know but maybe maybe we'll start with, I want each of you to all of you have been on my channel and so you've all given me your story so we don't have to go there so much, but I want each of you to tell me a little bit about why you started a YouTube channel, and what you're doing with it. Anywhere you want. Well I'm the selfish one so I guess I'll go first. I started. Hi, my name is Chad, I'm alcoholic. I started the alcoholic, I started YouTube channel. Initially, I started the Bridges of Meaning hub channel, initially so that I could kind of try and serve the discord, the reason Bridges of Meaning discord server so I put a bunch of playlists together that had a bunch of different audio books that were kind of for free on YouTube. I had a bunch of different religions and I had like there's screw tape letters is on there there's, there's like philosophers and all this different stuff so I just tried to put something up there that would be accessible to somebody kind of like myself likes information. So that's like the nice reason why I did it. I think the real reason why I might have done it was so that I could try to get some attention and have a seat at the table, because I really wanted to talk about stuff with, with people especially some my experience around alcohol synonymous and try to be useful with what I found there and maybe bring what I took to the table. Good. And how have you felt about how it's gone so far. Oh, it's gone, it's gone a lot better than I thought it would. I mean, like, I'm not, I'm not really a comedian so I just did it. The videos the comedy videos like the news videos. That was, I started doing that so that I can actually try and get some traffic to the channel. And also just be goofy. And it turned out a lot better than I thought it would I mean I wouldn't consider myself a comedian, I'm a class clown certainly but I think it's fun, and it's nice to do some of the creative stuff with the editing and all that stuff. And then the other channel that I have is the Chad the alcoholic channel, that's where I get into the steps and stuff like that maybe some poetry and different things like that so that one doesn't have very much traffic at all but it's, it's been really cool and really fun to be a part of the scene and I really enjoy it. Cool. Cool. All right, who's next. Want me to go grab. All right, I'll go. That's a Brady bunch here. I know really, we all have different. We have different squares to don't we I bet. So, yeah, so I started my channel navigating patterns, because that sort of embodies what I think we need to do, which is navigate patterns right so it's about making sense and clarity in the world, and I cover models and I cover word definitions and so you know part of this I can blame on you Paul, because you run my life now, that's my theory about why weird different cities are happening puppet master indeed. Yes, so I'm a mere guinea pig. But, but it wouldn't one of the things that happened was, you know, john brviggy talked about cultural cognitive grammar, and it, I agree, it's a big deal and it's a problem, and he kind of puts back with the ancient Greeks which I think is absurd but whatever. If we were broken that long ago we wouldn't have lasted this long. I just, it's a logic thing I do. So, but I do think he has a point, I mean there's definitely a way and lots of other people, yes, since it was even just since I started my channel and it's not that old right have started to notice so there's Catherine broad ski on, she's a journalist. She's got a lot of stuff going on on Twitter and she talks about this all the time she's got a series of articles on sub stack about, you know, misuse of words like I'm going to be complete. Right, but I'm going deeper than that I'm going passwords into models of how people are thinking about things versus what they're saying because that's off. They're thinking one thing, they're talking about something else, and they're trying to convey yet So, I'm trying to disentangle a lot of that and get to the, get to the bottom of that, and also give you tools, you know to understand phenomena like conspiracy theories, which some of us may or may not be happy about it my, my recapitulation of conspiracies, and And things like that and I and I also do you know somewhat take requests from like the discord server and a lot of this is around the discord server right someone they're awakening from the meaning crisis discord server that also has a YouTube channel. And I was appearing on YouTube so we've got our own there's like three written our religion there's another religion videos that I'm in with Manuel and jewels and they're, they're excellent. Chris has been getting me so I talked to Chris yesterday, he just released that video today it's probably our best talk. It's fantastic. I mean I was like what is going on. This is so amazing. And Chris is so good like he's right out in front of me, and I'm just like, obviously he's so smart. He's so smart, you know and and I appeared with Mary Cohen a couple times and I've been on the And then we get another round on the meaning code just to finish out the the Jordan Peterson john for Vicky talk. I think that's seven parts, it's going to be eight parts something like that. Really. Right, right. And, and the first talk I had with her I had right after I had my first talk with you. And we talked about the four P's model which has since been changed so you know I got used to this sort of thing, and it's like oh well I can do this like you know and I got some I got a fancy mic and I get a relatively high end webcam it's still a webcam it's not this nice Sony whatever you keep talking about but because I priced that I'm like oh yeah that's definitely. I'll set you back a little bit. So, so yeah, you know I'm trying to help to address some of these issues that I think john for Vicky has very correct, as opposed to maybe some of the things like written are that I think he is very wrong. So, that, that's basically the story there, not now you've got no more time Graham, now you have to cough it up. Sorry. Would you repeat the question. I must say, I'm going to confess it here that, you know hierarchies of an are inevitable and of the three of you. I've kind of become a little addicted to Grimm's channel. Just when I click on that video, I really don't know what I'm going to see. And this, this thing that I get nightmares about that that's I heard him say, I think I was watching his talk with you and he said something about, I have now I have a dragon at my door. And I was like, okay I said that mean stuff about those thumbnails I have to I have to make amends for the first slamming whoever came up with the Spider-Man thumbnails on that show. And so I thought I would make amends for that by humiliating myself by being the dragon at Mark's door as I debunked his obfuscation this attempt at coming at conspiracy theorists. Well, so you and I had a nice you and I had a nice conversation a while back now, Graham, and you're, you're doing some really funky stuff with your channel what what are you doing on YouTube, at least as long as they allow you here. Well, true. Well as everyone who's watched our previous conversation, you can search for on Paul's channel is like double bastard latch key fella. I, my holy quest remains the same to tear down the fourth wall. The, the black screen programming to hijack the campfire circuit and been regularly scheduling regularly scheduling programming my everyone around me, and like I see like otherwise brilliant mind swept up in such trivial fighting and in fact it's, I see through it and I can't it's Cassandra I have a Cassandra complex, as they say it. And now, now I'm in the populace that's being swept up and the pop dehumined for our lack of obedience. And so I have to scream as loud and true as I can while I can. And part of which is training and army of lobster monkeys of the, of the army of the 12 monkeys variety. There's there's people trapped in video game realities, and like everything here on YouTube. Like what we're doing, and I hope you see it on some level especially is mission work. Because we are, we are, we have comfort to otherwise lonely people like to quote tears in the rain I've seen things you people would not believe, such as people who live stream themselves to 16 other people like them sleeping, because everyone out here is so alone. Yeah. And, you know, and when they're not alone they're trapped in in the VR world that Facebook is now opening the door to. And you're going to lose your children to it if you don't support paintball for Jesus people. I don't know how to say this on the other way. And so that's what I'm doing on YouTube now. And you're recognizing the third low where the third low quartet. And you're part of it is you're like the base stem. I suppose, and like, hey, I'm going to think publicly this is me thinking, play along be my consciousness Congress. And like you noticed when I pointed out hey you're missing the shadow matriarchy. And the part about where it says the rats lose the ability to care to train their young to care for young. And what happens after that, and I saw you use the word atomized and you so you're seeing that now and I'm like, who is like for Cassandra's like people like with an audience seeing things like Jordan Peterson seeing that like they're putting words in your mouth now. They're telling you to call them God. And I did that and stood up and then you know, caught a book tour wave ended up in a coma in Russia. We're coming for you Papa, we're coming. The belly of the whale for sure. Right. Yeah, it's great. Go watch your go stare at your Mandela and listen to the Jupiter song again. Pajos going back to Jupiter, who lives in Jupiter. Chad save us please spin the spin the heads. Hey, Jordan Peterson. This morning, I actually watched a brand new part of a brand new live lecture that he just put on over and I don't know the town that he was in but it was just, it's like, it's probably some illegal recording from the from inside the theater, but it was really good there's some good stuff in there. I don't know about the Peterson stuff pretty much but he, you know, it's talking about free speech and then he talked about. He had this cool little bit in there about music and the layers of music and how, you know, to, you know, all this other Peter Sonny and jargon, but it's, I still love it, man. I don't live my life, exactly by it because a lot of it to me is so propelled self help stuff and I don't think that that really works very well for somebody like me. I need to rely on more of a loving service towards others model. And because this is my one of my greatest beefs I think about all this stuff and it might be related to what you're talking about, you're in with some of the black screen whatever it's like I think it's, it's kind of like the plague of self love, and I don't like it at all. I think that it's misdirected it's too higher in the hierarchy. And I think that that's where everything got kind of screwed up and Mark talks about a lot about the middle out stuff and I think that that's, that's the spirit of self love it's the spirit of Judas. It's the spirit of, and then when you find it doesn't work. There's nothing left. And so I've already been down that path, and no thank you. So, yeah, that's what I got on that. I wanted to show you, I don't know if you can see this but I was putting it up before but to the monkeys. Yeah, this painting that we just bought like a bed set on meta marketplace. And I was like, I got to have it because I really love the. I love the look at this kick ass frame. I love the frame man. Can you send it. Can you send the image for a little bit more. Sure. Like sit on it. No center so I can see it. Because it looks like the bottom monkey has turned the has taken the other ones to and turned it into something. He's got an apple. Eating of the fruit. That's Adam and Eve can't you tell. Looks like it's me. The crosses behind me are telling me so. Google, Google, Google human DNA and monkey brains guys they've already done it. You want to see the lobster my wife painted. Now I'll show you this place. Yeah baby show me a lobster. So it's a lobster. Well that last drop with the new guy is great. Thank you so much for that. Yeah, nice. So you and your wife are both creative. Well, she, she's more of a writer. She, she, she would never consider herself a painter. I think she just did it for fun. Z's. I love it. She made this. I won't put it on. She probably won't be happy with me if I did but she painted a porcupine. And it's hilarious, and I love it, but she thinks it's terrifying. So, she's, she's a writer though, and she like the story writer. She's like she grew up. I think like when she was 13 she was reading the GUI archipelago. Oh wow. Stuff like this so she's brilliant. She's not a Jordan Peterson fan. Well she likes Peterson. But not like I like Peterson. You know, it's like, oh, you go listen your Peterson, you go do that. She supported about me but she doesn't know she's not really her thing I guess. Okay, okay. Now, now, now Chad is married. I am married, Mark is not married, and grim is not married. So, the 15% of my audience. You know, here it is. And 95% of my audience is male. I don't know what that says about my channel or that says about me but YouTube, YouTube, and church it's about the other way around. So, you don't have enough conversations about sewing. Well, it's interesting right I mean one of the one of the things that really puzzled me for years, I think it was in the 90s, they did a study and they said that basically, women are the ones that go to church that start the church process going, and that this accelerates when, when they get pregnant. Not when they not even when they have kids but like the minute they get pregnant it's like art, construct on a church, it's a very mysterious thing and I couldn't figure it out for years it's like what the hell is why you wouldn't. This makes no sense it makes no sense. But then it does make sense once you get the broader context and I think that's the. If you wanted to think about Peterson in terms of what's the one thing like what is the one thing right because there's a lot of little things right but what are all those little things have in common, and it's this idea of opening you up to the broader context. Like, like he had a way of saying, I know that this is a stupid book, and that there's 10,000 unique words or something like that. I read that somewhere I don't know if that's true. There's 10,000 unique words in the book and therefore you know you only need to be a second grade more on to read it, but I'm going to take this book seriously because it survived over the years. Right and so that changes like here's an academic oh no I'm going to take this seriously because it's older than me, effectively, right, like most academics read things that are much younger than them by the way, that's sort of an interesting fact to note, oh wait, they're all reading stuff that's younger than them. How weird because papers are published all the time and right and we have a lot of more published material in the past hundred years and we had the hundred years before that etc. And then he did a lot of research on the data distribution that were tyrannized by terribly there's the hierarchy all over again just in production in actual things you can do in terms of reading. And then what he did was he pointed to, where's this, you know, the one that gets me every time is every time I think about Cain and Abel, when he did the Cain and Abel story. I don't know what the world, I don't know the world works I don't know anything. I'm done. I don't get it, because it's such a short story. And he fits in all this stuff right I mean it's, it's not that he fits it in it's there right I mean it's clearly there it's not like he's drawing it out of, out of the ether. In some sense he is like it's packed with, with, with meaning with with symbolism with metaphor with ability to cohere like you can hear all kinds of different things in that story, and they are all true. Right, even though you know they might seem conflicting or whatever because there's a love of the brothers. I'd like to note how the last few moments of our life there was a very, there was a story of a penetration. And, and what I would like to go from there is like after the penetration in the warm afterglow. There was this whisper that says, that said, You're not choosing to be meek from a strong place. You're a coward. That little whisper that it's okay to stand up for what you believe in those little whispers that is what's in that in a comforting place after we were all so deeply penetrated he whispered to us. That was what spoke to us it was the divine spark spoke of in the infamous infamous ayahuasca letter. And I don't know where it burned maybe it burned out, but I don't know, but that's what it was that's what happened is right after the penetration, those whispers and those are what matters. I think that's the only book of the Bible I'm sure of it. The penetration book, I don't I don't I don't know that book maybe maybe Paul does but but when you know Peterson opens that up. He opens up this space where he says, here's an object. But what are all the aspects of that object that you can interface with. Right, so if you want to put it in in. What are you guys calling it complicated vervecian terms or whatever. I can't see that job's fancy verveci words. Fancy verveci words. Thank you, Paul. Yeah, if you want to put it in fancy verveci words he points out all the affordances that the material has that you don't think about normally, because you're busy scientifically reducing everything to a to a cop, and he says things like well look if you're if you if you're tired, you're walking in the woods, you don't see a tree stump, of course not a tree stump doesn't exist. It's like, oh yeah, that's definitely the way my brain works. Yeah, it's you're looking for affordances all the time. And he's like, here's the latest research and also all the things that daddy didn't have should have told you those two factors. The thing that got me the most what got my attention about Peterson it's the thing. And I talked, I talked with Catherine about this on my channel. What got what got me about Peterson was, it was like, there's somebody who is doing this, this reciprocal opening idea where he like basically says, everything you think you know is bullshit. Like, all this way that you've been living your life. This self centered thinking and all this different stuff it's it's not as bullshit so and here's some real stuff right because I'm not scientific I don't give a shit about that. Like, it doesn't matter that matters to me what mattered to me was, he was able to basically, in a way, sit me down without telling me to sit down. He grabbed my attention by saying, what you're doing is bullshit. And what they're doing is bullshit here listen to this and so there was like, oh, so he's calling me on bullshit, and I couldn't really argue with some of that right so it got my attention this is what, and so like when he made the call and put those videos out on the bill see 16 thing as we say, you know he, you know, they came for the culture war and stayed for the content because like by the time I got to the video on existentialism in the maps of meaning I believe in like 2015 that video. That's, that was that was hitting that home man, because I was just like because you see it all this stuff happening in the world, and like, but again if you go back like you can, like, like, like, Tom soul is saying a lot of this shit like 30 years ago so it's not new stuff. But it was so nice to have somebody say, what are you doing listen to this, you know, and then that's what I think happened like you're saying I mean the scientific shit who gives a shit about that. You know, obviously, like, he also spoke to me because in the AA frame at the time for me. He's talking about a god of my understanding and I'm working at my god is a god of the seat like if I seek him he'll be there so I'm like cool this is a dude that can help me seek a little bit and it started opening up all this different stuff for me. And I started actually stealing some of the stuff that he's using, and they like working with some of the guys that I'm working with sponsorship. And I really like the, the, the attitude that he was carrying into his talks and is gripping, and it's useful. You know, and so that's what I think of that. This is so difficult for me that like listening to some of these other guys though like, like, the conversation you had Paul with with John for making the other day that was that was stunning, because that was like, like, oh this this guy keeps up what he's doing. You know, he's gonna be on the other side of the glass and he's maybe right because like, how do you understand this about Peterson either how do you read all this different stuff and seek the way you're seeking, and then, and then have a defense against being captured by, by, by, by God or whatever, you know, like, and that's, that's what blows my mind you have to be really, I think, actively trying to force yourself from not being captured. Well see, at this point in the question. I turned my consciousness Congress to pastor Paul van der Klaas discord q amp a's and I say like, hey what was that Jonah story again, because if he's not going to do pedo he's going to Jonah so how does that play out. You know that Bible right you should you should be a preacher that that line was genius. If he's not going to do pedo he's going to be he's going to Jonah, I got to write that one down. Yeah, yeah right. Might be the title that might be the title of this video. Yeah, yeah, that's a good, that's a good. Yeah, definitely you can you can see that Chad to your point, I think that Peterson and verveky they're not just middle out, but they're also taking someone like Heidegger seriously and the thing that came out in that video for me was high diggers obvious mistake and I'm like how is how are people falling for this, like I don't get it like, how did you not see the idiot move that I digger made and go, hey wait a minute all of his stuff is based on this idiot move. Let's not go there like, you know, you just misclassified the church as some sort of phantom that you saw somebody act out in the church, that's not the church and the people in the church are not the same thing and if it's just a handful of people and then it's not the thing and everybody makes that mistake. So, like the people who talk about church was the disaffected church people is the disaffected Protestants, they talk about church and I'm like, I have never seen a church that talks the way you people say church talks, and I've been to some Protestant churches, I've just never heard this hell and damnation preaching. I'm sure it exists. I get it. You know, but I've never heard it. But then this gets into sample size and stuff like that so Sally Joe is like, she's like, oh the church across the street is the street is awesome and the pastor is awesome and I never knew church could be this good and I'm like, I'm really Sally, I, you must not have been trying because you go to a Catholic church you never would have heard any of that stuff here as I can type in a ton of Catholic churches and they just don't talk like that they're not hell and damnation preachers or at least if they are they can't be in the majority. I know that we may be in the times when the servants of the Lord need to meet in each other's homes and twos and threes. But, Pastor Paul please take control of this ship and steer it somewhere. I don't like taking control of ships and steering them. That's why, that's why many of my efforts just run up a ton upon the shoals. And it's sometimes in the in the wreckage that I can take through and find interesting things. So, you're going to let us wreck, so that you can find interesting. Oh, that's Christian of you, Pastor. Thanks a lot. Well, you know, tell me of the third lobe or or the third lobe so why I'll answer the first question I asked all of you, which the first answer is, why did I start a YouTube channel I have no idea. I just did it. We don't have 40 minutes Paul, just warning. Can you keep it to you. I do. Keep going. I don't know what it is. Preach. I had no choice. My intro videos like two minutes this is like two, two days, so I'll tie some things together here. Okay, I'll lash the ship a little bit before we go up on the rocks. But I've liked what I've liked everything that's been said so far. Like, Chad, I mean I saw Peterson and I saw something there and I said, this guy is doing something which I haven't seen done. And I both want. I want I want in on the game just like Chad said. And you know even with my little YouTube channel. I mean very quickly I saw a hierarchy develop and I couldn't talk to. I couldn't talk to everybody who wanted to talk to me, and that sucks. And so, then suddenly you have a hierarchy and you have sifting mechanisms and filters, and all that just sucks. And so, very quickly, you know Peterson when I found Peterson he had 300,000 subs on his YouTube channel, so it's already way bigger than mine. And so it's like, how do I get involved in this thing. I talked to colleagues about them and talking to busy pastors of non dying churches that there's a guy in Canada making YouTube videos about gender pronouns and so I didn't go anywhere. And so then I thought, you know, for a long time I thought about book writing but I looked at my church and it's like, I saw some of my colleagues write books and it's like, they write books and they give them out to the people in their churches and it's like, you're losing money on this endeavor, and nobody's really that whole thank you for the book I really love it's going on my shelf and read not read exactly like Chad said the other day. And so then but then I'm doing the Freddie and Paul show. And you know what, Freddie watches the Freddie and Paul show. I don't know how many times, 10 or 15 at least each show Freddie's mom watches the Freddie and Nancy watches the Freddie and Paul show my mom watch the Freddie and Paul show my sisters, watch the Freddie and Paul show it's like, I'm going to do YouTube, because, right, I could spend hundreds of hours trying to rein in my ADHD addled brain and write a book and it'll be a catastrophe, and no one will ever read it and I'll go to my grave and it'll clutter up my children's homes. It's like, I don't want to do that. So, I thought let's see what happens on YouTube. And so then, you know, of course rando start finding me and I start doing conversations and so I have to sort of organize that which I had done. But then I also noticed that I just turn on the camera and start talking into this machine here. And then people start writing back and I went to for vacay's channel to kind of read the comments under the same conversation that we did. And I, I looked at my channel it's like, I don't know why I get such excellent commenters on my channel, people write real things and then Joey starts you know we start the local meetup and Joey and Rick and and Tyler start the bridges meaning discord server and real people start showing up. And, and they're part of the real problem of a church is that if you're the pastor. People don't want to lose status to tell you the truth. And it's only until they really get angry with me that they tell me to f off and slam the door on the way out and it's like, well that's not useful information you just told me that you're mad at me but you know we really haven't done much together here, because you couldn't because I'm the pastor so one of the beautiful things of YouTube is people will tell me exactly what they think. And so I like that. I mean part of the part of the difficulty with, you know, with talking to someone like john verveckis he's so darn nice and it's like come on john tell me what you really think up from New Jersey. If you don't hate me for something you're not really my friend. Wait, wait, wait, wait, I just got to get this out. Buzzwords are holy words. Yes, and the estuary is magic. Okay, whatever. Now this year the salt you'll last two estuary PS me. This is middle of the ocean, we're all the way down to Marianas. That's why I wanted this group because, you know, and nothing against my other groups of, I mean pastors are nice people. And they're people pleasers that's what the, that's in many ways what the, what the, what the position requires of you to be a people pleaser. But then pastors, they're really nice on Sunday but then when they get into their little huddles, you hear a little bit more truth from them about what's, you know what they're really thinking about the sheep that they're shepherding. And okay so there's some of that. But in, in this space. You know, you people are telling me what you really think, and that actually affords third lobe processing. I, I, you know, I just finished a two hour and 20 minute video right now about men and women. And that's coming out tomorrow. And, you know, I mean my videos are a mess. They really are some of them, some of them. And I'm at the point of, I just vomited out onto the internet and y'all are picking through the wreckage and every now and then you come up with something you say, this is really helpful. But if you don't do that. I don't know what's helpful, because we all have this bias to fall in love with our own ideas. And it's a real problem. And that's why I love honest people who are going to just tell me if I'm full of shit, because I'm full of shit a lot. My wife will tell me but she's got her biases so that's that's what I'm doing. And that's, and what I see from all three of you is, you know, one of the things that was amazing in our local meetup is, you know, at some point people like well let's take the Jordan Peterson personality profile and a whole group of people who are zero and agreeableness. But sort of, it's sort of surprising right you pointed to this one of the problems, and I think it's a problem that john has is he talks about opponent processing, but he won't be a good opponent, because he won't be disagreeable because maybe it's because he's Canadian maybe it's because of his social anxiety I don't know but he won't do that rubbing up against right even a little bit that that man is doing the best he can and if you can't pick up on the clues as to why he can only say and ask the way he can. I can tell you afterward. I agree with you, Chris. I think I know what you're talking about but we'll keep that conspiracy shit to our shelf. But like he's my troll crush. That's a gap a baby. No, I, and, and I don't know a better conversation partner than john, I mean I. After, after that last conversation we had it was just a holy moment, and I, you know that wasn't that was his dia logos, you know I that was something that between us was generated, and I was amazed by it, and it doesn't happen all the time. No, no, these videos is going to break he's going to show up next time wearing like a, like an orthodox priest uniform. He's just going to be full out, like veneration is going to be, it's going to be awesome. Like, how do you not flip, like that's what I'm saying he's. I mean, the way that he was talking about it is, is, it was like, it sounded as if he was like in love with it but yeah he's like, no, no, don't do it is go soon man is go through. There's no submission. I think that's the problem is the problem of our age is we don't want to submit. Right, and we've been told we don't have to write until we can be an individual all by ourselves alone. And that, and that we can be sufficient in that, and we're not, we have to recognize we're not sufficient by ourselves at all. And I think you know that sort of came out in that talk. One of the things you know that's a big with Chris Peck out because I fight I got through to Chris on middle out anyway. Oh, I got it. Right. I had to use Lord of the Rings but but I got it in there. And, well, because John invoked, John invoked fellowship, and I think the problem is and he did this with the Christian story to when he talks about steal the culture so there's a q amp a on the awakening from the meaning crisis discord YouTube channel for talks about And I was like, you're starting in the middle of the story. You're literally starting in the middle of the story that I realized he talks about structural functional organization and how things just emerge and it's like, okay, but where did they emerge from, can you start at the beginning And I was like, okay, but one of them came first. Stop stop bashing my crush when he's not in the. I'm not bashing. I'm not bashing. No, I'm just saying what John the Vicky has wrong. This is the third global cognition he's going to. But okay, here's a thought game for everybody. If you had Paul Vanderklaas full audience like every subscriber said I'm going to watch that one, and they tuned into this video. What would you say to them, like as a human and then as whatever else. Also, so you can have two answers. What would you say to Paul Vanderklaas audience if everybody tuned in. Go somebody. I love it. Here's what I would say. What was the question again. What was the question again though. What would I say to Paul Vanderklaas audience if they're all here two things I would say. The first thing I would say is, you're probably wrong. The second thing I would say is, to make sure how, how wrong you are. No, this is part of the first thing you're probably wrong. Investigate, investigate to see how you're wrong. And the second thing I would say is, if somebody else is wrong. Who gives a shit. That's what I would say. All right, there we have. How do I follow that up. You can't follow up the comedy gold guy. It's not possible. That's 100% genuine. I know it is. That's what I found out about myself that I was wrong. I had to find out how I was wrong. And then I had to see how other people if they were wrong that they could be wrong too, because everybody's on their own path. I don't mean that in your weird little what I know you have this thing about the postmodern whatever the hell that means. So I don't even know what the middle out means to me I don't even know what that means because the way that I understand God and my relationship to God is nothing to do with, like, at the beginning of the story, I don't give a shit. Like, and I know there's a lot of people out there like me, then I think there's a lot of people who like, want to take everything and compress from the top to the bottom and make it all this, this perfectly. It's insanity. Like, what are you doing. That's what I want to know. Like, what are you doing in your life that that that proves what you say you, you're doing, or how you feel I guess or what you believe. That's what I want to know. I'm sorry for cutting off. That's, that's quite all right, Chad. It's better than I could say anyway. Yeah, I mean I think I think you're trying to say to my audience if all of them watch this video, all of them watch this. I think that's your big shot. My big my big bugaboo in it was probably my first talk with Chris I've done I've done for now. It is this idea, and I know Chris Chris interviewed Nate Nate Hile, right, and he tried to get him to talk about this, which is this idea of, of speaking truth, right, and doing it poorly, because I think that's what's missing and every time I say that it's big big thing with Luke on Friday about this right every time I say that because I want to get into an argument I want to have a conversation I didn't say conversation, I didn't say get an argument. I'm like, I'm pretty sure he overturned some tables, and like yelled at some people and you, are you sure he didn't do that. I did I hear the Gospels incorrectly. No. Right. So, you know, you can't do this live hidden thing if it means I'm never going to signal to the rest of the world what my ethics are what I think is ethical and not because it's not and it's not about you, although listen Christians were made for lions, sorry, that's the, that's the road you picked. Right. Christians are made for lions that's that's the road you picked. But more importantly, it's not fair to other people who don't have ethics and who don't have a chance of ever have like Sam Harris has no chance of either ever being an ethical creature except by accident. Right, he can, he can act morally in the world, but he can't justify it, he can't justify it because his system doesn't work he doesn't have a system he doesn't have a way to do it. And it is unfair to him for you not to tell him that. And I've mentioned it many times on YouTube we had a whole Sam Harris's brain is in a vat with with Chris, which I thought was just a great name for a video. And we may have different reasons for putting Sam Harris's brain in a vat from maybe Sam Harris's reason but be that as it may at least we have a common goal. And that's the problem with the world is that a lot of what you're seeing is people are on are on a road to different things, and there's a cross in that road, and it seems like that cross in the road is where they want to end, or is the end of where they're going, when in fact when all that chaos is over. The chaos is going to spread because they're all going to be on there, along their way and fighting the whole way through, because the world we're in is the world john described when he talks about steal the We're in a world where everybody is in their own home little church, and they've grown their own home little religion. Some people their highest order is safety, right, highest order is safety, and I know you're evil because anti vax. Right. And then that's my religion, and then some people are nope the highest order is racism, and I know you're evil because you're racist, and I've labeled us up so I know that's true. That's my home religion, and then other people, their home religion is climate. Right, and I know that you're not recycling. And so I know that you're, you're Satan, and that's the world we're living in, it's very simple, it's very scary though when you, when you realize that. That's the world that john's talking about because he didn't start at the beginning which we have to have a common aim. And that common aim has to be towards the good that we agree on, not the good as conceived of you can't start and say everybody knows what the good is and therefore, but that's what they're doing that's what john's doing that's what Peterson's doing they're all doing it. Wow, that was good. That was succinct I mean you tease me and rightly so for verbosity but that's why I have these two on here too because they'll, they'll cut us off. It, do I get to do I get to push back on that in a little bit after gris does this thing. Okay. Go ahead gris. You got my audience they're all here that they're waiting to hear from above or below whichever you come from. Well first I'd like to note that Chad just brought this cock out. I certainly did. As the person posing the question I get to go last month pass Paul van der klee. Okay, okay. What would you say to your own audience. I say to my own audience, I, the two, two most important things. You can only talk to have our channels now, Paul. God loves you and has a terrible plan for your wife. Wow. Wow. I, I, that's that was a joke that was a joke. I believe in the resurrection, I believe that this world is the beginning of what God has for us. And let's get started. But the irony is that road is, I liked what you said Mark about the kind of the crossroads and it's going to wreck. And that is that is this Christianity is both the message of, of God's great redemption, but our deep misery and and what's where those two intersect is in some ways. There is no misery so deep that God can't make greater glory out of it, and I want people to know that joy. That's, that's what's at the heart of my channel. Wow, you thought Chad was hard to follow there, buddy. You wanted to go last. Even after he took his cock out. I'm a sewer people. I'm a sewer people were dead. You guys have your Taco Bell. Here's what I got for you. I think, I'm not sure. But I think Jesus said something about bringing kids toward them. And suffer the little children to come on to me. It's gonna be pretty hard to beat VR. And I think your best bet is paintball for Jesus. And so you should find the local church, give them some money and say I want to support your paintball team. And until they figure out what to do with all that money. You've done the best you can. Also, I have a patreon. Got one shot at a bigger channels audience. I've got a Patreon. That was shameless, even I didn't do that. And I'm a capitalist. That's not. I like that about grids. I really do. But when are you going to start your paintball team grids. Yeah, do you got one. There's a sign right across tracks of the guy who has maybe a paintball course or did one once in town with a big phone number on it, I haven't called yet. Okay, but my material meat space concerns are hard to face. So, and that's in the meat space. So, it doesn't get addressed directly often you know there's a church across the street I've been meaning to go to it, but, you know, I'm doing mission work on YouTube. I got things across the street come on down south I drive down this just I don't, I live in the middle of no we take a left out of my house you better have a full tank of gas because can I bring a cat. You'll pass 10 churches, you'll pass 10 houses and 10 churches. That's, I have a cat, I have to take cats travel so well. Cats do travel well can confirm. I just met our dog for the first time on Saturday. Will puppy will puppy. It's really cute. I just thought I'd throw that in there. I love puppies. I love puppies. Speaking of puppies and cocks, you want to say something as I recall it, would you turn the face again to want to do assault my position. Okay. Well, what I want to do is, I want to. I disagree with the idea of about this idea about as much as I disagree with the idea of, of self love, like self love is just about as annoying as this idea of calling out evil and doing it poorly because I think at some point it's like well then who, who becomes the arbiter of evil. We're going to say, like, it doesn't have to be a person. That's the whole point. Like, this is, so this is why people like Paul's channel and Chris is doing it by the way Chris Petcow has a whole series of videos calling out evil and doing it poorly. And he took that to heart. God bless him. Right and took it seriously and did it. Right, and he doesn't care. He's like no I'm going to do this because this is the thing that I can do and that I should do, and I think this is the thing that makes Paul's channel good is that you're seeing somebody think, and people don't know how to think, and you're seeing them articulate. So you kind of have to be articulate first fall, which is plus one for you, and you think very well, actually you think quite well. And the evil that I heard called out is all like, totally done. Like no shit pedophilia. But it's not, but it's not to those people. That's the problem. Yes. That's not addressed this. That's not addressed this problem. I don't know what you think we're building, but okay, maybe I don't know I don't know what you're referring to that you think we're building. Okay. That's fine. A little more specific because I've got like videos with manual six I've got one on my channel to I've got six videos at least with manual so you know hundreds of hours of, you know, hammering on the arc. Go ahead, that's fine. You don't have to understand I just was curious if you did. Sorry, sorry. Totally out of context for me. Now I believe in conspiracy theories. Grim doesn't need anybody else to do a conspiracy theory can do it just with his consciousness Congress. No, like the project he talked about in his videos with you is what I was talking about. I'm sorry. That's how I do I come by tangent. I have lots of tangents. That's me. Yeah, you have a floating frame. I want to, I want, I want this news to anyone who's watched your videos. It's like when you said when you said that when you said the in your tweet about the how there's a gold gold gold in the Peterson talk with those three or those two fellows. Yeah. People like you that can see that who can learn how to use OBS can become clip Reapers like me and if you'd like more additional training or information you can come over to my channel but we need Reapers of those gold clips. So it's us on the shoulders of giants. That's how we do it is we snap clips and we're on the together and say different things. It's, I want to get that. So if you see the gold and can learn how to use OBS, and you got the time because you're trapped in the devil's false like matrix. That's the same, but that's the same principle as listening to somebody speak and grabbing nuggets, right, like the clips channel that that Peugeot has for example he actually clip the clips channel from Peugeot clipped the q amp a that Peugeot did with on awakening from the meeting crisis and it was it was an excellent clip it's it's the clip that I hate the most this thing that I hate the most that Jonathan Peugeot says, because he's right. And we're on the wrong side of that for sure right because we're on the Reveke server doing the meditations and the practices, and he's like practices insufficient because you're not getting together with people that you don't like doing things that you may not want to do. And like what is there a better like one line summary of what the problem of the world is right people can't do things that they agree on with people they disagree with. Why, right, well because you won't go to church. No really. No skill set. And when you don't when you don't make mistakes when you're not willing to do the calling out and say this action that happened was evil, and I don't agree with this and you know so there's a great book by Greg Ellis who's a semi famous actor actually great Greg's a wonderful human being to. Oh my goodness what a great guy met him on clubhouse and he's just a wonderful person and he wrote a book called the respondent. And I think all the Christians should read it as nothing to Christianity, and then realized that you know and I love Greg but he wasn't in the not not domestic, domestic, you know, court system, the whole court system is that way. And I think that's almost as bad. He writes about being separated from his children and how his wife used an obscure California law. The beginning of the book alone is horrific, and I mean that technically, if the history is horrific. But it's like why is this why is why is our society allowing this, why are the courts, doing this to people that would be a good question. And the courts are doing bad things to me too and have been and have done it for a while. Why is this happening. Right, and that's the thing like if you don't read the respondent and hear his story or attend his clubhouse rooms or now he's got Twitter rooms, whatever that looks like it looks like he's got a clubhouse, then you won't hear that. It's not him. Where are you know when he was, he was famous right he's an actor a well known actor was in Pirates of the Caribbean and all kinds of other great stuff. And this can happen to him but that all his story is not unique. It's happening all over the place. And there's all these suicides from from fathers who, you know, got divorced of, you know, didn't want to get divorced and were basically forced into it. Nobody knows this story, and that's like that's a call. Why does, why isn't anybody hearing about this stuff and why. Why aren't we doing something about it. And that's the thing if you call out evil and you're willing to do it poorly, then at least we can know oh this person thinks this is evil and maybe I disagree, but I can't disagree with you if I can't hear your Right, and some people aren't hearing any signal at all or the signal they are hearing is racism is bad and I define racism. That's not the signal I think people should be hearing. That's not the signal that should be the loudest that that signals out there, almost by itself. I mean we've got the three big signals safety, safety first anti vax evil. Right. We've got the other big signal that is racism racism first racist evil. And then the third one is really climate. And there are others for sure but those to me are the three big signals and we're not hearing the Christian signals because we're not hearing Christians, they're busy living hidden. Go, go. I'm so private. Nobody knows my name. This is what I'm saying. I mean, it's to me it's. When we do this, if calling out evil is going to be at the top of the hierarchy or anywhere near the top of the hierarchy, not in the hierarchy. Hang on a second. Who becomes who, who, who arbitrates what is evil. You don't have to. That's the point. You have to have a discussion around it though or no one can come to the conclusion. Right. Like, nobody knows what evil is. I'm technically literally serious, nobody knows what evil is. That's why they're doing things like on a racism is definitely the biggest evil in the world. No, it's not. It's bad, but it's not the biggest problem we have. Not in the US. I just, I just, I guess I just disagree that that doing this should be like, really important because I think like all it really does is add more noise to the noise. And it's not really solving any problems. And I just not supposed to. I think that the signal that you're talking about, of all these evils are just being boosted by, you know, you know, some some, some of the bling. And I also think that there's been a lot of indoctrinated thought into these so called evils, you know, so like of course, that's what people really believe that, you know, because they've been taught this for, you know, and, and, and, and, and, you know, and I think that's what it's important. You know, and, and, and, and their public schools like, you know, like that about racism and all this different stuff. Of course, these things are going to be very loud. That's happening now. That's not what the man puts in his mouth that defile him, but what spews out of it. If you're resharing or bringing up evils, then you're putting it in the minds that otherwise wouldn't have been in, and the Archons feed on fear. Why would you so fear so love, there's two sides. You don't have to be afraid of something you can name. That's the thing you don't have to be afraid of something you can name, but you do have to be afraid of something you can't name, because then you can't you can't cognize it you can't And that is part of the problem is that, you know, yeah, sure. Now, they're teaching kids about racism in a bad way right as though that is the most important thing is never be racist you kill people just never be racist. That's absolutely where we're at in society. Right, but those are the kids, the people who are doing that didn't learn that in school for sure. I know some of them, they definitely did not learn that in school, they got that way after school and they got that from the So tell us about your cock there. Okay, well, follow. I gotta go guys I love you all. All right, Chris. My wife got this setup garage sale anyway, or for printing today. Why did you put it on the table. I think I was just trying to get a little bit of a sense of the I think I was just trying to seek attention, and I did it when Mark was talking. Mark, Mark has been. I like Mark, but it's been bothering me a lot. And I asked him this morning if we can have a discussion because part of my problem of why I'm being bothered is that I don't know his story. And so I want to know where you're coming from. And I think that's important to me, because I don't like. This is how I'm going to call out people like I, I'm being insufficient. Right, I'm practicing a prejudice I don't know you. I want to know you, I want to know where you're coming from so I can better understand why this would be so very important to you. So that's, that's my thing. But, so, yeah, that is, but your point there is not a small one. And I know some people tire of the fact that I insist on doing a fair amount of autobiography. And I think that's important to me, because I don't like to be a part of a conversation. I don't like to be a part of a conversation. I don't like to be a part of a conversation. That once we have, you know we got Luke running over here personalism personalism personalism. He's got a point. And that once we connect as, as people know each other stories better. We have a far greater capacity to find these things that we might have been set up by our culture to instantly attack one another about to say, I'm going to bring in the clause, and I'm going to listen. And I'm going to, I might disagree still, but we're actually going to, I probably going to learn something from this so. Well yeah that's sardines thing right like I can go around talking about how should be sardines are because I heard that that's what they were but if I have not tried them then I'm just, again, practicing a my prejudice and so I want to be able to outgrow that I can still at the end of the day think sardines are disgusting but at least I had my own experience with them. And so that's, that's all man and the other thing Mark I think the reason why it bothers me so much from what I've learned through the 12 step processes. I don't get to, I don't get to a brandish a blame thrower anymore, because somebody like me, I could take like my, my opinions and my grievances and go to the empty degree and burn my life back down to the ground I don't know how to, how to, I don't have the luxury of being able to do that so I do very careful. And so, what, what I get concerned about is, I think, if I'm going to, if I'm going to have a captured audience to people who are looking for and I start giving them guidance like go out there and call out evil, and they don't know what it is, like, they're not only going to cause damage but they themselves are going to be damaged. Well, yeah, I don't, look, I mean again you're carrying it too far. I didn't say blame anybody. You don't have to blame anybody, and I think, actually, Greg Alice when he's on clubhouse he does this excellently so one of the things he did that I really learned from was, you know, it's it's late pandemic we'll say right but still, still it's that sort of the, the end of the golden age of clubhouse if you will at least according to a lot of the early adopters right. And what happened was, Greg would run these wonderful rooms he's an amazing talent he plays piano on the fly and makes up silly songs and just, we would have a blast in rooms that he was in. But one of the things he would do because a lot of times he was pushing his, this was before his book was actually published he pushes book and pushes ideas and start he talks a lot about meaning crisis he says I think we're shuffling a meaning crisis, talks a lot about the boy crisis he talks a lot about these things. And so I can tell you, and I will tell you, and I have said this before on YouTube, saying socially distant is evil. Don't do it, because you don't need to. You can you can use better words like physically distant is evil. And so I can tell you, and I will tell you, and I have said this before on YouTube, saying socially distant is evil. Don't do it, because you don't need to. You can you can use better words like physically distant. If that's what you mean physical distancing is fine. If that's what you mean physical distancing is fine. There's no reason to use that term. Now I'm not blaming anybody. I'm not getting into it with anybody I'm not having conversation not having to be just making a statement. And it's the lack of the statement that is the problem, because if I don't know if you think that that, you know, pedophilia is evil, and for a lot of people I don't know that anymore, and I used to, but I'm not so sure. What am I going to do? How do I treat you? Like, are you safe to be treated? I mean, we had a big blow up over this on our server over this is, you know, they're publishing some of the ancient Greek art, which is, you know, like, I don't think that's appropriate. I'm sorry. Like I just, you know, I, you know, I think, I think, you know, Chad's cock perfectly okay. But, but the vase with the wrestling that no, I'm just a no on that. I'm a hard no on that I've said it many times, I'm a hard no on all these things, especially when they involve children for different reasons. But people aren't calling it out and when people do call out sometimes they get in trouble. Why, because it was never stated, like, is this okay or not. And people don't know, like they don't know, or they don't. And the worst part is that the, the, the published publishing of that particular piece of art, the person who published it didn't notice. I'm like, are you kidding me? You didn't notice. It's, you know, I mean, you can, oh, because it's a classic Greek, it's, it's art and not smart. Are you sure we agree on smart, because I know where smart is in my mind, and I need to tell you, or you don't know whether or not you've transgressed against me. If we don't have the conversation, and if we're more, if we can't have the conversation, how, how am I going to cooperate with anybody ever. Okay, and I don't, I don't have to. Okay, I've got two things. I've got two things. First, I want to, I really loved Chad's point about resentment, and especially in a recovery community. I love that resentment is about the most poisonous thing they have, and I love, I love that blame thrower, because addictions feed from resentment and you know again I, I've never been in a 12 step program but a deep friend of mine who was a member of the I mean, I had a dear friend of mine for many years before he died. He had been in a for years and so we'd spend a lot of time together and you know pour me pour me pour me a drink I mean that was in all these little sayings that a has that there's just so much brilliance and and just just sunk into a and so compressed into these little sayings that they've also got handles and they, they they are scalable, and that you don't need to. You don't need to be someone who who wields and who just who trades in abstractions to understand pour me pour me a drink. I mean it's campy but gosh, it communicates so so that's that's an important thing. The part of I'm sort of on team Chad with this. Now, the last thing you said Mark I really liked because it's, it's really important to hear people say to say how things are to them. And that's where I am, I sort of part ways with a lot of the anti woke and because people, people have people have trauma people have pains, people have transgressed them. They might not be able to articulate with much precision, the nature of the transgression all they know is that they hurt, and they have a bunch of words on the shelf that they pick up and they throw out there. Right, and, and part of I think being a grown up is to be able to stand there and get hit with the, with the resentment paintballs for from evil out there in the world. Right. And I think that's important for the church to model. And I think, in many ways the church should be able to model that because one way of understanding Jesus on the cross is that he's he's fully splayed out and go ahead. You know, you're angry at this world, throw it on me, you know, any, any anything you have throw on my shoulders I'm going to take all of this and all of this blame, you just put it on me because there's no limit to what I can bear because I am God. Okay, so that's, that's part of the story of the cross. And the difficulty. And I think part of what we have to model and help people with is because of the way consciousness works. People when they get and I think this is really what AA understands well. When they get into blame mode. And then they will fill that consciousness field. Yeah, and then they, they will act, and they will, and they will read that won't usually react and either either it's, I hate. You and I hate me. And so that's when the agency goes into reciprocal narrowing, and the self destructive behavior comes and. And, and for a lot of people boy I'll tell you, that is one heck of a slippery slope, and it's just a little, just let that little bit of resentment in and bang, they're back in that thing and, and they can, and I've seen, I've seen people who've been able to maintain sobriety for years. And one thing, whoosh, and they're in it for a decade again. So, you know, I understand both sides with this, and I think to sort of finish off my thought mark with your both taking what you just said about this and, you know, if you had my channel, have the full attention for my channel for two thoughts. But what I think religions, not ideologies and the Peter Sonia in turn but what religions offer are better stuff off the shelf that says, okay, we can talk about this blame we can talk about evil we have a word for it. We not only have a word for it. And, and we have a community that you can throw your stuff in because you need to get rid of it. But we also also have this archetypal story that actually addresses the evil. And I think, at least in Christianity, it's, we, we're going to be honest with you right now that I can't, you can tell me how you've been hurt. You can tell me about the, the evil things done to you. And I can listen and listen with you, and I can point to a God who cares and loves, and in fact I have hope that that God will be able to take that evil and actually turn it into glory. You're going to have to enter into this journey of faith, and that's really where the AA people come in, you're going to have to personally enter into taking your resentment, taking the debts that you have against other people and putting them on the shelf. Right, right. Well, and right is a lot about submitting, right, you got to submit to the fact that you don't have control of yourself when you drink, or when you do your drugs or whatever it is. And, and AA is very much the acknowledgement of submittance, and then figuring out where, where do you cross your lines and for most people in AA, it is one drink. And you think it's a transgression, and what do they do they make you call out that fact explicitly to your point. That's what they do that's what these little things do they remind you constantly where your line is constantly, and you need that I agree, but we're not doing that society and maybe we don't have a place to, but then what happens is you become a BLM race, a blame thrower. That's what you become. That's exactly what you become. This is what's happening to us right now. That's where I, that's where I have my objection the reason why that's happening or at least part of the reason is because of lack of signals. I, if I transgress, and you didn't tell me where your lines were, I don't care. I'm not taking responsibility for for crossing a line I can't see that's not going to happen. And that's the problem. If no one's telling me where their lines are, I'm going to cross them. Yep, and I'm not going to feel bad about it. Sorry, because I don't know they're there. It's, you have to take partial responsibility for telling me where your lines are, or you're screwed, because I'm not even going to feel bad about it. That's just me I'm disagreeable sorry, and I don't want to do that though, but you have to help me. But I'm trying to do is just, I'm trying to explain my concern about that. And, and, and so I appreciate that we're able to talk about it, which is really nice but in the thing that I do want to do want to correct a little bit though about the about the alcohol drink is in a. You could drink if you want. It's up to you. But I know that I can't. So, like, that's that that thing that you said it kind of doesn't it doesn't map the same because like, like, it's like yeah, duh no shit. Don't drink. Right. And so, you know, if somebody, if a guy is sponsor comes to me and say I, I drank, I'm like, well, yeah, I mean, you drink, like, let's get back, let's get back to work or somebody comes to me and says, Yeah, I think I want to. Or I want to drink or something like I'm going to say, well, it's probably not a great idea, I wouldn't do it but if you want to do it that's up to you. That's how you handle it, Chad, but you just did it. Oh, I can't know one drink now. That's all I'm saying is that one step. That's the right step. And you don't have to speak for others, and you don't have to judge others, but you do have to let them know where you're at. Otherwise they don't know where you're at. And now that's on you. That's not on them. Right. I tell everybody where I stand on every issue. And so you know when you transgress and you know what you're going to get when you transgress because I'm rather clear about it. I'll I'll beat you out I'll yell at you I'll backhand you I will do those things, and I have done them before. You stand with me, and you know where I stand on the issues. Right. And that's, you know, that's why people took there was a guy yesterday to come into the server, and he was a very, very difficult. And we gave him a hard time, and he exited in the weirdest fashion I've seen this before obviously been online for years that you see this. He said, Oh, well, you know, I just wish that we could have been nice and nicer and that you could have embodied the spirit of conversation and you know all this fluffy word stuff. And he said, But I really appreciate the conversation and I really got a lot of it and he quit immediately without allowing us to respond in kind. Right, which is just it's just a terrible move you know what though, four or five hours later he came back. Manuel and Mark by themselves in a room he comes back he's third person. And that's a terrible behavior for somebody who's upset by us basically beating around his terrible formulations and and a horrible baby Manuel called him out for evil, actually, Manuel said no no you just mean you were trying to manipulate Mark, and that's evil. And you knew you were doing it, and that's evil. And he came back. And he said, Well, the guy evil, he said what you did was evil, and the guy came back, and no one got into a debate or an argument about it or anything, because he knew instantly when Manuel explained it to him. You just said you tried to manipulate him deliberately to get him to feel something which wasn't going to work by the way. It was a case of you think I transgressed and I have no idea and by the way I don't know you. So, maybe, oh well, you know, and he was, he was trying to manipulate me into feeling something about that which was never going to work, but he admitted that that's what he said that's what he was trying to do it and Manuel said then then that was evil, you shouldn't have done that. And it worked. And he came back. Okay, good. Well I'm glad we were able to talk about it because it's been it's been bothering me, and it's just, I just, there's something about it that seems off that's all, and to me it does. And so I just, I feel like if I'm the, if I'm somebody who's feeling that way, there's other people who are and if we're in, if we're going to say that we're in this online community which we find to be really great then it's good to talk about it because if I think at the end of the day, what we're trying to do here, I asked Paul the other day. What is it that we're trying to do over this form of internet, you know, I really think that it's for me, this whole idea of estuary is to have a space for people who are in Chris who are like spiritually homeless basically, we're looking for a place that they can find other people to talk with and find and so like one of the principles I try to carry any of these things is, I'm just trying to be useful because their life might depend on it's I'm just trying to be useful because their life might depend on it's So it's real nice I want to be able to, it's tough like it's tough to, for me it's tough for me to like say what I just said to you but I want to be able to do that because if I can't do that here and practice it with you guys, how the hell am I going to do it out there, you know what I mean? Well said, and I agree look and so you need to ask yourself Chris's videos because he's got six or seven of them now of calling out evil and doing it poorly because he's willing to do it and make mistakes. Does that bother you? Because you're doing exactly what I talked about. You did it already a couple of times and Luke doesn't like it and Nate doesn't like it and most of the people on BOM don't like it when I talk about it either. But that, you know, and I think you're right that the key to this and the thing that that Paul brilliantly points out as always is next level pastor skills is this whole idea around getting to know somebody, making that intimate connection, right, because the meaning crisis I think stems from an intimacy crisis. And that's very much where the problem is. We have an intimacy crisis and what that means is that we can't get together and find commonality because we're too busy finding difference. This is the deep problem. I mean we talked about this in the second video we did Paul right with the church. It's like why can't the churches all get together and just say look at, we'll ignore all the things we disagree about and we'll just agree and signal as one voice about these things that we do definitely agree about. Where there's no disagreement like that signal would go a long way in my opinion towards helping people orient in the world because having lots of signals can be destructive but it can be helpful. Having no good signals to orient towards is a problem. And as I pointed out, when you look at John steal the culture, that's the world we're living in. That is a nightmare. I don't want to live in that world. I want all the little home churches as he puts it to have a common aim, and to have a common aim towards a common good, where that good is explicit and people can agree on it. I don't agree with BLM that racism is the biggest problem in the United States or the world for that matter. I just don't agree. Maybe in some countries it is. Absolutely. And I bet you won't agree on my list of countries or why it's that way. But it's important to know that, right? It's important to know these things, to know where other people stand because otherwise we can't make sense of the world because we're insufficient and the world is way bigger than us. And I don't care if you have a small group of 12 people, you know, in their own little home church talking about Socrates. That's not interesting because Socrates didn't talk about what was good. He talked about the virtues, but he didn't talk about how to embody goodness. And there's one story that does that, I think, really well. What's that book again, Paul? The one you read all the time on Sunday? Oh, the Bible. That's what it's called. It's really kind of a library. It's a big book. It's a big book. Well, maybe the Bible is a conscious book. I don't know. Right. Well, we lost our fourth partner and I don't want to necessarily go to... This is a big book. There's the big book. There's the big book. Technically speaking. So any last things y'all want to say before we land the plane here? No, just thanks for taking the time and talking with us and thank you, Mark, for taking the time to let me to talk to you about that. I'm looking forward to talking with you in the future. Hear your story. That's what I'm really interested in. I'm happy that Grizz is here. When's the next new show coming out? I'm not sure. I just kind of played on the fly. Probably something to do with this week or next week. Okay. Okay. How about you, Mark? What are your projects you're working on now? Well, yeah, I just did a talk with Chris that he just released. It was really... I thought that was probably my best talk. I got a talk coming up with Chad. We've already scheduled it. So watch out for that. I've got a bunch of videos backed up because my editor is slow. You have an editor? I need free help. I need an editor, man. I can't. So many problems just with the technology. I'm a technology expert. None of my technology works anymore. So I have an editor. So he's working on my videos. I got three ready to go and then I'm going to work on this intimacy crisis idea. I'll put that on navigating patterns on my channel at some point. And then I'm going to work on explaining signaling as such. And what I mean by signaling and why it's important. So the next video coming out is going to be the one on knowledge. And then I'm going to do one on signal and why that's important and how signal forms to make knowledge, right? Because that's important. And then I'm going to tie all that into our four P's of information and two types of knowledge because this guy, Vander Clay, has convinced me there's only two types of knowledge. And then when I found out that... Well, I think that's true. When I found out that the ancient Greeks had mythos and logos and I asked Verveki about it on the recent Q&A, it was interesting. He kind of, in my opinion, didn't really answer my question, but I think we can make a good case with our model instead of his why that would be true and why that's important. So I'm going to be doing that work. And I do have a talk. I'm going to do Karen Wong. We're going to round out the Jordan B. Peterson, John Verveki talk. So if you didn't understand that and you want to watch many more hours trying to explain it, maybe just watch the first one, though, Paul, just because I went over the overview thing. The first one, we did go into the talk and then all the others were like stopping videos and talking about sections and dates. But I thought the first one was really good. Of course, there's some great nuggets in what I was doing with Karen because she gets me off and saying, well, what do you think, Mark? And then I have to be like, you know, get out of my notes and go after actually think about things. Karen's wonderful. So yeah, so that's coming up. And then what's coming up for you, Paul? What do you do? Are you going to do more of these lovely videos where you've already got concrete ideas and you put out like 15 or 20 minutes of brilliance? You know, I was going to do one today because over the weekend I thought, oh, there's something I could do just a little short video on that. And I didn't write it down and I forgot what I was going to do it about. So it's gone. So instead you get two hours and 20 minutes of the problem with men and women. I'm looking forward to it. Paul, the guy that you had on today. Oh, yeah. Which one David or Jan? Jan, the budding philosopher. He said something at the end there that I thought was super interesting that has been something that I've noticed even in myself is this obsession with definitions that we have about words. And this is like something I think is kind of like this other distraction that's kind of it's helpful, but it becomes somewhat of an idol, I think. And I don't know what's your thoughts on that? I don't want to burn up too much more of your time, but like what do you think about this obsession that we have as a culture about these words, because I think that's huge. I think that gets to some degree into the McGill-Crist dynamic of our culture being way too left brained. And it's really helpful to define words, because when we use words poorly, we actually wear them out. And we have a big problem with that. Yet, there's a problem on the other side, too, where you can get so bogged down in definitions, you can't actually communicate. So it's one of these perennial problems that we're just not going to get away from. But it's one of these problems that you have to keep in mind so that you, you know, like I have always have this problem with envy and jealousy. And that envy and jealousy are have two very different definitions and people almost always say jealous when they mean envious. And then we have this other positive way of saying, oh, I'm jealous about that as sort of a way to compliment someone, this is actually a third use of the word. So, on one hand, you can get all fussy about these kinds of things and really not love people well. And I think the bottom line is that we should learn to love people well with language. Because language is powerful. And love is what's most important. But figuring out how to love people well with language, that's really hard. But that's, again, that's something that you, you learn to do in marriage over a long period of time, because a lot of marriage is a lot of talking. And so you have to learn to love people well with language. So I don't know, there's a thought or two. Good, good, good. Yeah, because I was thinking, this is all tied together with the language and then the intimacy crisis, you know, this obsession with words, the intimacy crisis, the meaning crisis, the lack of personalism, like, and then like this whole realm of the YouTube and the obsession with the language. And the obsession with the technology and all this stuff. It's like, everything's getting so much further distant from each other that it just becomes so easy to just not be personal. And it's like, and I don't know, I just, I don't know how to articulate what I'm thinking there. It seems like it's all the same kind of tornado, you know, of all these different kinds of problems, but they're all stemming from this lack of being seen, I think. The greatest resource you have is your attention. I mean, that's where we're at right now. And so we should think about that in terms of the priorities that we have with our relationships. And, you know, it's really hard to manage attention when we don't manage ourselves internally well. The most, one of the most amazing things I ever saw was Jordan Peterson working the VIP line at an event. So I went there with my friend James from our local meetup and a bunch of us were there. And James said before that meeting was like, I'm pretty much done with Peterson. I mean, it's map territory, I'm kind of done with him. But he and his wife were there for the VIP event. And then I watched him. There were about 160 people in that line, and they had about an hour and a half or so to go through it, which means that everybody gets like 30 or 45 seconds. And he managed to give each of those people in that line, his undivided attention to the point of when you were met him in that line, you really did feel like you had his undivided attention, which was an astounding thing after he had just talked, rambled for two hours, and was then going to, I don't remember if the Q&A afterwards was, but anyway, it was just an astounding thing to see. And it was quite remarkable, but that it emphasizes the point that your attention is right now the greatest resource you have. And what I think is genius about something like AA is you that via that attention you lend agency. And so what happens in that group is you're exactly right. Yeah, you can go out here you drink your, you know, you can drink and, you know, fall off your ass, I don't care. That's your agency. But with us, we've got this agency we're willing to lend to you. And if you're able to take that agency and cultivate it and build it, you will have agency to share with another, and what you have is a whole community then that is actually broadening and growing an agency and spreading out in the world, and there's no, that's the most blessed, powerful thing we see in our lives. So, yeah, man. Thank you for that. Anyway, gentlemen, this has been tremendously fun. We'll have to do it again. Thanks for hopefully we can talk again soon man, or at some point. All right. You guys take care. Bye bye.