https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Anxe8if2e1g

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. It's the COVID edition. How's it going, Fred? Okay. So, first time Freddie and I have been together since March. Long time. Long time. And we give them the Kings eight games. They have to win all of their games. Wow. Wow. So the Kings are going to have to really do well. The Milwaukee Bucks are doing okay. Has that NBA thing started yet? No, they're fitting to start next week. Okay, fitting to start next week. You've been doing okay through the virus, think Fred? Oh yeah, no problem. No coughing. Except if I eat something wrong and it goes down the wrong pipe. Then I start coughing. But anyways, basically what I've been doing is just keeping my distance. But I still go out, but then I just go through the drive-thru and sit in the parking lot and talk to my friend. Man, we just go out once in a while and do things. But no, it hasn't really bothered me. I haven't felt anything different or whatever. I just have to keep my room clean, do what's right, and everything will be out of sight. Okay. Through the light. Through the light. Through the light. Yeah, and I just wanted to say something. If you believe in God, he will grant you wisdom, power, and strength to grunt Jesus Christ Almighty. Because you can do all things in Christ that strengthens you. And I'm in strength to say, is it you or? I can do all things in Christ that strengthens you. He strengthens you. Yeah, I can do all things in Christ that strengthens him. And that he strengthens you. Strengthens me, yeah. Yeah, so anyways. We got a cat in the video. Look at that. Cat walked right through. Uh-oh. Anyways, so yeah, just be looking for some music. Once church starts, I'll be doing some music. Gotta speak up. I don't know. There's a lot of background noise. I'll just do some music like before when church is open. And hi, Forrest. Hi, Reggie. Hi, everybody in the church. Hi, Mom. Hi, Phillip. Hi, CJ. Hi, Gordon. Hi, Paul. Uh, Forrest. Lisa Barnes. Don't forget Mr. Roos. Uh, Toriyama. Mr. Toriyama. Okay. Well, Lisa, I'm gonna do a song. Okay. And it's gonna go a little bit something like this. Run. But finally, a new state of Iraq. This disease is somewhat whack. I don't like it because people can't walk normal. Gotta have a mask on your mouth like a Mormon. I don't know why. I don't know why I, I just gather that it is okay. That's why. When I run and when I fix, this is the stuff that I got to kick. The rhythm is coming. Never gonna stop. Full of hip hop, rockin' nonstop. People livin' and givin' stand on top. Of their life. Did they live in our Freddie B? And I'm jammed for the showbiz. Rip it up, Paulie. Alright, Fred. Very good. Anyways, so the rest of the day for you. I have to go in there and clean my room. So I won't get in trouble. And you're gonna do what you gotta do. And I'm gonna have to borrow some money from Drake today so I can get a soda. A lot of stuff from that soda. And everything will be good. So I'll see you at church in two weeks. Not this Sunday, right? This coming Sunday is our opening at 9.30 in the morning. So I gotta leave here at eight, right? You gotta leave here early to get there on time, yeah. It'll be nice and cooler in the day. Alright, can you give me a ride home once in a while? Probably not. I gotta have to church. I'm gonna be real busy uploading stuff. Oh, okay. I'll find somebody to give me a ride. Alright, ready? Alright. Hold on, I hear you. One love. One love. Amen. Amen. Hallelujah.