https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Pd9K0MJCXYI

 Hi, this is Paul. Over the weekend Saturday, I had a conversation with David Fuller and you can find that conversation on... Because it's a conversation that we and a lot of... You can find that conversation on Rebel Wisdom. I think David Fuller is probably my favorite Jordan Peterson... How would I... My favorite Jordan Peterson relevance realization spokesperson. I think David has... So all sorts of mapping in my mind. So I talked about Jonathan or John Verveckis' four P's and again his four P's are really propositional truth and then the other three P's. And I think this maps well on a variety of languages and how they talk about knowing. See in English, not so much because our language is a little poor on that. But in Spanish you have saber and conocer. I would expect that in French and in a lot of the other Latin languages. The differences in knowing that John is sort of bringing out through his cognitive science. That fundamental contrast is there. That fundamental contrast you can also find in C.S. Lewis in his Reflections from a Woodshed where he talks about looking at the light. So he's in a dark tool shed and there's a beam of light coming in through a crack in the ceiling and in the dark of the tool shed via the little specks of dust that are in the tool shed. As many of you have probably had this kind of experience, you can see the light actually. I thought of it because I take pictures on vacation and I took this picture in the Eastern Sierra One of my favorite trips is to drive down the valley, go up into the foothills and then up over Tioga Pass in Yosemite. Down the backside. I love the Eastern Sierra. It's desolate, it's dry, it's beautiful. And in the summer you can get up over Tioga Pass which is about 10,000 feet. And then from the Eastern Sierra you can get over to Canyonlands in Utah, Southern Utah. Utah is just a beautiful breathtaking state. All that desert is just glorious. But anyway, so I was taking pictures in the Eastern Sierra and here we are looking. The clouds are helping us see the light as it is. And you can see the contrast between the clouds and I don't know, these kinds of scenes just capture me. And you can get the sense from C.S. Lewis's reflections from a tool shed about looking at the light. But as Lewis often mentions, there's looking through the light. And so he steps into the light and he looks up through the light and he sees outside the crack, out to this whole new world or this whole world beyond the tool shed. And of course Lewis is running all sorts of metaphors through that image. But Vervecki's ways of knowing his four P's, again propositional is sort of looking at the light. Participatory, perspectival, I can never remember all four when I said I always remember three. Participatory, perspectival, it's been that way forever. Anyway, but those threes are really one and that's seeing through the light. Again, I've mentioned this before. It's the difference between being in love and watching someone in love. If you're watching someone in love, you can see a lot of the dynamics that are going on that the people within, that the people in love are to some degree blind to. They might not even be blind to it, but that might not just be their priority because the, once you're in the light, once you're in love, a lot of the other priorities of the propositional sort of fade away. All of this, I was just talking about David Fuller. Let's see how my OBS skills are. That's pretty good. So David Fuller is, I think, one of the best commenters. Again, I said relevance realization people because he very quickly right away understood Peterson and saw it early and, you know, beat a path to his door in Toronto and did that interview that would become a glitch in the matrix and really launched Rebel Wisdom. Rebel Wisdom started at about the same time I started my channel. And again, I, it was Providence or maybe if you don't believe it was dumb luck, I, both of us sort of started right at the right time. But David knew what he was doing. I didn't because I think he saw Peterson and the value of Peterson and the timing of Peterson almost right away. So we, so David and I had this conversation about the Peterson-Vervecky conversation. And then he did a, I guess they released it not too long ago, but he and Andrea, who is a part of our our discord community and she has her own channel. He before the Vervecky conversation, those two had a really good conversation. Now, I want to say something about Andrea and, you know, she's a friend. And so and now she's all nervous because I'm going to talk about her on my bigger channel. But Andrea is not appreciated for what she does. And I hope she's not overly appreciated for what she does because then her channel would explode and, you know, we couldn't get to talk to her and couldn't enjoy her her presence in the bridges of meaning community. But if you go on, so go all the way back to the Michael Malice Jordan Peterson conversation and Peterson made a critical point there. He said, you know, when you go, he met with Kathy Newman in the green room and she was nice and they were talking as two human beings. But then when they got onto the set and it's a set, all of this is ritual. This is James K. Smith stuff in terms of, you know, in terms of cultural liturgies. So when they get into the set, when they get into the holy place, Kathy Newman channeled the spirit of the Blue Church and she prosecuted Jordan Peterson there in the court. You know, think about what a court is, even our language. If in America you say you're going to court, you expect there to be a judge. And when the judge comes in the room, they say, all rise. We're all to stand up. Well, why is that? Well, we've taken the we've taken King and we fractured King into different pieces. That's what democracy did. So in America, you have the executive branch, you have the judicial branch, and then you have the legislative branch. OK. And now in the old world, the king had all of those things. The king would decree, as in the legislative branch. The king would try between purses, as in the judicial branch, and the king would act and be the commander in chief and all of those things, as in the executive branch. And so monarchy got split into three in the American system. And again, the American founding fathers were were classicists. They they were raised in an era when the Erasmus from Erasmus of Rotterdam, when the when the Erasmus educational method was on full display, which was sort of the fruition of Renaissance humanism. So the American founding fathers were classicists. And so they studied these things. And so they divided the powers so that the monarchy was broken up into three powers in the American system. So when Kathy Newman comes into onto the set in front of the sacred camera for our mass media, monarchical vision. She inhabit the spirit inhabits her and she prosecutes Jordan Peterson. Now, what does all of this have to do with Andrea and David Fuller? Well, obviously, there's the David Fuller connection to BBC four and to Kathy Newman. And he talks about this regular because he was a colleague of hers. He knew her. You know, he was at least an acquaintance of her. And after the Jordan Peterson thing, he would have loved to have had a conversation with her. But you can't have a conversation like that in the court on television. The the medium will not allow it. The spirits will not allow it. Now, a little bit later, I want to get into. And I know, Nate, you're going to be excited. I'm going to end. So is Berne, because Berne was the one who, you know, put me onto this propaganda by Jacques Loul. In a lot of ways, Andrea typifies this new media because she is not Kathy Newman. And I hope she doesn't aspire to ever be Kathy Newman. But when Andrea is doing an interview like this, she is very real. She is who she is. And I know when I did my conversation with with Jonathan Peugeot and myself and her, I'd regularly see the comments, oh, what's she saying? And she has read the comments and so she's internalized it. You know, she says, I'm ridiculous. And Peugeot rightly said, you're not ridiculous. If you were ridiculous, we wouldn't talk to you. And so I am to me, it speaks volumes of of David Fuller and Jonathan Peugeot that they give her interviews because they don't need to. They both have, you know, their platforms are of sufficient size that they don't need to talk to Andrea, but they give her their time. And, you know, from if you talk to Andrea and if you go on her channel, it's very enjoyable because it's a real conversation. What do I mean by that? It's not a it's not a Kathy Newman conversation. Well, what is it real about Kathy Newman and that? Well, it's it's real, but it's a different reality. And it's it's very much the Blue Church and it's the court of the Blue Church. And all of those dynamics that that Peterson talked about that went into the creation of that Blue Church. Television time is very scarce. And so, you know, all of that stuff that that Peterson talked about in the Michael Malice video, it's all right. It's all right there that made the Blue Church the Blue Church. And this is where technology both creates the Blue Church and is destroying the Blue Church. And it's destroying the Blue Church through YouTube because there's no end to the bandwidth with YouTube. And so about 250 people have seen this conversation so far. And I hope more see it on behalf of this. I won't play the whole conversation, but I thought the whole conversation was excellent. And again, some of you will watch it. And because it's not Blue Church, you will despise it. Probably not many of you because you'll find you'll find my lack of blue. You'll find comments about my lack of Blue Church programming on my channel. You know, you'll find them too. Is that so much time? Yeah, so much time. And I that's just the way it is, baby. Because again, what I'm doing in these videos is exactly what Peterson talks about. It's a brain dump. And the fact that any of you watch it is a is because of the disruption of technology. And, you know, I watch it too. I watch I watch long conversations between other people. And, you know, I'm right in the middle of dissecting this long conversation between John Verbeke and Jordan Peterson. And I know some of you look at me and say, well, why would you why would you spend all that time dissecting that? Well, because there's gold there and because I want to know and because Peterson is important and why spend time dissecting this? Well, I'm going to wind up dissecting more because now that I'm talking I'm thinking I really should start earlier with David's answer to how his relevance realization figuring out why Peterson was important. So I think I'm going to play that too, because he first gave an answer. I guess they had a technical problem and they lost the first one. So they talked about that early on. So so what Andrea is doing here is is I think very important even though it's not Blue Church. It's it's part of this sense making reality where Andrea sort of like I'm doing is posting in real time her figuring things out. Now the first challenge to this was. Why what was Peterson doing? Why was that important? Why did it capture the imagination of so many of us? And what I love about Andrea's interview here is she's sort of saying, well, it's sort of Blue Church is to say, well, I'm doing this for the audience. And she said, no, I'm doing this for me because I want to figure this out because the certain stuckness that Western civilization found itself in. I was in that stuckness. And for a hot minute there, it sure looked like Jordan Peterson and the IDW were going to help. Now, there is a world of strangeness about that whole thing, too, because we don't have any idea what's what's going on with that either. And again, I think I think David Fuller is one of the best explainers of that. And because he is both inside the light, he was, you know, and he describes himself later in this video as, you know, he was he was big into Bitcoin early and talked a lot of people into Bitcoin who have now done quite well when at least when the price ran up. But he said, well, I sold my Bitcoin. So so he's a he's a classic early adopter. And again, if you think you've got all the way back to my Brett Anderson conversation, I really should talk to Brett again. You go all the way back to my Brett Anderson conversation because that was that was a real deal logos experience for me. Now, deal logos when it comes now, I'm going to get Calvinist on you deal logos when it comes is always a gift. Why do I say that? It's something we participate in. This is very much for vakey and transjective. OK, Tim Keller used to say you build an altar. What did he mean by that? Well, he was grabbing on to the Elijah Carmel story. You have to build an altar. And then God's fire from heaven comes down. And so. The Brett the Brett Anderson conversation was very much a deal logos experience for me because while while we were having that conversation, I just had this sense of humanity as this giant. Three dimensional and fleshed and bodied. They're going to use machine because the machine ages to a whether to a degree. But but this entire thinking machine where it's almost this humanity is almost this computational device working out a problem. This is where we get get the sense of meaning in life. And yeah, it's not 64. It's 42. We're as as a as a species. That's not even the best word to say it because we are not separated from the world that we inhabit in the context and everything. But as a species, we are sort of the mouthpiece of the consciousness Congress that is working through the story that the creator launched in this world. And that I think of Tolkien and a Louvatar and and the Silmarillion where that's such a beautiful way that Tolkien gets at that. But. David Fuller, I think. He because he wasn't just looking at the light and Kathy Newman in that sense. In the the liturgy of Blue Church, when she talked to Jordan Peterson was attempting to look at the light and what Jordan Peterson so successfully did in that interview was say no, you're in a different light. And does that different light really make sense? And so Jordan Peterson sort of broke the frame and he did it in a big public way. And Blue Church was exposed, which I think is a very interesting thing. And Blue Church was exposed, which which is interesting because again, if you look at my my my commentary on the Barry Weiss conversation, which was fascinating at all sorts of levels. I mean, Barry Weiss and Jordan Peterson are in many ways mourners of the fall of Blue Church. And in some ways they want it back, but it's not coming back. And in that way, like many in the IDW. They are modernists in denial about the passing of their age. And Peterson. See, and this is where Vervecky is not IDW because Vervecky says Jordan said, you know, you've always been a radical and Peugeot is a radical. I'm a little less radical because, of course, I've got. Credentials in a Protestant church and Protestant churches deeply blue. Even though Protestant church in terms of American politics is also deeply red. And this is, you know, again, part of the big picture. A lot of the videos that I did when I was talking about this article about how the civil rights movement basically cratered the mainline church and mainline. I mean, the the Protestant establishment of the mid 20th century that reached its height during the Cold War. That was really the height of Blue Church. But but Peterson and and the rest of the IDW were modernists and denial. And you see this perhaps best typified in Brett Weinstein and in the battles that he's been fighting because he very much Sam Harris to. They very much want to see the hegemony of the Blue Church continue. But that rationalistic. Right brain. That era is over. It's been disrupted by technology. It's not coming back. We are all postmodern, but not in the dairy. I can't say those Frenchman's dairy, da and Foucault. Rafe just had a good conversation with John Vervecky on Rafe's channel about postmodernity. I only saw the first part of it, but what I saw, I really liked. And that I'm just so ADHD. I just flip between videos. And this one trumped that one for my late night listening last night. So that's why this one's getting a video today. Back to David Fuller. David, I think, has some of the best takes on Peterson because he's both inside the light. He's both a Peterson believer and he's outside. He's got the capacity to move inside and outside the light back and forth, back and forth. And that's often what we need, because secularity continues to be the the trade language of the world. But that is going away, too. And it's a rather frightening thing to think about secularity going away. The beginning of my question and answer last Friday, I had this talk about the orange church in Canada. And whereas the individual on Bridges of Meaning is, you know, he said, but we're going to need to find a we're going to need to find a bridge of meaning. The individual on Bridges of Meaning is, you know, he said, but we're going to need to find a we're going to need to find a system so that we don't kill each other. Yeah, that's what secularity did, because secularity arose as sort of a Protestant invention with the cat, which the Catholics sort of collaborated on and assumed, which is a way for Protestants and Catholics to stop killing each other. And so secularity sort of became a a resolution of Christendom in that if we can't believe if we can't agree on the dogma or the doctrine, at least we can agree that we shouldn't kill each other. But the the formation of secularity continued to be fundamentally Christian. And that's why it became sort of the secret second sister of the church. And that church evangelized the world according to it. But but that church is now passing away as well. And so the fall of the American mainline was it was the was the anticipation of that. And now, of course, many in the mainline are trying to replace sort of late 20th century secularity with woke as the new way forward. But it's it's parasitic. It's parasitic. Peugeot has that thing nailed. It cannot stand on its own. And so in that sense, we are all going into post modernity. We're calling it post modernity because we don't have a new name for it. But the the way that the postmodern philosophers, as we call them, how much they got wrong is also being exposed because they also were in many ways parasitic. And I think you can see this in the lives of these radicals that we are talking to in our little corner of the of the of the universe of the Internet. You know, the radicality of Jonathan Peugeot, the radicality of John Vervecky, the radicality of rebel wisdom. So a good way to understand Andrea's role in this is in some way she's sort of the every man, but she's a woman. She's a she's a mom. She's got three little boys and she's got a husband and she's listening to this stuff and she's trying to figure it out. And so her channel is delightfully, you know, in a lot of ways parallel to my channel where we're just trying to figure this out. Now, because David Fuller has expertise and credentials, his ironically, his channel is a little bit more. In alignment with the liturgy of the passing phase. Now, that's that's not a knock in any way, because human beings need transitions and his channel is different aspects. They have his members community. And if you've if you never if you want in on that, you can become a member of rebel wisdom and participate in those communities. And and David has invited me a couple of times to participate in some of those community meetings over Zoom. And I really like it. And I've told him that, too. I think I think what you're doing with these communities is really important. And it's parallel to what I'm doing with. Hopefully, in the next month or so, we'll see the emergence of the estuary protocol, because I think it's gotten ripe enough with the work that John Van Donk and his estuary leadership support network has been doing over the last year. This is part of the reason why when I sort of talked about estuary, everyone was expecting a rollout. But I'm not a corporation. I'm just me. And in this isn't something that Apple or Microsoft or Samsung are rolling out as a consumer product. This is something participatory that we are putting together together in real time. And so when I talked about estuary and people picked up on the idea, and that's why I said there is no the estuary that Paul is rolling out. This is something we are going to build together. And John Van Donk, who has been a partner with me very early on in this thing, you know, took it and ran with it and said, I said, yeah, I'll I'll support you. And same with Sherry, Sherry Harkin and her her artists, artists network. She's doing videos. Andrea was a part of this. It's been very interesting to see the way that so many of the critical leaders in what I call estuary are women. And I think there's real reason for that. And so many of them are moms. Because here's the thing. What moms know how to it's not really multitasking. It's a lot of task coaching, but moms know how to multitask. Moms know how to organize children. Moms know how moms have a very practical sense of getting things done because you have to as a mom. And so I think there's a there's very much even though this my channel is quite male, the moms, the moms have power. And influence far beyond their numbers in this estuary space. And so Andrea is very much a leader in bridges of meaning. And, you know, you can just tell that because we have these video spaces. I haven't been in the open studio for a long time. And that's that's to my discredit. I just found it hard to get anything done in there because we kept having interesting conversations. But, you know, Andrea, whenever Andrea is in a channel, everybody's there and Andrea keeps the conversation moving. And I think a big part of that is because she's a mom. That's that's a lot of this is and there's so there's a fair amount of mommying going on in this little corner of the universe of the Internet. And Andrea is doing that. So. OK, back to David Fuller. And I want to start with an earlier part of this conversation. But you know what you're thinking, your feelings. So so I don't what am I asking? What where were you in that space right then? Thinking this is worth betting all the marbles. And if you go back to that interview, which was I think happened in October or November 2017, that I then released as an interview, but also turned into documentary truth in the time of chaos. If you look back at that interview, I didn't ask him very much at all about cultural stuff. It was much more about Jung, the shadow synchronicities, sort of his more sort of spiritual religious understanding and perspective. Yeah. And that was what I really felt he articulated beautifully, this sense of the logos truth. And I felt like he yeah, there's something very congruent between his message and his his method at that point. Like he really was doing the thing that he was talking about. He was you got this sense of kind of, yeah, this real. I loved it when he said he was doing the thing he was talking about. I should I should read this text from my friend. So this was a friend of mine who was the first one to let me know that the Vervecki-Peterson conversation had dropped. And he the whole text stream was was quite interesting. JP just talked with John Vervecki, just dropped full nerd mode activated. You get a shout out early, JP. Jordan Peterson is very aware of you. He says, as big as the Peugeot conversation was, I don't think we can exaggerate the significance of this conversation in this little corner of the Internet. And he said, I've never seen Jordan Peterson like this. And I was sitting across from my wife at breakfast and she had just gone to the bathroom or something because I don't have my phone out when I'm talking to my wife. And I said, well, now you're just torturing me. And he said, when you when you get to it, tell me if you want to talk to me. And he said, well, now you're just torturing me. And he said, when you when you get to it, tell me if you think I'm wrong. And he was exactly right. And then he he wrote this. It just finished my commentary, my first commentary on it. I could see which I could see you struggling how to say something meaningful about such a multifaceted discussion. Yeah, I think the dynamic between him and John, including the status differential and that John is still an active, prolific academic, probably played a key role. Your question, what is going on here seems most salient and not just within the conversation, but also where this entire project is going. All of it, all of this talking, we're all doing to what end? And I think so right here when David Fuller says, you know, the man and his actions were doing the same thing. And I think that was critical in the Jordan Peterson in the Jordan Peterson moment. Now, I know that there is there in Canada and perhaps at University of Toronto, there are differences of opinion as to did Jordan. In fact, this was this was a big conversation on the Internet. Did Jordan freak out unnecessarily? Was it really as bad as Jordan says it is? And that gets us all into the culture war stuff. But talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk. But Jordan Peterson acted in a way now he acted with his talking, but he acted and and talk is one of the biggest agency pieces we have. Who's talking about that with? Anyway, the old cliche talk is cheap takes on new resonance in some ways. Talking publicly has never been more expensive. Now, it certainly was a lot more expensive throughout most of human history, and it was expensive for Martin Luther. It was expensive for the people in the Soviet Union. It was expensive. So here in the United States, with our First Amendment, we have we have a large degree of protection from for our people. We have we have a large degree of protection from for our free speech. But it is the talk. The price of talking has risen and it has risen because secularism and blue churches failing. And so these conventions are withdrawing. And even in a totalitarian state, at least you know what the rules are. And we're entering into a period where we don't know what the rules are. So that's why the price of talk is going up. In other ways, it's never been cheaper. And this is the disruption of technology and why Blue Church is being disrupted and what Andrea is doing with her channel and what rebel wisdom is doing and what I'm doing. So talk has never talk. The cost of speech is going up. But at the same time, the volume of speech is increasing and the whole platform war about you look at Bret Weinstein and YouTube over coverage during the covid all this kind of stuff. I've been asking myself this question more and more. And I think he's I think my friend is exactly right in this. And if maybe I can lure him onto my channel and do a conversation that we tape. But because I know he'll watch this and he knows I'm talking about him. But this this I mean part of the Peterson moment, part of why it felt like a revelation to many of us now. The whole premise behind depth psychology is that we have this consciousness Congress and our conscious selves are only aware of just a little bit. There's whole lots of other things going on that we are unaware of consciously. But there's seepage. It seeps up and it comes up in emotions and it comes up in our action because we've been going to this church listening to these sermons and it's like, this just doesn't just isn't doing for me. And we don't do it doing it for me anymore. And the whole walk away from church that has been happening is part of that. And but it's the same with walking away from television news and walking away from blue church things. We our feet know it again. The elephant knows it. The rider doesn't the rider is always the last to know. But the elephant knows that the elephant starts acting and the elephant starts squirming and the rider doesn't know why the elephant is squirming. And and and so then when Peterson happened, it was like bang. Oh, there's something and we all paid attention. But now we're still trying to dissect it. And again, I think of this vast computational machine that I had this vision of when I was talking to Brett Anderson that that we're bang. We're we're all figuring this out together as we go. It's a kind of yeah, this real alignment between the man and the message. And and that cut through at the time that I just felt and also just having a having a sense of the cultural conversation, having a sense of where it got stuck. It was like this is the thing that we need to unstick so many of these of these kind of stuck points. See it again. None of us know. And well, we've got these answers that the riders is trying to tell the elephant. Oh, it's this is going on and all the riders are talking. That's what we're doing with all of this talk. All these riders are talking back and forth and the elephants are just squirming and not knowing what to do. And pastors, of course, are squirming because people are leaving their churches and the major the mass media is squirming because it's no longer working like it used to. And, you know, radicals are rising out there and Jordan Peterson stands up and says enough. But again, he's a he's a mourner for the loss of Blue Church. But but he's also got this other aspect of him that sort of triggered us. And you know, that's you know, so I asked myself, so just this morning I released the third installment of the commentary on on Peterson and for Vickie. And I asked myself, how many how many installments are there going to be? So it's the second it's the same. Sam and Hank. And if you don't know, Sam and Hank were there in this little corner of the Internet, too. And they're they're making videos about church fathers. But and Hank, gosh, dare I say it? I mean, this has been part of Hank's journey to Hank's been on my channel a couple of times. But so Sam says Paul do for Paul will do for commentary videos on Peterson for Vickie. And Hank says, no, he'll do 10. And when I heard that, I thought, no, it'll be closer to four. And now I'm worried it's going to be closer to 10. And it's in that way. It's like it's terrifying because how much better does Hank know me than I know myself? Even though Hank and I have never shaken hands. We've spoken on the phone and we've done some conversations on this anyway. So. So we've got these two levels. And and so that's why in some ways we look around at each other and I listen to David Fuller and so often he's doing the interview thing. But when he talks directly, I think, yeah, he he's he knows this. He knows this from inside the light and he knows this from outside looking at the light. And he's he's able to articulate the things that he's doing. And he's he's able to articulate this quite well, even though, I mean, just right there, he was like, you know, we're grasping for words here. And me, me myself, I guess I'm I'm someone who does this every now and again, like gets very passionate about a certain thing and is convinced that it's the next big thing. He's an early adopter. And again, if you think about humanity as this vast computational machine working through a problem, I think that's kind of a good way to think about it. Now, why does God want us to work through a problem? Doesn't he know the answer? But this is sort of where we get into the two ways of knowing or Verveckis for peas. Because to know it propositionally is one thing. And I think so often when we say God knows everything, we mean that propositionally and fair enough. But did God know something new after the incarnation and crucifixion and resurrection and. And ascension of Christ and through his work in the church, does he know it in a different way? That's a scary question, theologically. Since he said, see, now some of you who know some theology, you say, oh, process theology, open theism. So just, you know, just chill. It's all right. It's all right. But it gets into this. So I'm anticipating this conversation I'm going to have with JP and and John Verveckis, where we're going to talk about. Because, you know, I've I've I've seeded some stuff in John and, you know, JP and I are both Christians and John can hold his own. I'm not worried about him. But, you know, so our next conversation, he's going to push back. He's going to say, well, what about the problem of evil? That's that's a lot of Christians sort of on their heels. And it's a tough thing. And and so because it asks, why would God create a universe in which there's so much suffering? I was actually watching a rationality rules new video last night, but haven't haven't for a while done any commentary on Woodford. It's a very difficult question. And so we are working through these things. And again, this isn't we're not trying to come up with a propositional answer. We're trying to come up with something that's perspectival and participatory and procedural. I got them all. I got all four. And and I think that's that's really what, you know, the the the Peugeot Peterson conversation about. About theosis is about because theosis is, in a sense, the the final realization. And again, Viveki knows exactly the double edged sort of relevance realization. And in some ways, his relevance realization is right there with his four piece because realization is both propositional, but it's also participatory, perspectival, procedural. It's both of those. And and that's why I think I think part of also his transjective also has this, because when I come to you. When I come to you with my ideas, now with all this talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk, talk. And you're out there living with your procedural, your participatory, your perspectival. It's transjective sort of between those two modes of knowing. And there's lots of two modes. And this is why dualisms will always be with us being and becoming. They just left a couple of really important comments in my last video. It's like, I hate it when I hate it. Love it when people leave comments that are like, oh, no, I got her. He's right. And I'm wrong. Ego, of course, takes a little hit there. But I want conversation partners that will do that because now I'll grow. And then it's like, oh, I'm not I'm not smart enough. I can't learn all this. I don't have time to really get into Aquinas and Aristotle and and the relationship between, you know, Aristotle and Neoplatonism and so on. How can I do that? And sometimes I'm right. Next big thing. And then you're. Well, I did. Sometimes I'm right. And then sometimes I'm right and I don't stick with it like I had loads of Bitcoin a while ago. And then I and that's this is the this is the early adopters dilemma. Kind of sold them. And I was I told loads of people about Bitcoin. There's lots of people are very wealthy because of because I told them about Bitcoin like five, six, seven years ago. But personally, I hope they're supporting rebel wisdom. And then I had quite a few and then ended up selling them because I don't have that much sort of sticking power. Oh, yeah, there was this sense. So I've done this many times. I've sort of seen what the next. See, and this is what you won't get in the court of Blue Church. This kind of see David brings himself to this interview and Andrea helps bring that out of him because, you know, we have lots of ways of she's not putting on airs. She's she's very authentic. She's very real. And she says she's showing him I can do this in public. And this is why in the Kathy Newman interview, Jordan Peterson broke the Internet when she was going through the procedurals, the procedures of the court of Blue Church. And Jordan Peterson just said, no, this, this, this, this, not. No, no, no. And afterwards, of course, Peterson's like. And he's not a, you know, Peterson isn't a professional person. He did plenty of Ontario Public Television, so he knew some of it. But he's like, you know, what happened? I had a conversation with a real person in the blue room with Kathy Newman. And suddenly we got into court and it'd be like, yeah, well, you know, you might you might bump into the judge over at the coffee shop and talk about politics. But when you get into court, all rise. He's got robes on. He's behind a bench. He's got the authority and the power of state. It's a different it's a different arena. And so the agents in the arena are different. OK, but here in this conversation, I mean, David Fuller can sort of do a little disclosing. And this is kind of how I am. And this is this is where I am. And the giant computational machine that is the story of heaven and earth. Big thing might be, but then haven't really followed through. Oh, but luckily, Peterson, it happened quick. Quick. You're like, I didn't have to get us in you. He stuck around. Well, you stuck around until he did it. It's like so. So see what's what's Andrea doing here? She's she's she's also and in a sense, she's also figuring it out in time in front of the camera. I should really finish my sentences because as my wife continually reminds me, when I don't finish my sentence, she doesn't always know how it's going to end. Oh, she's pretty good at guessing now after 30. Three years, but. Yes, got to finish my sentences. But see, this authenticity. Well, we love authenticity. So this is authentic and that's sort of the new but authentic is messy. There's a. This is so perfect. So there's the first and the second way. But the second way, there's a there's a space in between because he had. He he he was going a whole like full tilt, like you were saying, and then had to leave because of his wife's illness and then his own. And there was but he he left, but many didn't. And and and we're like, we were all still there on Twitter. We were all still there. And and there the IDW fell apart when he was gone. And and I that was the last time I spoke with you was about, you know, what is this IDW thing? Is it even the thing? And what could it be? And all those things. But it's it's now I get even more clarity looking back at it. It was just one thing because you were in your little sum up video. It wasn't a sum up video. It was like promoting the courses that you guys are. All right. You just came out yesterday, is it? Yeah. Sorry. Yeah. So so you it was perfect. I'm like, oh, this is fueling my interview with David for tomorrow. So so you guys and so this is what's funny, too, because. After self-critique in these things, because when Jordan Peterson lets out his inner voice, talking to John Vervecky, I worry about his mental health. But when when Andrea does it, I don't worry about it at all, because this is just what Andrea does. And and that also shows in some ways. Peterson as a mourner of the fall of Blue Church, I commented on Twitter, a couple of weeks ago, because the first thumbnail that came out of the Peugeot-Peterson conversation had just a still like I often do it from Jonathan Peugeot in that interview. And they Photoshopped that into the thumbnail. A few days later, outcomes, a new thumbnail of the same interview with Peugeot in a coat. And. Fair enough, you know, if you look at Tim Lott's conversation with Jordan Peterson on Jordan's channel, an early one about the resurrection, there's there's Jordan in a white T-shirt, you know, sitting there in his office talking to some dude on the Internet and just having a real conversation. And then you know, he's sitting there in his office, talking to some dude on the Internet and then, of course, this gets into what David Fuller will talk about. Well, now suddenly you've got three and a half million subs. You're going to still wear that grimy T-shirt on the Internet. Will Paul VanderKlay clean his office? I was thinking about that this morning. I should really clean my office. I should really empty my office and give it a thorough cleaning. But I find doing this far more interesting than cleaning my office. So hope my sound levels are right. Now, Peterson wears a coat. And fair enough, that's, you know, again, these are all liturgies and these liturgies signal things to us. And so then the verveky thumbnail, of course, had John in a coat and tie. And, you know, a bunch of people were like, does John own a coat and tie? We're used to seeing John on the COVID sofa with the with the the thing behind him and, you know, doing his things. And there's nostalgia for, you know, pre status rocket. Wave one, Jordan Peterson. So. But all of this stuff is part of it. Brought this up about the factions and the little tribes that formed. So, no, no, no, no, they were more more coherent together. But then now Trump is gone and now COVID is winding down ish, you know. And so they're they're they're turning into like more fractals, whereas they were a little bit more coherent. And we saw that a little bit earlier on with the IDW sort of breaking apart. And so this is the intermission for Peterson and. Intermission is a good word. So my question there is. Is. Like, I'm kind of insinuating why, but I'd like to know why from from your perspective, and I know we had an entire discussion. The name of her channel is She Asks Why. Discussion is what's going on with IDW before, but I feel like it's even more straightforward and simple now. So please, straightforward and simple answer, David. Can you summarize the question again? OK, yeah, so things are breaking things in the interim Peterson period. We're going whole force as almost like these behemoths of groups combining and an alliance. That's I love that language. It's very vivid. These behemoths of groups combining. That's really good because she's again. You're not going to find this on television. But this is very I mean, it's coming straight from her heart. She's expressing it. It's very image based. It's something elephants and behemoths of groups, something elephants can connect with. And the enemy of my enemy is my friend with the atheists and the Christians and whatnot. You know, and Peter Boghossian and James Lindsay were talking to conservative Calvinists. I was like. You know, I was I was just happy James Lindsay would have a conversation with me and I knew I'm a nice Calvinist. I'm used to being friends with atheists and David Lindsay's used to being friends with Christians too. But, you know, watching those guys flip, it's like, wow, the times they are a change in and others. You know, and they really formed these groups, IDW being one of them. And then sorry, intellectual dark web, for those of you who don't know. But then now they've broken apart, I'd say, and are just down to little individuals of people. And they're not really groups anymore. And I thought that was excellent because it's that and I was thinking, what's what's my video today going to be? Am we going to do jump in, do some more commentary? Well, I got to I got to go down to rapid transit and get Freddie a new RT card. People don't know what pastors do. We unclog toilets. We go down to regional transit. We give people rides. We deal with the insane. That's what pastors do. So I just want to know in that interim anyway, they didn't finish my sentence. You know, the rise and fall of the IDW. Why why did the IDW fail? And even just phrasing it that way, fail at what? Did they fail? No, they didn't fail completely. But what were we hoping for from them? What did we want to imagine? So yesterday was the fifth of July, which was a holiday because the fourth was on Sunday. So I took the day off and I don't really ever take a day off. I do, but I just love what I do so much. It's like, oh, good, I get to do some reading today. And so I was reading Jacques Loul's propaganda. And the the introduction to this book, at least this edition of it, I bought it used. It's kind of a hard book to find. It was outstanding. I was thinking I might read it in this video. I only have it in paper, so I was thinking maybe I should copy it and I can put it up on the screen. We'll see what I do. Maybe I will. Maybe I won't. Who knows? The period why they stayed together so well and now they're this sort of thing. So they're this sort of fizzled out. Yeah. I mean, the intellectual dark web is something again that we covered quite a lot on Rebel Wisdom. And I think they sold themselves as being non-tribal. But I think as many people have pointed out, they were a tribe. They were. They had their own sort of tribal alliances. And there was a sense that they split along different lines, especially in the run up to the election in in 2020. And Peterson was was absent for that. I wonder if he hadn't been absent, how that might have played out. That's a really interesting thought experiment. Although given what happened on the book tour. I don't know that it would make much of a difference. And whether it might have played out in a different way. But my sense, my sense now, like the fragmentation you're talking about and that we put out on the film a couple of days ago is I think Trump, in a way, was this incredibly obviously this incredibly polarizing force and the arguments. People fell out on different sides of this, like some people saying, well, Trump is our only chance against the radical left, against wokeness. And I always thought that was a that was a that was wrong because he was like he fed it. He fed it and he basically from their perspective proved everything about their their critique of America being this racist. Here, too, David is really nice because he's not an American and Andrea. Well, Andrea is half American, but he can he can look at the American political dynamics, not through it, because not a part of it. So you can look at it. They've got Brexit and they got all those things. But it's helpful that he's an outsider. This America being this racist, ignorant like Trump. Trump was a was an example of the thing. Very easy to make the case on the other side. I also feel like he was like the real battle line in culture. Why Barry Weiss was forced out of the New York Times? Why Andrew Sullivan had to leave New York magazine? Why he had all these revolts in different news organizations over last summer, which I covered in something called the sense making series. The real fault line where most of the heat is is between wokeness, broadly defined social justice ideology and old school liberalism. And Trump rode in on the back of that and was kind of as a as a prime. I mean, as a scam artist, effectively, he was able to kind of weaponize that division and take and be elected. But ultimately, it's a civil war within the left, which is something that Brett and Eric Weinstein have talked about. And I think Trump was a distraction from that civil war within the left that now that Trump is out of the way, that's the battle that that ultimately needs to be fought. It's not so much between left and right. I mean, there's obviously divisions between left and right. There's divisions all over the map that my friend Peter Lindbergh talks about the different memetic tribes of what he calls culture war two point another Canadian, which is a more sort of multipolar war. And that but I think the most heat is along that dividing line between social justice when it turns into an all encompassing ideology versus liberalism, which is is more about individuals, individual difference, meritocracy, that that kind of. And that's a that is where I think we've seen a lot of the fragmentation. We've seen a lot of people on the anti woke side, I think, get captured by serious ideology and become the thing they're fighting against. Someone like James Lindsay being the perfect example from my perspective. And so you've seen James Lindsay fall out with Claire Layman. You've seen Sam Harris fall out with with most of the rest of the W.W. You've seen all of this sort of. So I think I think Trump in a in a weird paradoxical way was a unifying factor in many, many ways that now that he's gone, I think it's safer in some ways to make the argument against social justice extremism when you're not being accused of basically benefiting Trump. So I think there's a there's a freedom now for those of us who are suspicious of that ideology. But but were were, I guess, from the other side, vulnerable to the attack that you're you're helping get Trump reelected or whatever like that's now no longer there. So I think it's allowed for a lot more diversity of opinion and for a lot more of these fractures to open up. And I think we've seen that really happen after the election. Is that helpful? I don't know how Peterson relates to that so much. No, it does. No, I it does. No, I've got it all. I've visuals, the visual. I think that actually helps a lot because there's two factors in the second wave with Peterson. One is that, well, the the blue church will continue to try to discipline him. We saw that in the Times of London moment. So they're they're not going to they're not blue church is not going to forgive and forget the heresy of Jordan Peterson, the blue church heresy. They're not going to forgive and forget. That is true. But also Peterson isn't doing he isn't he isn't. So what happens in Protestant churches when you have church discipline is you never actually get around to disciplining the people because they just stop coming. OK. And this is essentially the difference from the Middle Ages in the Middle Ages to one degree or another. Then in the early modern period, to one degree or another, the state would collaborate with the church and do do discipline on you. Now, once there's a whiff of discipline, you're out of there. And so church discipline doesn't happen. And so as long as Jordan Peterson stays off the airways or cable TV, they'll leave him alone because he'll do his little thing on YouTube. And, you know, YouTube hasn't taken him down and all that stuff. So the waves are different, too. But I think I think his point about Trump and Peterson is right. A big part of it, a big part of what made that first wave what it was, was Trump. Gosh, in my head is forming. So don't worry. So so don't you worry, David Fuller. So I will bring it all together. So you you touched on we're not even worried if you don't, Andrea, just keep doing what you're doing. The heart of Peterson's message you saw in your little I can see things happen sometimes you saw you saw this. This sort of more I will say spiritual but psychological spiritual is a good word slash spiritual sort of things. Yet yet in his in his absence. But but no, people but but many people picked up on the political side of him. That's what a law that's what almost drove his popularity is a mix of clean up your room. Sorry, clean up your damn room. And and oh, he's, you know, speaking, standing up against them, them establishments taking away our freedom of speech and and whatnot. And and and the you but what you saw, you weren't looking at that from how it sounds. But but many were and many of these these factions we're talking about were I see it as a holding up looking at the top layer. Whereas like there's this depth that many did pull towards but was getting because of Trump. It was like all brought up there. But then Trump goes away. And like, you know, all this covid stuff is still kind of here, but not as intense. See, again, what's she doing? This is this is free flow. This is not edited and it's messy. But she is she's being authentic. That's what she's doing. She's telling us just what she thinks. And she's making it up in real time. So nothing to unite in that big way around there. And so now with and then Peterson is I I will say he's a he's a broken man now. And I don't think it's bad to be broken because I think that's where we could we can grow and we can be truly humbled. That's a lot of Christianity coming out right in there. So he's he's a different person. He's not he's not both of those things. He's sort of he seems to be in one in that that yearning space. And she did record this. They had this conversation before the verveke Peterson video was released. And and and and and many are still in the political space. But I've I've moved on and I feel like rebel wisdom very much. You guys have actually not really gotten as involved. But you know, you said it early on, you did the IDW sort of pieces and and and whatnot. But I feel like you guys have been able to sort of stick with that more higher level but deeper level spiritual space. And that's what I think is left when like, you know, the the burning away of what of what's the I don't want to say trivial human matters. But when you are looking to have what's left, you know, what's left when you clear away the sort of bickering over like right and left. And when you clear out that deadwood, it does seem to have this be this depth. And so so that brings us to the second Peterson wave or Peterson number two. And and so that's that's what I want to, I guess, look look into because. Like it's I kind of accidentally explained he's different. He is different. But but it seems like we're different. And some of us aren't like, you know, some of us are. And I think that's really good. He's different. But we're different. We all went through a transformation together. And, you know, she said, you know, I got beyond him. And and so, you know, a lot of people, well, why are we still talking about Peterson? Well, we're not just talking about Peterson. We're talking about us and we're getting beyond it. And we're wrestling with my friends. Text question talk is more expensive. But talk has never been cheaper. Both of those things at the same time. So like wrapped up in that, you know, political layer. But it feels like we're we've gone through almost like I mean, we I mean, me. Like I feel different from one from the first time. But I don't know that I'm alone. So that's what I want to get your opinion on is that we've kind of been brought on this journey with Peterson. And it's not it's because of him, but it's not because of him. It's like you said, he's he's touched on something. And and and we're going through it. And so I'm like. So we're you know, all of us talkers, all of us writers up here and we're trying to get a sense. OK, we're all we're all riding elephants. And maybe we're going to monkey with this metaphor a little bit because get a little bit more Jungian on it, because the elephants are sort of a collective unconscious. And we're all sort of riding up here and we're all talking. But in some ways, we're all we have individual elements. But the funny thing about a herd is that you can watch the schools of fish herds of sheep. They move as herds, they move as one. And that's what a herd does. And so the elephant is the elephants are moving underneath. And so all of us riders on top are talking, talking, talking, talking. And we're trying to figure it out. I'm wondering what what is this new and I do think that rebel wisdom is pushing forward in this space. So that's what I want to know. What is happening in this second Peterson era? Yeah, I I'm looking forward to seeing his conversation with John Vivekhi because John Vivekhi is someone I think is really pushing things forward and his interest in Deologos as a kind of form of alive, emergent dialogue is exactly what I think we need is to recover. And that's what I think a lot of us were attracted to with the IDW and with Peterson originally was this sense of novelty, something being new, something being original, the sense that people were going to new areas and that sense of novelty. I think a lot of us now feel is no longer there or we struggle to find to know where it is in the culture. So I think Peterson obviously talked to John recently and apparently I haven't seen it, but was very it was a long conversation. It sounds like he enjoyed the conversation and it sounds like they're going to have another one. I think most of the interesting stuff is happening in the cracks. I think part of the problem with the with the IDW was it was already one as soon as it was named, it ceased to be because it was no longer dark by definition. OK. And and the criticism from the beginning was what on earth are you talking about? How can Joe Rogan, the biggest podcast from the world, be dark? How can Sam Harris be dark? How can Jordan Peterson be dark? And that was true. Like they were dark because they were kind of being ignored. But at the same time, if you have that kind of public profile, if you have that attention on you, it's very, very hard to keep growing in public. And I think there's a lot of sense that very few of the hierarchies bind and blind. They really do. And, you know, that status rocket that Jordan took gave him reach, but also captured him in many ways. The sense that very few of the original members of that group did grow in any significant way. Once we learned what they thought about certain things, I think they they became established with certain positions, with certain arguments that then they kind of calcified around those positions. Yeah. Yeah. And that sense that not just around those positions, but. See, in this, you know, when I was listening to this part of the conversation earlier, this gets into the whole thing of dogma. We hear this often. Dogma is the problem. Dogma is the problem. Well, that's sort of the combination of the conocer saber, propositional versus perspectival, participatory, procedural. I'm starting to get all the four P's all at the same time. The transjective, you don't just say, OK, no more propositional. No, it's not going to work. It's not going to work. They work together. Saber, conocer. You have to have those both ways of knowing. You have to both be in the light and you have to see the light. And we have to do this back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. And that's how we learn. And part of. So I was maybe. What was interesting about I haven't finished book by any means, I only just started, but maybe maybe now is a good time to read some of this book. OK, now this book was written in nineteen sixty five. I think a lot of it was written in sixty two. This is a vintage books edition from nineteen seventy three. And this introduction was written in nineteen sixty five. That is important. And if you read. If you read Marsden's Twilight of the American Enlightenment, You get a sense for the kinds of anxieties that were out there in the fifties and sixties about authenticity very much was an existential age. And so the anxiety was about freedom. And I began reading this because a lot of my thinking about principalities and powers is about. Well, what what are we and do we think and how do we think? And again, I'm thinking about this vast computational machine. So I'm just going to read the introduction. It's not very long, but I think it'll help give a sense of what's going on in this book. Jockey Lule's view of propaganda and his approach to the study of propaganda are new. The principal difference between his thought edifice and most other literature on propaganda is that a Lule regards propaganda as a sociological phenomenon rather than something made by certain people for certain purposes. When David Fuller talks about, I think, the fall and death of the IDW, it's because in some ways its members fell into propaganda, not that they put out propaganda, but they sort of fell into it. Propaganda exists and thrives. It is the Siamese twin of our technological society. Only in the technological society can there be anything of the type and order of magnitude of modern propaganda, which is with us forever. And only with the all pervading effects that flow from propaganda can the technological society hold itself together and further expand. Now, we're reading this. This is written at the height of mid modernity. When you get into, let's see if I have his book here. When you get into, what's the book that launched this channel in many ways? I don't see it right now. When you get into Neil Postman's Amusing Ourselves to Death, in some ways part of how that book can be understood as is the beginning of the decay of this thing. This thing, this hyper thing that Elul is writing about. Most people are easy prey for propaganda, Elul says, because of their firm but entirely erroneous conviction that it is composed of only lies and tall stories and that conversely, what is true cannot be propaganda. But modern propaganda has long disdained the ridiculous lies of past and outmoded forms of propaganda. It operates instead with many different kinds of truth, half truth, limited truth, truth out of context. Even Goebbels, the propaganda minister of Adolf Hitler, always insisted that the Wehrmacht, that's the professional German army, communicase be as accurate as possible. A second basic misconception is that, is that, a second basic misconception that makes people vulnerable to propaganda is the notion that it serves only to change opinions. That is one of its aims, but a limited subordinate one. Much more importantly, it aims to intensify existing trends, to sharpen and focus them, and above all to lead men to action or, when it is directed at immobile, immovable opponents, to non-action through terror or discouragement to prevent them from interfering. And I really loved how he brought both of those dynamics because that's very much what we see. We see on one hand this demand for action, you hear this in the new woke church, oh we have to combat racism right now and even if it means tearing everything apart, this is the need of the moment. Or inaction, do nothing, hold fast, there's nothing to do here and propaganda works both ways. But again, getting at what he's thinking of as propaganda here, it's a little different from, as the earlier sentences said, most of our assumptions are. We think of propaganda as the propagation of lies. Now what he sees is that our entire process is embedded in a technological society of a certain making. Therefore, Elul distinguishes various forms of propaganda and calls his book Propagandas, I guess in French, propagandas, what did they do with the English? Well, they left it as singular in English. Well, that's very interesting. That plural is one of the keys of this concept. The most trenchant distinction made by Elul is between agitation propaganda and integration propaganda. The former leads men from mere resentment to rebellion. The latter aims at making them adjust themselves to desired patterns. Now part of what the anxiety and George Marsden writes about this well in The Twilight of the American Mind, I should probably pull that up just so you can see the cover of the book. The Twilight of the American Enlightenment, which 1950s and the Crisis of Liberal Belief. This was a Bancroft Prize lecture and it's an audible book as well as it is in print. And he talks about this anxiety that was going on in the 1950s in American culture of the corporate man of the suit. And of course, that broke out then in the counterculture of wearing your hair long and tie dye shirts and bell bottoms and, you know, against the man. This whole revolutionary ethos that we've sort of that that has sort of become at the center. And of course, this is very Peugeotian where you take what should be at the fringe because the counterculture, they literally they literally wore fringes. You take the fringe and you put it at the center and then, you know, as well, everything then starts to break down and mess up. The most trenchant distinction made by Alul is between agitation propaganda and integration propaganda. The former leads men from mere resentment to rebellion. The latter aims at making them adjust themselves to desired patterns. The two types rely on entirely different means. Both exist all over the world. Integration propaganda is needed, especially for the technological society to flourish and its technological means. Mass media among them in turn to make integration propaganda possible. And so, you know, you see this is classically in, let's say, a communist revolution where you bombard people with propaganda, agitation propaganda to mobilize them for action. But then you need integration propaganda to keep them docile. And of course, in 1984, names, I have these senior moments and it's like I've been this way my whole life in 1984. And I'm looking up here at his book, George Orwell makes that point beautifully in his book. So you need the agitation propaganda and the integration propaganda. It's sort of like drugs. You need your upper and your downer. I'm going to get rid of that. There we go. A related point central to Alul's thesis is that modern propaganda cannot work without education. He thus reverses the widespread notion that education is the best prophylactic against propaganda. And this you hear in Blue Church all the time. We need to we need to educate people against racism. Oh, really? Racism can just be educated out of you. You're not that's again, we're back to sort of Verveckis two kinds of knowledge. Oh, racism is bad. I won't be a racist. But then it's like but then, you know, along comes the postmodern. Oh, no, we need to. Well, tell me exactly what your idea is, how you're going to make these people anti-racist. Oh, we need a participatory. We need a participatory sort of way of knowing we need a kind of sad way of knowing so that we can, you know, like Adam knew his wife. That's the kind of knowledge we need. Thus, he reverses the widespread notion that education is the best prophylactic against propaganda. On the contrary, he says education or what usually goes by the word in the modern world is the absolute prerequisite of propaganda. And you can see some of the Michael Malice anarchism themes coming through here. In fact, education is largely identical with what a little calls pre propaganda, the conditioning of minds with vast amounts of incoherent information already dispensed for our ulterior motives and posing as facts and as education. And again, with the whole fake news and post fact era, you can see this stuff, you know, playing itself out. It will follows through by designating intellectuals as virtually the most vulnerable of all modern pro to of all to modern propaganda for three reasons. They absorb the largest amount of secondhand unverifiable information. They feel a compelling need to have an opinion on every important question of our time and thus easily succumb to opinions offered them by propaganda of all on all such indigestible pieces of information. And they consider themselves capable of judging for themselves. They literally need propaganda. In fact, the need for propaganda on the part of the propaganda is one of the most powerful elements of the thesis cast out of the disintegrating micro groups of the past. And see now we're heading back into micro groups such as family, church or village. The individual is plunged into mass society and thrown back upon his own inadequate resources, his isolation, his loneliness, his ineffectuality. And I think, you know, what's been this is exactly the process that we see happening now. The the disintegration of modernity and disintegration is exactly the right word. Propaganda then hands him a veritable abundance of what he needs, a reason for being personal involvement and participation in important events and outlet. And excuse for some of his more doubtful impulses, righteousness, all. All facetious, to be sure, all more or less spurious, but he drinks it all in and asks for more. Without this intense collaboration by the propagandist and the propagandist would be helpless. In other words, we beg for propaganda. We beg for it from our nude sources. We beg for it all over the place. Thus propaganda by first creating pseudo needs through pre propaganda and then providing pseudo satisfactions for them is pernicious. Can wholesome propaganda be made for a wholesome cause? Can democracy, Christianity, humanism be propagated by modern propaganda techniques? Now, again, it's important. This is being written in the early 60s, which means the thought process is coming out of the 1950s. And I should probably look more into a Lulz biographical information to read this better. But that's not unimportant because the time we're living in now is in some ways a fulfillment of some of this. He will traces the similarities among all propaganda efforts, communist, Nazi, Democratic. He thinks that no one can use this intrinsically undemocratic weapon, sort of like the ring of Sauron, or rather abandon himself to it unscathed or without undergoing deep transformations in the process. This is some of what David Fuller is going to talk about in terms of what happened with Jordan Peterson and the IDW. He shows the inevitable unwilled propaganda effects of which the good propagandist is unaware, the fallout from any major propaganda activity and all its pernicious consequences. Most pernicious of all, the process once fully launched tends to become irreversible. He critically reviews what most American authors have written on the subject of propaganda and mass media, having studied the literature of Laswell and Reisman with great thoroughness. Accepting some of their findings, he rejects others, particularly the effort to gauge the effects of propaganda. Illul believes that on the whole, propaganda is much more effective and effective in many more ways than most American analysis shows. Particularly, he rejects as unrealistic and meaningless all experiments that have been conducted with small groups. Propaganda is a unique phenomenon that results from the totality of forces pressing in upon an individual in his society and therefore cannot be duplicated in a test tube. And initially in the first chapter of the book, he begins talking about the relationship between the individual and the mass. And you know, where I'm coming from in this is very much trying to get a sense of spirits and principalities and where the individual fits into this matrix. To make his many original points, Illul never relies on statistics or quantification, which he hardly disdains, but on observation and logic. You see still, Illul is still writing very much within a modern context here. His treatise is a fully integrated structure of thought in which every piece fits in with all others, be it a hundred pages apart. In this respect, his work resembles Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Idea, of which the philosopher said that the reader, really to understand this book, must read it twice because no page of the book could be fully understood without knowledge of the whole. That's really true of any book, any good book at least. The process can hardly be suggested to the reader in our busy days, but he ought to be warned that to... leaf through the book is not to suffice. And then he talks more about the book. I'll just finish reading it. Paul Pickrell in Harper's Magazine said of Illul's The Technological Society that Illul, a great man, had written with monumental calm and maddening thoroughness a magnificent book. Illul's propaganda is no less maddening, monumental and thorough. What in Illul's view can mankind do? At the end of this book, Illul reaches neither a pessimistic nor an optimistic conclusion with regard to the future. He merely states that, in his view, propaganda is today a greater danger to mankind than any of the other most grandly advertised threats hanging over the human race. His super analysis ends with a warning, not a prophecy. February 1965, Conrad Kellan. And so then I, of course, went on to read more of the book. But I thought that introduction was really rather pertinent to the rise and the fall of the IDW and why did it fall? It fell because in many ways, what status does to the individual is sort of makes them into propagandists unwittingly. And the devolution to a degree in terms of non-player characters is part of this because you, and actually David and Andrea are going to go on to talk more about this here, because you wind up simply captured by your principality. And so in my conversation with David that I had on his channel, I briefly talked about institutions, but I think that is clear here because you need to you need to have the right kinds of institutions that won't that won't capture the individual. And this actually maps onto a lot of what Eric Weinstein was talking about in terms of decadence in the academy. But I didn't see, you know, I know there's this is a controversial opinion here, but I still do think that the Weinstein brothers are brilliant. And I'm sort of riffing on Jacob from Bridges of Meaning Discord, where what they can't do is organize a community. And I think Eric played with that a little bit with some of the Discord servers around his portal. I don't know what Brett is doing with that in that space, but I get the sense that Brett and Heather are just trying to make a living. And that's part of this. So I think this is critical to the fall of Peterson and the IDW. I think that explore it is very difficult to explore new territory in public as well. And I think there are some who can do that, but but I think it's very rare. And there are costs to doing that, especially if you're questioning previous. There are costs to doing that. In terms of hierarchy, I mean, I've said many times if my church were larger, if I was the pastor of a in real life mega church, if I was a denominational official in the Christian Reformed Church, I could not make these videos. I could not do what I'm doing right here and right now. Status spines and blinds. The held positions. So I think. Sorry to interrupt. And I think I think in many ways when you look at Jesus, Jesus shows what happens when you don't play this game. They come for you and they kill you. But of course, if you really believe in a resurrection and in a life after death, you can do so responsibly. You could be killed responsibly. By death, you can do that. But but I think it's very rare and there are costs to doing that, especially if you're questioning previously held positions. So I think by definition and in all fairness, I mean, the church, you need dogma. But your dogma has to be held in just the right way. Nation, a lot of the more interesting stuff is going on. At a lower level, I'd say John Bovachy is someone to check out a lot of the conversations that my friend Peter Lindbergh is having at the store. That's a really interesting place to check out. And then to realize what what stops people growing. There are incentive structures that stop people growing. People just get used to a certain type of content. What do you mean incentive structures like like following following incentives, following following views or following controversy or following certain narratives like being canceled is good for business, for example. OK, audience capture exists as a thing. Once you establish a certain position, once you've got a certain audience, it's difficult to challenge that audience. They don't like being challenged. People don't like people don't like being challenged. Really, none of us do. YouTube has a comments thread. If you're a YouTube creator, you get to learn what your audience likes, what they don't like. And every time Jordan Peterson says like, well, 98 percent of the I get I get likes 98 percent of the time. And it's like, yeah, so do I. That tells you nothing, especially with long form content like this. It's actually the negative comments that are the most valuable and the comments that critique. And part of the reason you get so many likes is because if you have, you know, the way you can see a video and decide to watch it later is to hit like and you can find it again. So no, that's he's going to continue to talk about this. I'll let some funded creator. You get to learn what your audience likes, what they don't like. A lot of people are funded by Patreon subscriptions. You get to learn what people like and don't like. There's a series of there's a series of films that anyone who cares about this conversation, I think, should watch by a guy called Timber on Toast about Dave Rubin. Yes. The Battle of Ideas. That sketches out audience capture. It sketches out what happens to someone who I believe started as a good faith actor, Dave Rubin, how he got captured by his audience, how he started producing content that they wanted to see, how if you go down that level. If you go down that that path, it's very difficult to come back. It's very difficult to pursue truth if you're worried about what other people will think. And it's very, very difficult to pursue truth if you get aligned again, aligned incentives, meaning if you have a quid pro quo with certain people that you don't criticize because you want to get on their podcast or and you get these little ecosystems of belief that all have their taboos and all have their things you can say and things you can't say. And of course, that's been the church, right? The things you can say, things you can't say. And, you know, part of what I've wanted to do is, you know, and I say to small groups, I say, you know, to the group, there's nothing you can't say in this group. Don't don't attack another person, attack an idea. But if you're honest about it, you don't say it because as a pastor, I can't work with you if you don't say it because I won't know. And you learn. And I think all of these people got subject to that. I mean, Jordan Peterson included. Like what now I'm. Yeah, the Peterson industry is a thing. Like that there are these there are these financial interests. There are these egotistical interests, not not every not every trap is a monetary trap. It's also egotistical. It's also popularity. It's also like all of these different things, which, you know, we shouldn't listen to this and act. Oh, we'll just not know. There's no Pollyanna's way around this stuff. It's a function of scale. And and so in many ways, we need scale and we can't live without it. And and it's tremendously difficult to figure out how to do this. And again, I think Jesus in many ways does this. If you look at Jesus in the Gospels, he both has scale and Galilee and then turns away from scale. And of course, I'm a Christian minister. So Jesus is my model, which I. It's also popularity. It's also like all of these different things, which which I actually thought. In my you talked about the interview that Jonathan Pajot and Jordan Peterson did, I think Pajot hinted at that in that interview where Jordan said something about his fans. Yes, as a as a community. And I felt like Jonathan was saying, whoa, whoa, whoa, careful. That's not a community. That's that's not a congregation. It's not a congregation. And that's a very unhealthy dynamic, which I think. And it's not I don't think that it's an it's not an unhealthy dynamic. You just have to understand the dynamic for what it is. And it's tremendously tempting. And it's unhealthy. It's dangerous. It's going to happen. You're not going to get rid of it. But it's dangerous. And so you have to. You know, a tiger is not an unhealthy animal, but it's an animal that must be respected. I think it certainly is, but it's one that we can all get trapped in. He was saying you need peers. Well, what I I don't know this for sure. And not just peers, you need superiors, at least in different aspects of in different hierarchies. Again, we're all nested in all of these different hierarchies. And again, one of the insights I got early on from Peterson is, well, human beings have lots of hierarchies. And so what happens in in a structure and a healthy institution is that you have multiple hierarchies. And and we have ways that we are in submission to others and in ways that others are in submission to us. It was back and forth. I mean, you actually have that in a marriage. There are things in our marriage that my wife submits to me on and things in our marriage that I submit to her on. And I see this all over the place. I mean, even some of you are just like kick back and oh man, is the head of the house. Oh, yeah. When you walk in and you have muddy feet and your wife says, take your shoes off. Do you listen? I bet you do. Why? Well, because there are multiple hierarchies, even in one relationship. There are multiple hierarchies and healthy. I'm going to use that word is therapeutic, this therapeutic age that we're immersed in. If you're if you're navigating those hierarchies properly, there are times to to submit and times to speak with authority. Well, I've only you need peers. I don't know this for sure. I've only watched it and I haven't spoken to Jonathan about this. But I imagine that's what he meant when he was saying when he was asking that question. You just got a sense of him kind of like, oh, no, no, no, that's not that's not a healthy relationship. And that's what I think. Jordan Peterson or any of these figures with. Huge followings, you're able to then to just when you're overwhelmed with the amount of potential input, both positive and negative, it's very easy where we wouldn't be human if we didn't screen out some of it. Right. Especially if a lot of it feels like it's bad faith or a lot of it feels like it's not quite on the money. We start to we then start to only really perceive the stuff that's positive. Right. And that so this kind of it's infinitely more easy than it ever was to lose your bearings in this new world where we're constantly overstimulated with. The amount of input that we're getting from all of these different mediums and to lose your bearings again, that that's a metaphor that implies a journey with a destination. And, you know, I still haven't been able to sort of put together a video I'm satisfied with or even just a PowerPoint because you see most of the videos I make because I don't delete a lot of them and I never edit. But it's amazing how we're how we're we're working towards a destination. OK, so how does rebel wisdom not become audience captured? So that's a great question. It answers it well, but I'm going to I'm going to leave some meat on the bone here. So you'll go to Andrea's channel and give her an opportunity for audience capture or to deal with that temptation. Because, again, I I think I think Andrea is doing a doing a great job. And I thought this was a I thought this was a great interview. I thought her first interview with with David Fuller was outstanding. And so so I think that's going to wrap this up. And yeah, check out, you know, check out their conversation and like and subscribe to Andrea's channel. Just give her a little just give her a little give her a little thumbs up. Give her a little thumbs up. Give her a little encouragement because we we need more conversations like this. And again, to go back, the smallness of it, let's not despise small things. The smallness of it is really. I think I would rather have. Lots of little channels that are and that's what sense what a church is. It's all these. All these fairly small integrated woven together into a community of sense making, of meaning making, of of putting these things together. So I think that's enough for this video. Leave a comment. I'll really be interested to hear what you have to say about this.