https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=P548r7b6EFc

 Freddie and Paul show. Hey Paul, how you been? I'm doing good friend. How you doing? Ah, the Kings won one game but they lost last night by four. Oh. But they're doing really good, you know, and what's happening T Grisley, what's happening Ice Cube, what's happening Snoop Doggy Dogg. Go wait for those comments from T Gris. Yeah T Grisley get back to us, let me know what's happening man I gotta see what's going on. Anyways, baseball is starting so, baseball again and the A's should be doing good this year and the Giants and what's your sermon going to be about today? Sermon today is about Jesus going into Jericho. Yeah because I didn't look at the rough draft. I didn't look at the rough draft. So I talk about how Jesus loses his culture where, what do you think about that? I think he should be decent in order. Decent in order, I think Jesus was decent in order. Yeah he's decent in order but what I'm saying is that he was reaching his total realm again. Well that's true, he was reaching his total realm but what do you think about the idea of Jesus losing? Not good. Jesus loses his life. It could be good because he's doing it for a purpose but then again it could be that but is it true that camaraderie is a good thing? Camaraderie is a good thing. Oh okay, now what is camaraderie? Camaraderie is what we're doing right now. Oh I see this is like motion. We're working together on something, that's camaraderie. We're getting a project done. Getting the project done, that's exactly right. If you're building a house, you gotta have the two by fours and the nails and the hammers and you gotta come together as one to get it built. That's exactly what camaraderie is. I don't know if you were here. I wasn't here when the house was here on the field. I had cadet things. We built Hive Docs NURBY cars with my father. He would help us and we had like races. We went to Ripon and had races and then my cousin Mark would come and I would see him on Thanksgiving with my mom and his family and it was just really cool. So anyway, yeah. Those good memories. Yeah. Before I was here. Right. I've been at this church for... You've been at this church your whole life. You're baptized here as a baby. Yeah, baptized by Reverend Marlink. That's right. So anyway, what else do you know? I don't know. What else do I know? Come and tell me. Oh well, you'll hear the sermon. I hope you stay in for the sermon. I'm going to. You know a bathroom break or two I can understand. All right. You got a wrap? Yeah. We got a stage for you today. Don't fall. This church grows big trees. All right. All right. I'm getting for a close-up. What's happening y'all? It's your boyfriend D up on the tree stump. I like it. Ready? Yeah. Who's that? Who's that? Who? Who? Who? Who's that? Who's that guy? He Fred Dean. He love Jesus Christ. Gee, Robin for filing a new state of rat. It's CRC. We're heard all over the map. Preaches his word. He is Paul. He stands tall and he knows it all. One, two, three. Yeah, it's me. The boy they call Freddy D from the 916 for Shiggy D my diggity. Don't you know? Good to go without a word to say. I don't play and I don't have no shame in my game. I am one rocking on the mic because I don't drink rum. I get some all the time. Busting fresh rhymes with my Pepsi time. Drinking that soda down to earth on the mic because Jesus gave us his birth and he died for our sins because he can win to come on in. Don't you understand my friend? Jesus Christ is number one in my book and if you don't know this is my hook. Who's that guy? He Fred Dean. He love Jesus Christ. Gee, who's that guy? He Fred Dean. He love Jesus Christ. Gee, one. One love. Amen.