https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=n-VrzcVma_I

 There we go, oh it's in that book Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. It's been a few weeks, but how you guys been? What's happening? How you been Fred? I got it. I got it. I've been pretty good It's just all you fans out there. What happened to me is is I had to go to the doctor because I wasn't having my medicine and it wasn't good Paul So, you know what happened is I had to get a shot in my hip And my other hip and I'm asking for prayer out there that the pain goes away because it's really extraordinary It's really hurting And I don't know why and it's been six months Paul It's been six months since what? Since I had the injured shot. Oh, yeah The shot they gave me three shots one in my shoulder Uh-huh one in my right side my left side because they said I needed it But what I'm saying is I guess I shouldn't be saying this on air, but it's hurting me a lot And I shouldn't have to go through this so I need to make an appointment again for the doctor to see me and give me some medicine Another thing is I want to find another place to live because somebody bothered me last night And I didn't feel too happy about it. I don't like the way I'm being treated The guy that owns it's cool, but I'm just looking for other opportunities So if anybody knows of a place I know of a place right now that I can go to as the first But I got to talk to Paul and my owner about it But other than that the A's have been doing good the Giants have been doing good The 49ers beat the Chiefs. They have three wins now Preseason yes, okay, okay Oh, I heard the River Caps are doing good as well You got new glasses Alright well if you guys turn the talk I just wanted to get that off of my head Okay, so Nancy you got the sermon report, what do you think of the song? Basically you talked about March mark five No, you guys keep that bookmark. Yeah. Oh, oh, yeah, okay Basically you talked about the demon okay, and You know Jesus healed the demon right? Jesus healed the demon can demons be healed. Yeah, okay Well demon possessed man maybe but I didn't know Jesus would heal the demon Oh Demon possessed right. Well, okay, you're right You're right. It was possessed by Jesus healed the man. Yes I Know demons could be healed that shows anybody can be healed. I mean if you ask with Jesus help with right You are right Okay, I'm right. Yeah I guess I guess I deserve $20 Is that what you get for being ready get 20 bucks You know we think it's hopeless with some of these people like What's going on right now, which I asked for prayer for the demon possessed They there's something possessed. That's true And what they're doing is They're putting fear and anxiety, you know a lot of people and actually in me Oh Be honest with you when it happened at Costco when it happened at Walmart here in Sacramento That people came in with guns And one it well El Paso was the big one Yes, there was and But he got out I guess I don't know it was on the cameras so yeah And one guy evidently stopped one by shooting one Okay. Well, yeah Yeah, I wanted all this to quit well it seems there's been 27 now, okay I'm gonna read because I can imagine Fred said Well, Freddie told me today he said, you know You like coming to church and she feels good at church and church there And he said he wished church would go longer and I remembered you and Fred sitting in that background once it get past new So I got an intergenerational thing going here Yeah Okay Jesus loves me this I know for the Bible tell me so little one soon him belong They are weak, but he is strong Yes. Yes Jesus loves me. Yes. Yes Jesus loves me. Yes. Yes Jesus loves me for the Bible. So Jesus loves me. He died heaven's gate to open wide He will wash away my sin. Let his little child come in Yes, Jesus come to me. Yes. Jesus loves me Yes, Jesus loves me the Bible tells me so woman first y'all Jesus take this heart of mine Make it prayer and holy thine on the cross you died for me I will try to live for thee Yes, Jesus loves me. I said yes Jesus loves me from the 916 for sugar D Don't you know good to go? Yes, Jesus loves me. Yes, Jesus loves me Yes, Jesus loves me for the Bible tells me so Think about that if you read the Bible, it'll explain to you what Jesus did. He died for your sins and And Ask and the door shall be open on to you. Allelu. Allelu Be trustworthy, pure, grateful, loyal, industrious and cheerful and you will find a way For the golden rule. Thank you Paul we need to end this show now Awesome show I like this show awesome show I like this show any last any last words Nancy We got in trouble last week telling you to land the plane Keep hope alive. There we go. We'll call it that keep hope alive. That's what the That will be the title for it. That'll be the title. All right. There we go. Keep hope alive. Keep hope alive Okay One love amen. Hallelujah on Sunday