https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IzAZD3Ici3Q

 How y'all doing out there? Doing good. Freddie and Paul show. Freddie and Paul show. Freddie, Paul, Paul, Paul, Paul, Paul, Paul, Paul, Paul, Paul, to tight like me, the boy they call Freddie D. So Paul, how you been? I've been good. We should point out your bike. Yeah, that's my bike. I ride that around, you know, get my groove on. You know, people be checking it out, saying, oh, nice bike. I say, well, thank you. Said I got it from a lady from the church, a nice lady. And the Kings won one game. They lost one game. And then they won two games. And I found out spring training's coming up for baseball. Baseball. And we've got a lot of good players coming up. Roseweed. We're all the Giants in the area. All the Giants in the area. Those are my favorite teams. OK. The Dodgers are OK, but they won last year. I don't think they needed a shoot. No, they don't need a shoot. We already talked about Brady. Hi, T. Grizzly. Hi, T. Grizzly. I've been watching your videos. Hey, T. Grizz, when you going to leave a comment, huh? What's the deal? Leave a comment right below. Yeah, please do. Freddie's waiting on that comment. Yeah, because I went to the bomb when the bomb was 103.5. And they had me go on stage. And I wish I could get that footage. If anybody has that footage of me performing at the radio station, toaster anybody, that would be great. Because I did a good job. I did three songs in front of a lot of people. Anyway, so basically, OK, the weather. The weather, the rain's supposed to come tomorrow. But although I see blue. I see blue, too. So I don't know. Look at the trees starting to. The bugs are starting to come. Sacramento spring is on the way. Sorry, East Coasters. I know it hurts. City of trees. City of trees. And we got it going on. But now we're supposed to be farmed a fork. They changed that. I don't know why. So now I got to do a wrap. I got to do a wrap. Well, do one of the ones you did with T. Grizzly. I know, but that was a long time ago. OK, I'll just go from the head. OK, go from the head. Oh, I know what your Bible study's about today. What? I mean, the sermon. Yeah, did you watch it already? Yeah. Forgive your sins, because we're not supposed to sin. But God will grant us wisdom if we ask for forgiveness. Amen. Is that right? Amen. I was right? That sounds good. OK, I'm going to wrap. All right. Forgive your sin, because you'll win. It's not good to sin, but you'll come right in. Yo, Pastor Paul, preach us a word. My number one pastor, not absurd. Come in like this, verb, or maybe a dictionary. Looking like that, and he ain't no fairy. Step in hard to the top. Never going to stop, because I'm full of that hip hop, rocking nonstop. People living and giving, staying on top. My boy CJ, he does it all. He's got a curl of rock your world all the way to the top. Don't stop till the drop. Don't forget about Gordon, because he likes to eat. And that's a treat. So yo, peace out. And that's the meat. One love. You got to do the one love, Paul. One love. Sunday.