https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=yGbOPO0XXuc

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul Show. What's up, Paul? Well, I came to church last week, but I didn't make it in because I was tired and what have you. I'm kind of upset because my buddy Gordon didn't make it, but that's okay. Gordon is still my homie, so don't worry. Anyways, so basically what I'm talking about is OU won against Oklahoma State University, and Yale beat BYU, and Oregon won four games in a row. Of course, you would be happy. And who do you have at the football today? I don't know, Fred. My season is a disaster. It's just a game. I'm barely keeping enough motivation to put in lineups. Reggie would be so disappointed. It's just a game. But anyway... Yeah, yeah, I'm talking about Reggie. So fantasy football, complete disaster this year. I've got like the third highest scoring team in the league and I'm about the eighth in the ranking, so it's a disaster. Anyway... What uh... I still have a couple of days here in the room. Oh. What were you talking about? Oh, I can't do the audition today because the audio is not working right now. We'll work on it next week after. Alright, so you want to audition for America's Got Talent? Next week. Next week, okay. Alright, alright. Basically what... Come on, you talk. We gotta talk about the sermon. You gotta explain the sermon. Well, this whole Sunday morning has just been... I mean, we put in new lights because... Anything would go wrong. Everything that could go wrong went wrong. The church across the street, they're meeting outside. Music is blasting so much. I'm getting distracted. I'm not easy to distract, but this morning the AV computer didn't turn on. I feel the same, bro. Everything, everything just... Everything that could go wrong went wrong. The sermon, you know, every week you go into a sermon you don't quite know how you feel about it. Some sermons you think are going to go real well and they don't. Other sermons you don't think are going to go well. I get a lot out of your sermons because it's like... It's educational. Because you explain yourself pretty much when you're talking. You don't explain later. That's what makes it really outstandingly great. It's just good that you do that. Now, what I got out of the sermon is... Basically, you were saying politically... Yeah, you were opinion, you were fair. You were saying COVID really changed the whole outlook around everywhere. Because everybody was like, oh my gosh, we're going to get COVID. Anyway, this is like... I'm just careful when I go out. I just wear a mask and I'm usually fine. And I get around. And now that you got me this bus pass, I thank you, Paul, because I can get around whenever I need a break. I can get out. Good, good. I think that's good. I think a bus pass is the best thing. I know we've heard you. Let me get a little personal. I want to really thank you for that. You can thank the people. I'm not buttering up like a buttermilk biscuit. And... Hey, CJ, I hope you're doing well. He's working a lot lately. He can't make it to work. The church right now, it totally changes hours or what have you. Okay. Anyways... All right, you're going to do a wrap, isn't it? Yeah. All right, go for it. Okay. I stack my chips all like this. I come like a one. Merry Christmas, my foot. Let me put Santa down, you see. Because yo, it's Jesus Christ. It's a real Santa, please. Coming up like that. Coming up like this. Enough chitter chat. My stuff is fat. I bust platinum tracks. I'll just be good because Paul's our number one preacher. Step into the top, you see. He's so cool. You know me. When I say my preacher's cool, because when he goes down, he went to school to preach his word. He's not absurd. He's praying to the truth. And this is true. You better understand what I have to say. I love to pray because my boy says he's cool. And CJ says, okay. We come up like this. We come up like that. I keep my platinum track. I stack my chips. And yo, it's like this. My hat says boss, not Merry Christmas. But when I say the name of Christmas, it's our Christ Savior, you see. He's the one that died for our sins, you see. He is the one, the true maker. And that's it for the taker. All right. All right. That was quite a wrap. Yeah, pretty long, too. But I made that up just by the top of my head. I didn't write that one. I can do that. I have that. That's my gift that you told me I have. I can go from the word to make words rhyme like that. That's true. I did really good in class. And I got a PD. And I got credits in college. And if I ever wanted to go back to college, I really could if I wanted to. But we'll see. All right. All right. Let's land the plane. Land the plane. So everybody have a good Thanksgiving. Be festive. My mom's going to Ponderosa. So I don't think I can go with her. So I don't know what I'm going to do. I might have to just be with my people. Is the plane still open? Yeah, they go up there in the motor home with Philip. Hi, Philip. Hope you're doing well. And anyways, I've been doing really good. And I'm thankful to have the show. The show is enlightening. And any comments or anything that they would like to say, they can reach you on the comments and leave a comment. And Freddie reads the comments. We will talk about it, whether it's athletics, music, media, church, sermons, anything that you would like us to talk about. Please let us know. And we're going to land the plane. Thank you for tuning in to the Freddie and Paul show. It's greatly appreciated. And our check will come in the mail. Anyways, and the Kings got a number one draft pick. And let's hope they do better this year. Let's hope the Kings do better this year. One more thing I have to ask. Who is going to be the coach? Is it still going to be Luke Walton? I have no idea. Or is it going to be...who's the manager? The guys. I haven't filed to Kings much lately. I trust you to follow them for me. Okay. All right. All right. Thank you, Paul. Yeah. Thank you very much. One love. Oh, wait. I got to do it over. One...no, I'm backwards. I'm dyslexic. I never know which way it goes. One love. There it goes.