https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IfipolodXXo

 Hi, this is Paul and Len Van De Zee has been on the channel before. We've discussed a number of topics. Len is a retired minister in the Christian Reformed Church. He's also an author. I think I've got his book right down here somewhere. Here it is, Christ's Baptism and the Lord's Supper, which actually when I was thinking through sacraments was pretty formative for me. And Len is working on a new book. How did that happen, Len? I got bored. Yeah, well, I've been thinking a lot about worship and that's sort of at the heart of it. And so I think there's really a crisis that's happening in generally in Protestant worship of all stripes. And I think it has to do with the sacraments, but I think it has to do with a much bigger picture of worship as well. So, yeah, and started to do a lot of reading and decided, well, maybe I might be able to have a message for the larger church. So that's what set me down the path and talked to a few folks here in ground methods that are involved in worship and we've been encouraging. So that's been helpful. How long have you been working at it now? Oh, maybe three, four months. Actually really focused on it. Yeah. Well, well, before we get into the book, why don't we talk a little bit about your experience of worship in the Christian Reformed Church, because I think that will probably set the table for. I expect most of the listeners of this video will probably be Christian Reformed because they recognize the name. But so, so how about a little bit of retrospective, because, you know, you've you've you've been around. Yeah, I've been around. Last year was the 50th anniversary of my ordination in the CRC. 1970. So, yeah, it's it's been a while. Been retired for a few years now, but yeah. So I yeah, I grew up in the CRC and at that point worship was very standard around the Christian Reformed Church. Usually the so-called order of worship was printed on the back of the bulletin. It had a nice structure to it. And yeah, it was it was it was pretty much uniform. And it there was always a certain sense of reverence, a sense of truly meeting God. And the focus was very much on that. I remember in my youth, the ministers always start by saying, the Lord is in his holy temple, let all the earth keep silence before you. That was that it's interesting that that phrase embedded itself in my mind. It just is there always has been. And so that when the worship begins with those words, there's really a sense that you're meeting with God here. And of course, you know, we would arrive in church maybe 15, 10 minutes before the service. Sit there quietly, even as a little kid. I mean, you just had to. My father and mother would pass me some peppermints and try to keep me some a little quieter. You observe the surroundings. Everybody else was quiet. When the minister, the first minister I remembered, wore tails of morning, a traditional British morning coat, a traditional morning jacket with the tails and the whole works and the straight pants and the whole thing. So everything about it was set up with a sense of formality, a sense of engagement with the divine, with a sense of ultimate purpose. I remember also one of the first, there wasn't a whole lot of ways to participate. There wasn't much of a back and forth in the worship. It was pretty much what the minister did, except for singing. And I loved singing and I fairly early learned to sing in parts, really taught myself. And that was also very formative for me. I realized later in my life, thinking about my calling to the ministry, that certainly a part of the reason why I wanted to become a minister was because on Sunday morning, a thousand people in that church were listening to this one person. And I know that that's part of what my motivation was, for better or for worse. It's something I had to face it. And so I wanted to be able to communicate in that way. And I wanted to communicate about God. Do you think, I mean that held sway in the CRC for a long time, really, I think, into the 70s and on beyond the 70s in many places, of course, where I grew up, as you well know, in Patterson, you know, the racial reconciliation issues, the self-consciousness of blackness. And, you know, that of course changed the liturgy at Northside Community Chapel on Jefferson Street in Patterson. But this tradition that held for a number of decades in the CRC, was this sort of an oral tradition, do you think, that just sort of passed on and developed as such? Because I know Synod would come along and sort of, you know, sort of, you know, nail it down at some points. But, you know, you've also been quite involved in the development of liturgy and liturgical forms for the denomination as well. So maybe you know some of that history, because I really don't. Well, the basic structure of the worship service was all the way back to Kelvin. And it was sort of stratified at the Synod of Dort. So while the Christian Reformed Church always refrained from saying that we have an official form of worship, which everybody should follow, it was nevertheless that form that came from the continent over here that held sway until, as you said, the 60s, 70s, and so forth, when the whole Serenade culture was changing. Although the Christian Reformed Church was, saw itself very much as a part from the culture. You know, it was that wave after the Second World War where in many ways the denomination took the walls down and, you know, wanted to engage in a more self-conscious way than I think before the Second World War. Right. Well, I think, I don't know if that sort of sense of worship that I described was exclusive to the Christian Reformed Church by any means. I think if you would have attended a United Church of Christ, a Presbyterian Church, almost any what we now call mainstay denomination, you would have found pretty close to the same thing. Yeah, I mean, there will be certain differences, but a lot of it would be the same. Certainly that, I think it would be that same sense of, for want of another word, worshipfulness or a sense of meeting the divine, a sense of the transcendence in the language and in the attitudes of the people that were involved in the worship. But it would also be obviously a, there's a layer of assumptions in terms of how the divine ought to be, how the divine ought to be approached or at least received in there. And so there's formality, there's uniformity, you know, reverence is expressed in terms of withholding. And so I mean these kinds of issues, I think once we get into the 60s and 70s and the rise of the counterculture, and then also as we get into much more of an awareness of pluralism, cultural pluralism that will sort of begin to take apart this, you know, this tradition and the assumptions beneath the tradition of how one ought to meet the monarch, let's say. Yeah. And an aspect of that is, you might call it heightened language. You don't use ordinary discourse, it was a heightened language that was involved. So, just to go on with our denomination, around 1968, I'm almost positive, the Senate of the Crooked Plum Church had appointed a worship committee, a worship study committee. And a lot of pretty prominent people in denomination like Nick Waltersdorf and Peris Mounsta and so forth were on it. And they produced a, this was of course the time when there was a liturgical awakening that had been going on for some time, a discussion, an ecumenical discussion place that was taking place. And it had sort of settled upon a certain structure of worship, including the communion or the Eucharist. So they produced a model worship service that was based upon really the worship of the early church, and which was also, it was similar to the Catholic mass. It was not so similar to the Orthodox worship, which is much more involved, it was much more sacramentally involved. So anyway, that came along and was pretty well thrown in the dust heap. Hardly anybody read it, and very few people ever used it. But it was, if you look back upon it, it was a magnificent piece of work. It was a wonderful worship service. But it was coming at exactly the wrong time, exactly the time at which the culture was falling apart, and when the church was seeking to find out how do we address this cultural phenomenon in our worship. And it wasn't going to be what the committee produced. Sounds like they were about 60 years ahead of their time. Yep. You know that's about right. Yeah. Of course, the Christian Reformed Church was 60 years behind at the time, most of this religious term. Well, this was also Vatican too. Yeah, around the same time. So, yeah, it was quite universal. Just because I know you love books. I've been reading a very interesting book on Vatican One. Oh, okay. Which was what year? That was in the 19th century. And has a whole bunch of history that I knew nothing about, such as, you know, a lot of the turmoil going on in France, ultramontanism, which has infallibility of the Pope. And it's very interesting looking at, let's say, you know, infallibility, papal infallibility, biblical infallibility, you know, these, the need to to sort of frame truth in a particular way at that particular time sort of at the height of modernity. It's a very interesting book. I think it, I think it. It's interesting in terms of how we, you know, how we understand God and how we try to, you know, frame truth, very much seeing papal infallibility as sort of a bulwark against the rise of, you know, the European, you know, absolute monarchy and then, you know, the anti revolutionary spirit. So anyway, it's a, you might want to take a look at that. It's, it's a fascinating book, especially in the light of then Vatican Two comes along. And in many ways, you know, comes along at a time when, you know, talking to Roman Catholics about this time period, suddenly, youth culture seems to, you know, sort of lodge. You've got all these subcultures that arise in the 60s and 70s, you have black culture as distinct from, you know, that that flourishing that comes along with the civil rights movement, you know, Afros and that, you know, that's a context that I grew up in, obviously. And you have youth culture developing and so you have all these subcultures and, and then Vatican Two as well sort of, you know, pushes away a lot of what then is perceived as staid, stuffy, rigid traditionalism in terms of a much more expressive spontaneity, you know, these, these kinds of expressions that we see in the church and which will eventually get into the church, especially then later in the seeker movement, and really, you know, the this, what was universal in the Christian form church that you just described. And especially in the 80s and 90s just completely disrupted by these other cultural movements. So what now you obviously were, I mean, you lived a lot of this, what, what did you see in terms of that disruption. Well, Vatican Two was a lot of, there are still a lot of Catholics who decried Vatican Two, and the mass that came out of it. And I think that it was in many ways a brilliant piece of work in the sense that it maintained the basic structure of the mass. It maintained the basic place and, and understanding of the Eucharist as a center and culmination of the mass. But then at the same time that brought in, it was supposed to bring in a much larger emphasis upon the preach word that didn't always work out. And as well it brought in a greater sense of openness to charismatic influence in the church, and also to different kinds of different kinds of music as well as handset. Can I tell you a little story about the music. When I was in seminary, I taught a Sunday of sort of a catechism class basically in our in my home church. And the class was on different kinds of Christianity. So, a Catholic Church was about four blocks away so I asked the pastor if I could take the kids in my class like 14 kids or so to the Catholic Church, St. Adobo, beautiful big Basilica actually. So we got there on the all sat in the back row of church. You know people to disrupt it so the church service started with the procession and the first hand of the procession was, believe it or not, a mighty fortresses our God. And then in 1667, they just started singing so we automatically broke into song, nobody else saying in the church, like everybody turned around says where's the choir. And of course you know for those who, for those who might be listening that aren't aware of it. That's a song reliably sung on Reformation Sunday in the Christian Church as a rebel cry of, you know, rebellion against the papists who were slaughtering us. So, so, in the ministries that you lead were involved in what what, how did you, how did you sense the change. How did you respond to the change. You know, looking back on it what's some of your assessment of these changes that that very much, you know swept the, you know, in many places sort of swept away this, this tradition of formality and uniformity that the Christian Form Church, you know, that held the Christian Form Church for a long time. Well, I was always interested in in worship from the very start of my ministry and so I going back to the beginning to some extent. I was actively involved in producing a liturgy for Sunday, rather than just relying on what was, you know, everybody out on the back of their bulletin. And that increased as I, as I went along. So it was always, it was probably one of the, one of the things I really look forward to in my week was having to craft that service, choosing the hymns how they would fit in, in terms of responses and and where we were the worship service and that sort of thing. And so that that was my own response was to work hard on worship services to try to make them accessible to people, but also to make them focus on God. And interestingly enough, I was in. When I was in my last church that I served for 17 years, yourself in Indiana. That's where I worked on the book on sacraments, and strangely enough I was never able to convince that congregation to have weekly communion. So I was involved in all the traditional arguments and they never quite went for it. We, I think, once a month was there and and the plus the religious holidays, the Easter and Christmas and so forth. That's as far as I ever got. Just a little too close to Notre Dame or what. I don't know what it was, but I won't mention his name, but a famous history professor was at my church and he was the one that argued most vociferously against it. But we're good friends. Those historians are so pesky. Well, you know, it's, it's interesting because, you know, in, in Sacramento, as you well know you you did an interim stint just down the road and whatever. One of our church plants is now a sister church, where, when Kevin Adams let's say came in 1991 and planted Granite Springs, very much in the seeker mythos where they had the, you know, you had your seeker service on Sunday. And then once a month you'd have, or on Wednesday night then you'd sort of have the believers service, where you do communion you didn't do communion in the seeker in the seeker service and you know, as we got into the 2000s, especially the 2010s, the church plants including Kevin's church we're all all then began shifting to towards weekly communion, you know, not calling it the Lord's Supper most more often calling it the Eucharist, much more formal liturgy often a printed liturgy that people would hold in their hand, not just something on the screen. You know, and so we've we very much, you know, in our church which is how to describe my church I still I've never, I've never even tried to move towards weekly communion here just because I know that I don't have a I don't have a famous professor of history here blocking me I've just got a lot of regular folks who would look at me and be like, Why would we do that. So it's been interesting that this, you know, this, this new wave which has come through the church. Right. Yeah, it's happening in a lot of places. So, which, which I find very gratifying. You know, I think in the Christian Reformed Church, probably, Church of the Servant, where I'm now a member here in young left. It was the first congregation, and interestingly enough I don't know if you know the history of that but Nick Walters or philosopher who was one of the founding members of the congregation, and of course he was also the author of that. Really the author of that study on worship that we talked about a little, a little previously. And so the church was founded on the idea of weekly communion, which is a lot easier to do than to take a congregation that's never really experienced and bring it, bring that congregation into it. That's that's that's a tough thing to do. And it's a very appreciative of the churches who take it who take that burden. So, so let's, by the way, your friend. What's his name from granted. Kevin had a new book coming out which I was delighted to give the board to for meridians on Baptist. Yeah, yeah, yeah, he's been working on that book for a little while now. So, yeah. So let's let's let's turn to your book. Yeah, where does it begin and, and, you know, you were bored okay but obviously you have much more of a mission than just passing the time. Yep. Yeah, well, I think, as I said before, I think that there's a crisis in Protestant churches, a crisis of worship. The church churches do not understand what worship is they don't understand its prominence, they don't understand how it works. And they don't churches don't understand how to meet the culture. In terms of worship. So, the secular culture, the culture that's that's described in as being in the call the eminent plane. And so, we're going to, we're going to dumb down the, the sacredness, the mystery of what's going on. And we're going to meet people where they are. However that is. So I see the crisis going on both in evangelical churches, so called, and in mainland churches in evangelical churches in the mainland churches. The focus is on social action. The worship of God centers around how we can teach people how to be good Democrats. And, and do the work of God in the world. That's what worship is for it's to build people up so that they can be those kinds of good Christian people in the world. And then evangelical worship as a whole different focus, and that is on how to get people as you talk about the Seeker Services how to get people involved so that they are, I'll use the word entertained, they, they feel good about themselves they feel good about how their children are being treated and invited into the church and the kind of activities that they have. The music is good. The preaching is meets their needs, so to speak. So the evangelical churches have basically played into the culture by adopting the culture, say we're gonna, we're gonna beat them at their own game. But I don't think it's working. It's not working because, because there's no fundamental content to what's happening there except to try to meet people's needs. The worship in most evangelical churches, and then include a lot of Christian reform churches is singing so called worship song that that is what worship is I think a lot of people's minds we sing songs before God, and hearing a oftentimes a very lengthy sermon. And as long as I remember when I was a kid. Some of them have more strictly Bible teaching in them. Some of them more general teaching like how to be good parents and that sort of thing. Sort of ethical guidance. But, but on the other side whether it's from the mainline side or from the evangelical side. It's not really worship. It's something else. It's not engaging with God. It is engaging with people. It's not the formation of an interest group. It's not a cliche, the called out people of God. So anyway, I think that worship is the most important thing that the church stuff. It is the center of what the church does. And if you go to most Protestant churches and look at the worship to say well, the center isn't holding. It isn't working. It isn't developing the kind of people that the called out people of God are supposed are supposed to be At its heart, I think. I'm very strongly working from a biblical. I want to talk about biblical worship not just what I think worship is or, or what the Vatican to thinks it is or what the latest liturgical scholars think it is what the Bible says about it. So, right from the start, I think the Old Testament is very informative about worship, worship is a covenant meeting between God and his people. It's a covenant renewal. And all throughout the Old Testament, whenever a covenant renewal takes place, there are ritual actions that accompany always, always. It's never purely a word centered thing. It's always. It's always enacted within a ritual framework, whether that's the Passover and the ritual that surrounded that, whether it's the sacrifices that that took place regularly at the temple. Whether it's the great central covenant formation at Mount Sinai where Moses sacrifices the animals and then sprinkles it upon the altar and then sprinkles it upon the people and this is this is now in covenant with God. So, worship defines the church, it defines who we are. It is, it is the most identity, identity forming thing that we do. And that's precisely it seems to me what we're not doing in worship in in Protestant churches and to some extent in in Catholic churches as well. We could talk about that another time. Worship is the central activity. And it's out of worship that the mission of the church comes, it's out of worship that the identity of the church comes. It's not a spiritual booster shot of some kind, it is the center of what we do. It's the heart of what we do. I love Alexander Schmemann's definition of worship, that is, we enter the kingdom. And if you can envision a typical Orthodox church with all of its icons and with that great central icon of Christus Pantopratio, Christ the ruler of all, you are entering into another sphere, you're entering into the kingdom through all these through all these symbols. And as Christians to live our identity in the world, we need that time, week by week of entering into the kingdom of entering into the future, in a lot of ways, entering into the apocalypse. The final revealing that is going to take place. And that's not something that you do just informally, it's not something that you make up as you go along. It's something that's embedded in a long tradition. And it needs to be done carefully because it's so close to our identity, and it's so close to the revelation of God. You know, there's that old phrase, as we pray so we believe. As we worship, that is, that is the fundamental theology of the church, it's worship. And that fundamental theology are also always to be expressed in the in the church's worship. I've been going on for a while. That's good. That's good. Well, you just wrote a book. I mean, it's a you got a little bit in you. So, part of what's difficult about part of what's difficult, having a conversation about this is just the fact that we're having a conversation we're not enacting anything between us we're two faces on a screen passing words back and forth. There's obviously a, a long history of, you know, we, when we talk about debate, we primarily think about passing words back and forth. But in terms of the church's history of worship. You know, when I think about, oh shoot, what was his name, and I've done I've done so much work in so many different areas over these last three years. You know, there's there's a there's a lot of there's a lot of thinking and questioning going on behind the how we figure out Okay, let's talk about Old Testament worship. And I think you rightly said, there's, there's always ritual involved. How, how we imagine ritual how we think how we think what ritual does is is so has changed so much just before I was talking to you, I was watching a video of someone going through the, the change from paganism to to Christianity was talking about Roman, Roman life where for example if the, if the if the emperor is leading a triumph through Rome and a wheel falls off his chariot. This is a bad omen of the gods, and he must, he must perform ritual ritual is is so is so foundational to to culture. You know, that's pervasive throughout throughout the world. You know, even in Mesoamerica you have sacrifices in order to to forestall a great calamity that would that would take out the people, you know, in, in the book in, you know, Moses is about to re enter Egypt with his wife and sons his sons who are not. They're not circumcised and so you know the angel of death is about to come and slaughter them and and Moses wife quickly circumcises the sons and you might think, well there's there's a, there's an event one night in the tent that those sons will not soon forget. But it's you know we sort of can chuckle about it but it's a, you know, it's a tremendous mystery to us, and you have the reality of Israel on one hand, participating in a, in a sacrificial system that would surely be recognizable to her neighbors. You know, you know, they offered sacrifices to bail, and you've got animal you've got altar, you know you've you've in many ways, a good bit of the former prophets in the Old Testament are all involved in this question of, do we sacrifice on high places. What are the elements of sacrifice that of course that all gets then eventually brought into the temple. There's one place to sacrifice. And then of course with the Babylonians the temple is destroyed. There you have a crisis now. How can we, you know, sing us some of your songs of Zion, how can we sing in this foreign land, you know, what now that the temple is destroyed and then of course the synagogue emerges out of that with in many ways that the service of the Torah replacing the service of the sacrificial animal now the temple will be reconstructed and then sort of you have a two, you have two systems going on you have synagogue and temple. And then, you know, the Romans will come and destroy the temple again. And then the temple has not to this point been rebuilt and sacrifices have not to this point been reconstituted for Israel so synagogue continues and of course then the Apostle Paul comes into the Roman Empire and seems like in the book of Acts any city he goes to and finds a he's going to he's going to blow the thing up in a horrible schism that will nearly cost him his life. And then suddenly you've got these, these churches that are forming which are in some ways like the synagogue. You know they they don't set up an altar you don't have a statue and and Christian worship will develop and so even in the story in the Bible you have this, some have noted in some ways, a transition of. Is it abstraction but this transition from, you know, real blood, you know, a real animal, a real slaughter to now service around a book and and much more abstract notions of indebtedness and and then the liturgy that that forms around that. How, how did you see that transition in in your study of the Bible in this. I think the heart of the transition is the incarnation is God becoming human this God, who we entering human life. That's what creates that's what makes all the difference. As many theologians have said Christ is the quintessential sacrament. He is the where the place where divinity meets humanity, where heaven beats earth. So that that is where the coming of the incarnation that is bound to change how people worship but what's interesting is that almost all the elements of the Old Testament worship, the Passover, the covenant. The, the manna wilderness. All of them were brought into the worship of the early church through Christ. Christ of course is the baptized one. Christ, of course, participated in the life, the worship of the temple, the worship of the synagogue. And he brings it all to bear, I think, in that, in that last supper, which was a Passover meal, which is says this is now the new covenant. It has arrived it is arriving in my body and blood which will be sacrificed on the cross. So that is the ultimate sacrifice which sums up all the sacrifices of the Old Testament. And now, now they are all met, met in Christ, so that in Christ. We now have the one sacrament, which is given to us in baptism and in the Eucharist. That is, we meet Christ, we come into participation in Christ. And that is the essential ritual for for Christians has been from the beginning from the New Testament, all the way through the history of the church. So, Christ the incarnate one, the incarnate Son of God becomes human, enters into our human life, takes on our sin and and and our fallenness and our humanity and brings us back into fellowship with God, which is what all the covenant sacrifices were meant to do. So now, all our worship is focused in Christ. And so he is, he is the ultimate sacrament and through the Christian sacraments of baptism and the Eucharist, we, we participate in Christ, we come into Christ. So, yeah, I think that what what presence don't understand is how the Eucharist is the culmination of worship that without Eucharist worship is truncated. It has no logical place to go. Worship, as we come before God, we are renewing the covenant in Christ. We confess our sins we hear the word just as the early church did, listening to the letters of Paul, we pray. And, but at the, at the culmination. We participate in Christ himself, we participate in his sacrifice. We are renewed in our life through the power of the Holy Spirit who unites us to Christ. And that requires, just like it did in the Old Testament, a ritualized action. Because we are human, because stuff matters, because Christ is not with us present in this worship services, we don't talk to him, we don't walk with him, we participate in him through this ritual of the Eucharist. That's where it goes without it. The worship service doesn't have, well, I just some someone put it, I think it was without it the worship service ends with some like with a with a, with a colon instead of a period. I love that I love that idea, a colon instead of a period. A colon instead of a period. Something is missing. Why did. Why do you think in Protestant churches. The Eucharist fell out or was sort of replaced with, I think in many respects with the sermon. The sermon. Oh yeah, you know the Christian informed church the sermon really sort of became the central component of the service. That's a reformation. Of course, Calvin, Calvin understood sacraments to the light. He understood how they operate and understand the importance, but he could not convince the church in Geneva that you've got to remember that medieval Catholic people, probably the Eucharist once a year. It was Eucharist would largely appreciate the exercise. It's not something that people did regularly. In fact, they were probably afraid of it. So, Calvin coming across that every week, it just did not go in a favor and of course, the other side of it was the emphasis upon the word was just what the Catholic Church, the enemy so to speak, weren't doing they weren't giving people the word of God the word of grace Jesus Christ. So now we're going to, we have the word. What do we need a second for. What do we need that for. Now they would do it four times a year oftentimes in great solemnity as I remember it as a child. But if the Eucharist is not done every Sunday. It is being dismissed. It is being downplay is not important. So what it comes down to, we'll do it once in a while. The second part of it was that, of course, Swingley's influence was that basically he said, the, the spiritual cannot be communicated through the material. So whatever material we use in the worship services purely showing tell it's a way of remembering something rather than a way of participating in something. And that was of course the big difference between Calvin Luther on one side and and swing me on the other, but Protestant churches even reform churches became swangling that's, that's what we believe. So we lost something terribly important in that process. Did you look at all at the connection between the loss of the, the sacrament of confession and the frequency of celebration of the Eucharist at all. That's interesting question. Whether in a sense, we didn't. The Protestant churches, Christian reform church didn't set up the sacrament of confession but there was a kind of sacrament of confession revolving around the Eucharist, say four times a year when I was when I was growing up. And the preparatory service and the whole thing was about penitence about being sorry for your sins and not coming to the Eucharist, without, without having paid due penitence for your sins without having broken relationship with your neighbor or family. That was a, that was a really important thing so there was a kind of a sort of quasi sacramental action to that, but it was all individual, something that had to take place within you. And, of course it had no ritual about it, you don't tell it to somebody else somebody else didn't say to you. In the name of Christ you are forgiven. It had to be carried, carried in your own in your own heart. By the way, my mother, in some ways a troubled woman she had a really sad childhood. And she carried a lot of guilt. And I remember several times that she fainted in the communion service. Wow. Yeah, so you know what was going on there. Yeah. Overwhelmed. Because before times a year this, this sense of guilt built up, and she wasn't there was no real expiation, it was only a sense of maybe I'm, as the old phrase was I'm eating and drinking judgment to myself. Yeah, participating in this way. I have a theory, you know, so it was common medieval practice that the. If you were, if you were, if you were in a European medieval Roman Catholic Church, you have communion once a year, and you had an entire build up to that you, of course, had to participate in the, you know, in penance the sacrament, you know you had to go to the confessional you had to forgive your sins there's a conversation I did with a woman you can find it on my channel. I entitled it bless me father for I have sinned and the woman who listens to quite a bit of my channel talked about she was raised Catholic talked about her father anyway. I wonder. I wonder if in the Christian reform church. Basically, a lot of this stuff, sort of filtered through into house visitation, because in some ways, practice of house visitation was sort of like, we're going to have the family confessional now, the elders are here to check on, you know to check up on you. And then also you know the preparatory service, and it's it in the Christian reform church then even in to some respects, the holiest among us never dared take communion, because we were the ones most cognizant of our sin. So if you look down the aisle someone who normally would take a minute isn't taking all they must be really holy because they are, they are more in touch with their sinfulness than the rest of us who actually dare to participate. I wonder if in some ways, the service, this got to four times a year just because it seemed, you know, even then it seemed just too much to manage in order to in order to sufficiently facilitate the confession needed in order to justify the partaking of the element. I mean the the the terror around, you know, part, you know, eating and drinking in an unworthy manner, you know, for some have gotten sick and died. You know, all of this that I wonder in the Christian reform church and and and some of the Protestant churches, if there were some of that, some of some leftover stuff that never really got taken the church never figured out really how to deal with this full ritual movement of sin, sin, you know, expiation, and then, you know, a celebration and of course, in, you know, what sort of happened then is in the Christian form church culturally, this, there's a tradition that happened after the 60s 70s 80s much more into a celebratory posture rather than the, you know, fear and trembling and it seems like these, these are not disconnected from the rest of the emotionality of Christian reformed liturgy and you know what we've been through in the last 60 years. Right. Yeah, I think the The focus was very much on our sinfulness before God, confessing our sin, you know that that phrase from first Corinthians 11. In the, in the Lord's Supper we proclaim the Lord's death to become there was the till he comes didn't really get too much attention but the death part the cross part of that a lot of attention. And it was about remembering the cross it was about remembering the terrible suffering that Jesus went through in order to save us from our sins and therefore, we not to be very grateful for that. And in that, in that framework, a lot of the meaning of the Eucharist is left out because the Eucharist isn't just for helping us to remember our sinfulness so that we can be saved by Christ. It's, it's entering into the pascha the, the whole drama of salvation, cross resurrection ascension and coming again that is our kingdom that is the reign of God. That's what we enter into in the Eucharist not just that, that aspect of remembering the cross in our in our sinfulness relationship. So, in traditionally from the very beginning the the Eucharistic prayer courses the celebratory prayer it's a Thanksgiving prayer to God for all that all that was all that was given to us. The confession was earlier in the service. Now we get to the real thing, which is entering into our inheritance as as a children of God, participating in Christ. It's noteworthy that confession is something that tended to drop out of, I don't know about the main line but out of evangelical services. Oh yeah, the confession fell out completely and it was, you know, couple of years ago that I, I, I noticed that it for the most part gotten perfunctory and fallen out of our service here and so I usually, I try not to be too heavy handed with other I've got enough say in this church as it is. But that's something that I said you know I want to, I want to pause in the service. So that, you know, part of that was you know during George Floyd, you've got, you know, you've got, you've got people in the streets participating in a confessional liturgy. And I thought, I wonder if this is because we no longer do it in the church. And, and, and now, if, if the church isn't. If the church isn't. What's the right word, facilitating this for the public if the church isn't, isn't taking these needed functions in. And if the church isn't playing its role in society, you know, in that way sort of the stones cry out, and that people's, you know, sort of all over the place are are confessing things but it's it's chaotic it's haphazard. We're not disciplined or ritualized or engaged with too much thought in terms of, okay, if this is who we are. How do we actually begin to address this in our life and in our world it's much more in that way sort of like a, it's a spontaneous expression of confession. There's no, there's no one there that can announce, or there are few there that can announce pardon, because actually there's no, there's no longer a central. There's no longer a center to the culture. Right. Well, what we're talking about is a whole, whole structure of the worship service you know it begins, there may be any, what happens in most evangelical worship services. Good evening everyone. Glad you're here. Thank you for coming. I mean, thank you for coming. What is this. So it's not about God. It's about you. Yeah, that's what we're here for. The, the, what, in the book of common prayer, how does the worship service begin. Blessed be God Father Son and Holy Spirit. People respond and blessed be God's kingdom now and forever. We're here. We're blessing God, and we're glad to be a part of God's kingdom, because that's what would be that's what we're entering into here that's what it's all about. So you're, you're meeting with God, praise God, then you can't help but be realize that you fail to be the human being that God called you to be. I love that prayer and the book of common prayer, the confession. We have sinned in thought by what we have done and by what we have left undone. We have not loved you above all, and we have not loved our neighbors as ourself. And I can, I can, I can, I can remember exactly the things that are left on them and ways which I didn't love my neighbors. That's an important aspect to be honest with, and it needs to be gone through what needs to be entered into because of the, the God that you're meeting here in this in this worship service because of the covenant that God has made me a covenant of not only God's grace and love but a covenant of obedience on my part. That all has to be dealt with there and it's not. It's just glad you're here. Let's sing a few songs with a really really good rock band. Yeah, yeah, well, or at least the best rock band we can put together for today. I, boy, I tell you know, this is a real problem because so the churches, often churches want to copy the big mega churches right. They don't have the talent for it. And so it's often just just agonizingly bad. You know, they might better have an organ. Do that better. I mean organ kind of sounds like a band and a lot of instruments together. Anyway, you would need someone who could play that. And as you know, I mean, well, you know, at Christ Church Davis you had a, you had a pretty remarkable set of musicians there to not many many of us, many of us don't necessarily have have that at our disposal and. Well, what, what do you want, what do you want the book to do for the church. I want the church to understand what worship is. And I want to call them, call the church to worship again. And it's not something that worship is not something that we can just decide how we're going to do it. It's laid out for us. There's a prescription. I'm not going to say that there are going to be different ways in which various cultural groups are going to worship. There are going to be different kinds of music, different kinds of a of a feel of how the worship goes. But what we do in worship, I think it's pretty much the same. And it's been the same since the beginning. I was reading again, Justin martyrs description about 150 AD. Just says it all when we come together. We read the scriptures we read the apostles. And we, we eat this bread and wine which he says is not ordinary food. So, you know, so how do we decide that we can just throw that over. You know, when the church has been worshiping that way for all those years. And that is grounded in the New Testament itself. Paul says when we get when you get together. It's always the Eucharist is there. Acts 20 same thing. So I want to call the church back to worship. I want to, I want to help people to recognize that it has a pattern to it, that it has certain elements to it. Fundamentally, word and sacrament, those two things and those two things cannot be separated from each other. They belong together. In fact, the preaching of the word is in a way I think Elton talked about this, a sacrament. It is God's word coming through a human being. So that's the physical, the spiritual, so to speak, God's word entering into the life of the church through a human being. Just as well as the is the sacrament is Christ entering into our into into us and are participating as rice through the bread and wine of the Eucharist. It's all it's all sacramental from beginning to end. It's it's heaven meeting Earth. It's a it's God meeting us in our humanity in the stuff of this of this world. So let me let me read you something that. About two years ago I came across this two sentences from early 20th century Roman Catholic monk named Odo Cassell, who was widely known in the Catholic circles prior to Vatican II was one of the sort of liturgical scholars. So this is what this is what he said. The liturgy that is the worship service culminating in the process. That's the liturgy is the ritual enactment of the redemptive work of Christ in and through the church. It is a holy ritual action in which God saving acts are made present in the right that is in the worship service made present and bring salvation to the worshiping community. That last one is really got me. And I think that he's absolutely right. Where do we experience salvation. We experience it week after week in the liturgy in the word and in the sacrament. That whole experience put together is the gift of salvation that we accept and receive over and over again in the worship service. I think there are a lot of Protestants at least who would say, who would consider that to be sort of blasphemous or heretical even to say that we experience it that that these things bring salvation to the worshiping community. What if we believe in the Holy Spirit, who's at work in the word and in the sacrament. That's exactly what happens. I think that understanding of worship as bringing salvation. If that could be resurrected and clothed. Could be a revolutionary idea for people in worship. That's why we go to enter into the kingdom where salvation comes to us. That is experienced by the worshiping community. That's a powerful thing. Yeah, yeah. You know, it strikes me that the consciousness of that we live. We live in a very noisy world. You know the consciousness of that. I think took took centuries to to to make accessible to large populations. And I fear that in mere decades, much of it was lost. Even one of the things, you know, a number of years ago, I was thinking about, you know, what does that word salvation mean to people? The, I mean, the Christian worship is, is that a center of an entire view of the cosmos. And, you know, if you, you know, you look at, let's say, CS Lewis's book, The Discarded Image, you know, in modernity, you know, this, this classical, this classical then then medieval work, you know, view of the world, this, you know, the seven heavens, all of this that comes crashing down in many ways. And, and you know, the reformers, I think, try to, they, I think they try to, you know, they try to stabilize that in in the in the church. Now in but in a new cosmos, I mean, all of this, all of this stuff. I, you know, I've spent so much time the last couple of years talking to Roman Catholics and looking at history and, you know, it's something like that, you know, the Eucharist miracles where, you know, people would smuggle, you'd smuggle the wafer out of out of church in the mass, you got to get it to your cow. Because you know, your cow was sick. And if the, you know, Dutchman should You know, because if the cow is sick, then I mean, this is salvation for me. Surely it must, you know, surely it must also help my cow. And of course the Protestant reformers would look at that and say, you know, It's not quite what we're talking about. But in another sense now, you know, 500 years later, we're getting to the point where we need some of that where, you know, the Eucharist needs to needs to float down through to my cow as well. And then all of those connections between, you know, between our world and the center of the world, because that's what we're doing when we're worshiping. We're, we're taking this time away. And you're exactly right. I mean, and I think you And I think you know, worship in an express in the society of expressive individuals is the church is there to afford me an experience. It's not an experience of release or transcendence. But it's to afford me that and I think part of the poverty of that is when you make that trade. All you get left with is that experience. And it is no longer connected out to the rest of the world. But it's, it's my experience that the worship service rightly done is cosmic and it's so this is salvation is cosmic and it's so it includes absolutely everything. The cows, as you said, wonderfully. Yeah, and when it's reduced to that sort of individuals need something is something is really something really important is lost. I ran across somebody who churches want to create community. You know, we want to create this good feeling between people. And this writer was saying, the church is not a community, it is a community toss, which is a very different reality. It's not this community of like minded people who enjoyed being together and that sort of thing, which is what people think of as the church. I don't have a sense of community here when I, I don't. It is worth my time. But it's a community toss is something that is created. Extrinsically it's called out, it's created by God, not by us. That is that is that is a part of what I think needs to be recovered when we think of worship. This is what's gathering together. It's not about you. It's not about how you feel. It's something that God has called into being through Christ, by the power of the Holy Spirit. When is when is your book coming out who's the publisher. I have no idea. Oh really, no, no, no, I'm just started to work. I, you know, I've talked to a few people but I don't have any commitments. Okay, before I need to, to put together a couple of chapters that will give an indication of where it's going and how I communicate it. I said the beginning stages. Okay, okay. Oh, well, I've, yeah, boy. You know in. Oh my. There's so much going on. Well, there's just so much going on in this space right now. You know because, you know, over on the orthodox side. You know, we've got, you know, Jonathan Peugeot, turning everybody on in terms of symbolism and giving some understanding of symbolism. Gosh, why can't I remember this, the guy, the guy wrote me a, the guy wrote me a nice note asking if I would read his just written, he teaches and he teaches in New York City, I can't forget his name drew. Oh, I know you mean yeah yeah it's a ritual it's on ritual. Yes, yes, yes, yes. Yeah, I know what you mean I've got the book. Yeah, he's on the, he's often on this, this on script podcast. Okay. Yeah. Is it johnson's? It's a wonderful book on just on ritual as such and how it functions. Yeah. In both in the church and in the world. Yeah. I've been a little out of flying the last couple months. And one thing I noticed is this, there's a ritual going on about soldiers. Go to the airport, go other places, it's less honor, those who give their lives, you know, there's a kind of a sacrificial liturgy that goes on airplanes of all places. And I'm not putting that down. But I'm, it's part of how liturgies pop up all over the place rituals pop up a lovely because we need them. Because, yeah, we, we, we need them in order to function in order to have a sense of societal function and and in unity. Yeah. Well, of course, you know, Jamie Smith wrote about that extensively all the, all the liturgies of our modern life. I also read a book by a guy named Graham Hughes, a couple books of Australian literature scholar. And he's got this wonderful idea that in order to, to speak to the needs of our disenchanted world and secular world. We need to focus on what all people experience as the limits, the limits of what we are often afraid to go to the liminal aspects of life that everybody experiences. That's where we can sort of, I was gonna say more people back into worship but that's where worship can connect with people. At least in the beginning since we all have this sense of limits we all have this sense of something beyond, which were, which were afraid to name which we're, which we, which we have a sense is there but don't know how to describe it that we dealt with at the same time that we think it's there. That's something that liturgy can address in people's, in people's means. That's interesting. That's a that's an interesting idea. I mean you're, it's, it's an attempt to. So much of what's going on now is an attempt to, to re appropriate the absolutes, or at least universals. And I think it's sort of I think of what has happened in, in, you know, since Columbus, we've had this, this massive Columbus, the printing press now the internet especially social media, we have this match, we have this massive pluralism crisis where we're dealing with so much on a regular basis that it's very difficult to find common al commonality that affords, you know bridges across differences. So looking at looking at limits and liminal spaces liminal aspects that are universal. You know I could, I can very much understand why, why, why someone would look at that. This is this is very interesting and it's very interesting that you've just started so I'm curious, I'm curious what kinds of what kinds of, because, you know, I'm going to put this out people are going to write stuff in the comments I'm curious what kind of feedback. You'd like. And I love people to to relate their own experiences. Are they pleased with how their church worships. What may they be, what may they may they be missing in it. What worship does or doesn't do in their lives. Can I tell you another little story. So in our church and the cold with them. We, three months ago we went back into a regular worship services and we, of course, we do have weekly community which I'd say to 95% of the people in that church is extremely important they would be you know, that's what that's what they're there for. And I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. I'm not sure if that's what they're doing. on., on, on, on of the Lords. This will be all right. And why is that? This because of the semantics. And because the language is the thing, it was a speaking. So last Sunday I was visiting my son in Charleston and we went to an Episcopal church downtown the cathedral there and they had come to the front floor of the Eucharist. They didn't do the wine, they just did the bread. Facing that priest, placing that in my hand, I just wept. I just wept. It was so powerful that it could be physical again. It could be, it could embody what it's supposed to embody and I had missed so much trying to peel back that plastic cover and spilling the grape juice on my pants. So it reminded me how you do it, the very physicality of it is so deeply important and is so profoundly affecting of your faith and your sense of identity. Yeah, boy, there's so much here. There's just so much here. One of the things that I've learned over the last three years is one thing that YouTube is really good for, it's actually getting feedback from people. I mean, I look at places that disable the comments and given what often goes on in comment sections, I can understand that but it's a huge loss because we do learn from each other and so I'll be interested to hear the feedback. How you laid worship out I think is, in C.S. Lewis's phrase, I think this is merely Christian. This is something that Orthodox, Roman Catholics, Protestants can recognize and many can say yes, that's it. I think as you say, there is a, I mean, when you first used the word crisis, I thought, let me think more about that but I think the way you spelled it out, you made the argument well that there is a crisis in this and I think it's in many ways a crisis of distraction. I think people appropriated this, something which didn't really belong to them, which is sort of the worship service and said, wow, we can employ this for a lot of other things and I think that's the way it is. Churches have kind of done that and you ought not to try to employ that for other things because it doesn't really belong to you. In American historical church history, it goes back to Charles Finney and the great revivals finding that they could use, the purpose was conversion, get people converted and so you could use various means within the gathering to be able to accomplish that and of course my theological hero John Nevins said no, no, no, no, no, it's word and sacrament and catechesis because you don't understand word and sacrament unless you have the catechetical training behind it. Charles Hodge, the great Presbyterian theologian said no to Nevins and yes to Finney. Well, I think the service is for conversion but I think we probably ought to we ought to begin to address is our theology of conversion. Yeah, well, of course, what Finney was saying was yes, it's for conversion and we can produce it. Yeah, we know how to do that. We don't leave it up to God, we don't leave it up to God to convert people, we can do it ourselves because we can put them in the anxious bench and make them really nervous and want to confess all their sins and accept Jesus as their seed. Yeah, well, that of course came through. You know, Finney was an interesting character. There's a regular listener of my channel who has, he's a layman but he's worked on a lot of Charles Finney and I've had some conversations with him. Finney was a very interesting individual and as often is the case, I'm not sure if the the innovators necessarily are to blame for everything that those who followed their innovation took it to. That's often the case, which should probably give us a little bit of respect for the orthodox who are like, don't mess with anything. And I don't, you know, I don't know a whole lot about Finney but I don't think that he intended that the worship service would be used for this. It was something outside of the worship service. But increasingly, even by Nevenstein, it was being utilized as a substitute for the worship service, the liturgy. Yeah, there was recently a funeral that I went to and that preacher was not going to let us out of the room and because he said last funeral he did, he had six or seven people who came forward at the altar call and he was not going to let us out of that building until, you know, we had some people. I was tempted to come forward just so we could end the thing, you know. All right, I'll come, you know. Well, will that make this thing end soon? So yeah, yeah. Well, of course, as you well know, salvation has been individualized. It's been carved down to some minimal relationship between me and Christ and the forgiveness of my sins and my accepting Christ. What did that come from? And so yeah, that's all part of the mix. Yeah, yeah, there's a lot there. Well, I'm anxious to share this with those who watch my videos, at least those who will watch the ones that are explicitly Christian and especially some of the CRC ones and I'm, you know, I thought maybe you were further along on your book. I was hoping, you know, I was looking forward to reading it, but in another way, well, hopefully maybe on CRC Voices will, this will prompt some discussion amongst that crew because there's, yeah, there's so much to this and, you know, when I, you know, last this week I've been thinking a lot about my friend John Vervecky who is, you know, he's a professor of cognitive science up in Toronto and the, you know, the conversations I've been having and, you know, his religion, it's not a religion and, you know, so I've got him on one side, I've got Jonathan Peugeot on the other and it's like, I very much feel in the middle as a Protestant because although, you know, I'm clearly on the Christian side of the line, so I think I think the church would be well served and the Christian Reformed Church as well with a good conversation about worship and its centrality and some, I think we are seeing, we are seeing as, you know, you could see in Christ Church Davis when you were here as we see in Granite Springs, so City Life who is currently worshiping in our facility because they lost their facility during COVID, we are seeing more and more Christian Reformed churches going to weekly communion and being more in touch with this, you know, this, it's interesting, it's, I, you know, I, a number of times I've mentioned, you know, Protestantism is about a protest and the tell-off, the goal of any protest is not protest itself, it's the conclusion of the protest, a satisfying conclusion of the protest and I think what we've also seen in the last 60 years is a, I think, some real progress in terms of seeing the broken apart church better recognizing each other, appreciating the Orthodox, appreciating the Roman Catholics, Protestants and some of what Protestants have been protesting about for a few centuries now, I think has in fact landed in some of these churches as well, so the protest does need to end at some point and maybe we're getting closer to that day. One of the reasons why I think the Eucharist is so important is because it is, it is uniform and in other words, instead of churches defining themselves according to their particular confessional beliefs, we come more and more in the Eucharist to define ourselves on the centrality of Christ and our participation together in Christ and that's a much healthier place to be, I think, than arguing about all these other doctrines and ethical issues and that sort of thing. Are we one into it? Can we gather around the table? That's the big thing. Yeah, and that I think comes with the recession of modernity that we are currently in the midst of and that's going to continue, and I think at that point maybe we'll see a better, a more balanced, you know, Verbecky has his four Ps. The proposition was one aspect of knowing, but that aspect being in better harmony with the other aspects of knowing, which is participatory, procedural and perspectival, those are his four Ps. Does he have ritual? What's that? Does he have ritual in there? Well, that would be the part, that would be the procedural. Participatory? Well, participatory, see really there's, in modernity the propositional sort of was our attempt to gain a God's eye view of the world and so... Control it, to control it. Yeah, so the propositional sort of got out of whack with the participatory, the procedural and the perspectival and so now as modernity is receding, I think we're seeing the propositional settle back into a better place with respect to all of the rest and I think that's very much in harmony with what you're asking for in the church to say, no, it can't, you know, we're not, as Jamie Smith says, you know, we're not heads on sticks, we're not just thinking sacks of meat, we are embodied and so within the Eucharist it is participatory, it is procedural, I mean all ritual is procedural and it is perspectival because the ritual reframes us and again part of modernity was this humanity, you know, man is the measure, it's the demotion of humanity back to our proper place, but that has to be within, you know, within the image of God, you know, on getting us recalibrated, so I think your plea is... It's in Christ who was the image of God. Right. So, well this is good, Len, anything you wanted to get in that we didn't get in? I don't think so, Mike, we covered it pretty well. I was going to tell you a little bit about John, the recovery of John chapter six, the great the great bread from heaven discourse which I've come more and more to love and appreciate anyway. We can save that for when you get the book done and we'll do this again. All right, yeah, it's been great talking to you and I appreciate the work that you're doing and the many people that you are talking to and the way in which you represent the church to a lot of people, so you're a pastor to many. Thank you. I want to pay tribute to that. Thank you. Well, I hope, you know, I always tell people that that's very important, that you're a pastor to many and that's a great thing to do, and I want to thank you for that. You know, I always tell people that this very much goes along with this conversation. I don't really think there's such thing as an internet pastor and then because it must be procedural, it must be embodied, it must be local and because it's a bridge. That's right, it is a bridge, it is a bridge. All right, Len, I'm going to post this tomorrow, so. Good, I'll look forward to the comments. Yeah, it should be fun. Take care, Len. It's good talking to you. You too. Bye-bye. Bye-bye.