https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=A0wAb8hlpyM

 Okay, hold on. Alright, here we go. Alright. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. You're very excited. Fred booked a recording studio. We're recording. Hey, guess who's gonna be in it. The magic Charles J and Freddie D. Yeah, baby. You know, there's an organization called Notes for Notes. Yeah, it has free recording studio time for people. Well, I don't think they have one in Sacramento, but I know a guy who's involved. I'll have to ask him if, you know, he watches the show sometimes. Right on. What's up? Peace out. What's up? What's up? Ice Cube. What's up? Uh, Super Doggy Dog. You know what I'm saying? Tweety Bird. All very faithful watchers of the channel. I'm sure. Tweety Bird is cool. Yeah. She's a female rapper, but she's tight. Alright. Alright. Anyways, what are we talking about today? The A's are winning. The A's won two out of three games, right? And the Kings lost to the Jazz by 50. What? If you, yes. By 50 points. In the NBA? That's ridiculous. That's shameful. It's bad. I don't know what to say more about it. Coaches get fired for less than that. Well, you know what happened to, um, what was that guy's name? No, not the coach, but a radio announcer. Uh, yeah, they fired him. Yeah. But that wasn't cause the Kings lost. I know. I know that's true. Anyways, uh, yeah. So what do you know about sports? I mean, you follow it. Who do you want for the draft? I haven't, I haven't followed anything for like three years. Well, who won the, my YouTube stuff swallowed all the time. I have to get to sports. Who won the fantasy football? Yeah. Reggie. Reggie won? Again. Of course. With my mom? I believe so. Problem's out, mom. You got it going on. All right. Well, I think your mom needs to take a more active role in picking lineups for that. Yeah. I think they got some. Reggie's been doing too much. Reggie needs to leave a little bit more room for Nancy to make some picks. That's what I think. And then one of these times, I think we should, uh, I was thinking I could shoot a movie video. If, uh, not a movie video, but a music video. And if anybody knows of anything, you can email, call. Oh, that's my card. No, I dropped it. I know. Why do you need my card? You got my number. I know you do. I know. Nobody calls me more times during the week than you, Fred. No, I don't. I call once a week. I do. Anyways, to make a long story short, we could, uh, now you'd mess me up. I was going to say, I forgot. I don't know what you were going to say. We were talking about how many times a week you call me. No, not that the other thing. All right. I'm going to do my performance. Look, the other church, Mark's church moved here and those hooligans rode on the building sidewalk chalk. It's fine. They're kids. It's fine. All right. Here we go. I got the mix. So what's on time? I got the rhythm, the drum. So what you trying to get some vanilla ice? You better eat your beans and rice because I know that I still the show. When I walked down the carpet, it better be red. And that's right. My name is Fred. Good to go without a word to say. We got Paul. Anyway, don't forget about Charlie J and Gordon too. Don't you know I'm down with my crew? My homies, my D, his name is Dion. He rolls in a six bow, ready to go. Ready to roar. Ready to see. Any EMC wants to challenge me, but I don't think so because Tweety Bird is tight. Yeah, he's fresh like a hot fire ignites to the rhythm that I come. And when I get up, I got to have some more method for my Jesus Christ. Because you know, he's doing right and he died for our sins. And that's right. He's good to victory. And he's living stones. Gee. And yo, this is it for my rhyme. B peace out. There we go. One love. Amen. Amen. Hallelujah.