https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OhwmTJnP7a4

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Look who's back. Fancy Nancy is in the house. Fancy Nancy is in the house. Yes, I praise God for being here, I'll tell you. It's been eight months and to come into my sanctuary, it's just almost like, well, I guess going to heaven. Anyhow, as to the sermon, we worked on the fifth commandment and that's honor your father and your mother. Now I'm going to give a little bit of past history with me with this. My parents were Christian and foreign and they were very staunch, I thought. Very strict. Very strict. On Sunday afternoons, if I wanted to go with a friend to do something, no. Couldn't do it. If I was dating, yeah. I had to be in by 10.30, 11 o'clock at the latest. And another thing, we were a block, half a block, block away from the church. And so my father and mother and I walked to church. And my mother, and I don't have them on, oopsie, I don't have this on either. You don't need that right now. Well, anyhow, my mother always had to wear earrings. Oh really? And yeah, and that's why I was wearing them. I had them in my purse, but they fell off because of the mess. Anyhow, getting back to my mother, she says, Nancy, I don't have my earrings on. I want to have them for the church. And she says, I need you to go back and get my earrings. And my mother said, oh. And she says, obey me, do it. So I did. She told me where they were. And I got the earrings. Other things, obey me. My father was a little more lenient. I love my mother and father. I went through 12 years of Rippet and Christian. And actually, I think I was a pretty good person, but child. Anyhow, that's that. Yeah. I don't know how much personal I'm going to tell you, but basically, Freddie, I tried to bring you up. Like my father and mother brought me in. However, it was a different time. I mean, now that's all. Kids don't do it. Okay. But I'm not a kid. I'm a bit old. And I do make my own decisions. And I do the golden rule. And I do honor my mother and my father. And my father was a very good softball player. Even in his day. He pitched. He played second base. And we had Mark Cole on our team. And we had Dick Cole managing with Father Fred. And it was just good. And I was on the team. And we had a good time having softball. And we also had volleyball that we had with the Priest family. And Christine played. And a couple others played. And it was a good time. And I remember when this church was a big church. And we had all kinds of things going on. We had cadets. We had Calvinets. We had youth group with Neil Hand. And we had the Coddaburg Catechism. And that was a very interesting subject. He would bring donuts every morning. And make sure the guys had donuts. And I thought that was very lovely. Anyways, Paul, what do you have to say about the growth of the church? Or what we've had before or what have you? I'm a pretty lousy pastor. Because we don't have any of those things now. We're not a lousy pastor. We just don't have as many people because of the academic. The academic or whatever you want to call it. The economy? No, no, no, no, no. Because of the COVID-19. Anyways, okay, we're going to discuss baseball. Tampa Bay won against the Houston Astros on yesterday. Okay. And I think they've won. Oh, and the Dodgers beat the Braves. So it's either going to be the Braves in the Astros or the Tampa Bay Braves and the Dodgers or Atlanta. Seasons are just all messed up this year because we just had basketball. Basketball and baseball at the same time. And how are you doing on fantasy football, sir? I'm doing okay. I'm doing horrible. I've won in three and one. I'm doing terrible. I'm hoping to win today. But my season's a mess. Well, mine is. Ours is too. We lost the quarterback on the Cowboys. Your record doesn't show it. Your four and one. And I'm one and three and one. And that tie should have been my win. I hate ties. But basically we lost our quarterback. And this week we don't have our New Orleans guy, Kamara. Who has Diggy watched? He's on defense. So nobody has him individually. Except the defense team. But anyhow, I'll be honest with you. With the way this COVID-19's going, this is the church and my sports are keeping me in a little bit of a right mind. Right. Well, what about your left mind? My left mind. Good one, Fred. I like that. Well, you've got to bust some dairy. I can't do that. You were right when you were on 102. Yeah, but right now my mind is. Alright, wish you well. Alright, wish you well at the plane. Any final thoughts? I've got to do the wrap, though. You can do the wrap? Okay, go ahead. Well, maybe we should close the show and then do the wrap. Or should I just do it then? Yeah, okay, I'll just do it. In an age of twisted values, we have lost the truth that we need. In sophisticated language, we have justified our greed. If we hold recidiments, dear, when they lose their way, in life give us truth to life, they will bring our way. Honor thy mother, thy father, so you will live long. Everybody knows they're not teaching chums. Step into the middle, don't forget about this. You must trust and obey them because he gave them birth. Birth and sin and nature, it will be this way. And when we're on the mic, we all will pray. Amen. Amen. That was a good show. All right, Rick, you got any graphics for us? Got a graphic. Rick and Jared have been doing the graphics. They had Paul one, everyone else three, running in by the fantasy football, misery. I guess you need to land the plane, Paul, the graphics. Paul, land the plane. Oh, we need one love. You got a one love graphic? Oh, yeah. Ready. One love. All right. Amen. Hey, there it is.