https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=nPUlTdZ8utU

 Hi, this is Paul. I wanted to do a little deeper dive into this book. Just finished it today. The Faiths of Our Founding Fathers by David Holmes. It was copyright in 2006. When I was finishing it up, the last chapter is, I thought, quite a good treatment of the religious lives of the presidents from Gerald R. Ford through George W. Bush. And the whole book I really deeply appreciated. Found it quite helpful. The religious beliefs of Washington, Jefferson, John Adams, is a near constant debate in American culture with respect to religious people. They become very quickly a tug of war between the religious and the non-religious. And as I mentioned Robert Putnam's book, American Grace, that has in some ways become the dividing line within American culture between the religious and the not religious. Do you go to church? What do you say with respect to the Bible? Not so much do you believe in God. That's a different question really than the questions involved. And interestingly enough that really holds true through this treatment. So David Holmes really I think does an excellent job as a professional historian to take a look at these matters. But labeling something as Christian is always a difficult thing. It's always a challenge simply on the basis of a one word summary of something so broad as to in fact 200 plus year history and longer than that back to colonial days of a nation. There's the challenge of essence. Now some of you might know Derek Fiedler. Derek has been on my channel. He lives in Northern California. He wrote a really I thought an excellent blog post on the symbolic world where he talked about this problem of essence or summary. How do you sum up a human life in an obituary? Many of us we do it instantly just in terms of an impression, that first impression. There's never a second chance to make a first impression. And so we immediately and again we have to do this because the world is so large and our lives are so short and reality comes at us so quickly we just instantly have an impulse or an impression of someone. So there's apparently a human project that collects five terabytes of info on a human being, which is a tiny amount of actual what a human life is. And so when you ask the question, what is a Christian nation? Well, does it mean does it have a state church? Now it's not a meaningless enterprise, but it really has to be understood in context. And so when you get at, okay, what were the religious ideas by the words that they used? The religious behaviors, church attendance. Confirmation is an interesting example because at that period you needed a bishop to confirm. Now most infants were baptized unless they were part of a Baptist sect. And but you would only be confirmed and there were there weren't there weren't many bishops in the colonies. So it took a little doing to get confirmed. And so whether or not someone was confirmed really was a statement as to where they stood as an adult with respect to the church and also participation in the Eucharist or the Lord's Supper. Because again, this was a voluntary effort that would often take a little doing in many colonial services. The service of the Eucharist would happen once a quarter at the end of the service and people could leave before then. And George Washington, for example, very seldom took the Eucharist. He would leave before that part of the service. And because Washington is in some ways the preeminent of those founding fathers, he there was a lot of attention paid to the the piety of George Washington. And we'll get into that a little bit. But but David Holmes is a very credible historian. And so he did his homework and he makes his arguments. I thought he made them quite convincingly. He looks at the testimony of family members of clergy of contemporaries with respect to what many of these individuals that founded and were so formative in the formation of what would become the United States, what their ideas and behaviors with respect to the Christian faith were. As I mentioned in my previous video, deism was the big. Non religion of the day in Western Europe. And it was sort of a religious posture found in England, in France, in Western Europe, among the educated, among the business elites, among the political elites. And again, as I read last time, this is a this is a good summary of what let's call them the five points of deism. Number one, there is a God. Number two, he ought to be worshipped. Number three, virtue is the principal element in this worship. So, again, the worship of this God is not necessarily done in church, but it's something done in your life, in your moral quality. Now, I have a whole bunch of thoughts on this. In the ancient world, morality and divinity didn't necessarily come together. C.S. Lewis argues in the problem of pain that in fact, these two things were separate things, the numinous world, which was the world of the power of the gods and morality, which was the world of right and wrong. C.S. Lewis counts these two aspects as being two separate senses in a way in addition to our five senses. They're they're not direct senses as our they don't seem as direct to our conscious. That isn't even right. How to talk about these things? Because, again, through this long dive that we've done into cognitive science, our eyes are nowhere as direct in terms of broad witnesses to the outside world as we would imagine. Neither are our ears, neither are our touch. You have the problem of selectivity, you have the problem the size of the world, you have problem of salience and the focus of your consciousness. All of this goes into, again, what Jordan Peterson argued to be the the a priori structure that enables these senses to create a manifest image of the world around us. OK, now the numinous is this additional sense of of the supernatural, of the miraculous, of the divine. And of course, in the ancient world, this was a means of power. Morality is the sense of what we ought to do. Now, as I should probably just pull up the slide, it's in a previous rendition of this video. So you have the numinous sense, which is sometimes very intuitive. Let's call it the willies or the heebie-jeebies, or you just have a sense of something. It's why people go to the Del Coronado in San Diego and find exactly what rooms to stay in if they want to if they want to experience a ghost. It's the awe that you get when you enter Yosemite Valley. And in the ancient world, it was all about power and it was available through sacrifice and rituals and and what we call religious. But again, Tom Holland noted was was not, you know, was not seen as necessary religious. They didn't have the category. You see Agamemnon sacrificing his daughter to Artemis for for fair winds to to do battle with Troy. Then you have the moral sense, which is, you know, what is right or wrong? And we have this sense of righteous indignation when when something we feel must be, you know, morally real, as morally real as gravity is physically real as violated. And we must rise up to denounce it or fix it. We've got a lot of moralizing going in our culture right now. Agamemnon's wife will seek justice by killing Agamemnon over the death of her daughter. She'll seek his life for this. She was not at all happy that her daughter was used this way. Now, God, the god Artemis, you know, was withholding the normal winds from Agamemnon because he had accidentally killed one of her sacred deer. So she had a sense of justice, but somehow the death of Agamemnon's daughter fulfilled justice. And so right away you can see the kind of contradictory streams that come together. Lewis, of course, believed that these two things actually did come together in Judaism. The moral experience and the numinous experience are so far from being the same that they may exist quite for quite long periods without establishing mutual contact. In many forms of paganism, the worship of the gods and the ethical discussions of the philosophers had very little to do with each other. The third stage in religious development arises when men identify them, when the numinous power to which we feel awe is made the guardian of morality to which we feel obligation. Once again, this may seem to you very natural. What can be more natural than a savage haunted at once by awe and by guilt to think that the power which awes him is also the authority which condemns his guilt. And it is indeed natural to humanity, but it is not at the least obvious. And many people throughout the history of the world did simply not see it this way. We see it as natural because it's simply a part of the package that that we've inherited. The actual behavior of that universe with which the numinous haunts bears no resemblance to the behavior which morality demands of us. The one seems wasteful, ruthless and unjust, Artemis. The other enjoins upon us the opposite qualities, nor can the identification of the two be explained as wish fulfillment, for it fulfills no one's wish. We desire nothing less than to see the law, capital L, whose naked authority is already unsupportable, armed with the incalculable claims of the numinous, capital N. Of all the jumps that humanity takes in its religious history, this is certainly the most surprising. That's Lewis from The Problem of Pain. And this very much is backed up if you look at John Walton's treatment of ancient Near East thought in the Old Testament. And I've mentioned this numerous times in my videos. Israel indictment oracles are far more common than ancient Near East oracles. Israelite oracles most often call for covenant faithfulness, something that has to do with morality, while ancient Near East oracles most often call for ritual faithfulness. Sacrifice that daughter Agamemnon and maybe I'll be okay about your the loss of my sacred dear, says God Artemis. Israel prophets are covenant enforcers, while ancient Near East prophets are ritual enforcers. Judgment in the ancient Near East prophecy is nearly non-existent. Ancient Near East prophecy divine support is often, prophecy divine support is most often in focus. In Israelite prophecy, divine disfavor is most often in focus, as opposed as opposition to the status quo. Ancient Near East prophecy often majors in ritual prescription. Israelite prophecy holds covenant accountability rather than ritual accountability and its prescription's covenant faithfulness is often the presumed remedy. You know, I don't care for the blood of sacrifice. I want obedience rather than sacrifice, the Hebrew prophets say. Israelite hope is often after judgment has come. Ancient Near East prophecy offers hope in a near term victory in support of the king. In other words, avoiding judgment. Ancient Near East prophecy functions as a context of immediacy and urgency with no long term value. Israelite prophecy is presented as a part of a divine plan that is eschatological and covenant based. While Israelite prophecy sometimes offers future telling, it is most often interested in revealing God. Its goal is the people of God and offers a vision of the person and the plan of God. Ancient Near East prophecy is usually served to legitimate the present king. Yeah, that was...there are many videos that start in PowerPoint and never get there. So what you see in deism is in many ways a fruit of all of this. There is a God he ought to be worshiped but he ought to be worshiped in virtue. So you can already see this Judeo-Christian strand right there in deism. Virtue is the principal element in this worship. Humans should repent of their sins, their moral sins, and there is a life after death. I just had a little conversation with Ali from Rebel Wisdom today and we talked about some of these issues. It might show up on his channel. Maybe I'll decide to use the video. I don't know. We'll see what we do. But there is life...for the deists however as opposed to the atheists which we'll talk about later, there is life after death where evil will be punished and the good rewarded. You can see when you look at deism where you sort of would have a baseline compatibility between the various Christian sects that migrated to the United States and this pervasive deism held by many of the founding fathers. We'll get into that a little bit later when we get into it. But the ideas are going to impact religious communities and some religious communities are going to oppose deism and see it as a corruption or a decayed status of true religion. Some are going to resist it and some are going to adopt it at various different levels. Now one of the things that David Holmes does is he offers, and he's not alone in this, offering three classifications of basically the majority of the founding fathers as it were, those who participated in the Continental Congress, those who signed the Declaration of Independence. His three classifications will be deists, Christian deists, and he calls them Orthodox Christians, small o-Orthodox or perhaps traditional Christians. Remember this book was written in 2006 and over the last 15 years a lot has happened and some of this nomenclature is a little more slippery than it would have been in 2006 nevertheless. So one of the interesting things in reading this book is that I didn't check the date of its copyright when I started reading it but as the book went along remembering some of the debates that were happening in 2006 and then thinking okay I can see how this book was written to address some of these things. New atheism was really in its heyday and in many ways new atheism rose to address the religious right which was by 2006 pretty much on its way down. The second Gulf War under George W. Bush and the failures to accomplish the mission in Iraq or Afghanistan in a timely way really took down the neo-cons and really led to the loss of status and appreciation of the religious right which has had, there was sort of a heyday in the 80s and then I think another resurgence in the Monica Lewinsky scandal and after Bill Clinton which led to the election of George W. Bush. And again the last chapter of the book I thought was really helpful in just kind of going through these presidents. I thought it was very even handed in how he treated the subject. Now hallmark amongst the deists I think is Thomas Jefferson even though as was stated in the book he was in some ways the most theologically, the best theologically read of some of, certainly more than Washington. Jefferson was pretty much the definition of a deist, belief in nature's God, known by reason. And of course Thomas Jefferson would have his Bible that he would clip out all of the supernatural things because no God worth his salt would bend the rules that he made once first made. In terms of church participation he was a Unitarian at best. And the Unitarians were a very interesting group. It was very much believed that New England Unitarianism was the wave of the future, that the Trinity was going to be on its way out. And this was basically a belief that, well you know, deism is going to conquer, that deists know science and they're on the right side of history. And I mean it's very interesting if you read back in those, in that period Unitarian churches imagined that they had been sort of replacing the Calvinist Puritan churches in New England. And the assumption was that Unitarianism was going to just sort of sweep the table. And all the churches would very quickly become Unitarian and they would all see things in a deist scientific sort of way. And that's the way the story was going to go. Now of course looking at it from 2020, that's not at all the way the story went. You can go to New England and find those beautiful, stately Unitarian churches in town squares and places like Wellesley, Massachusetts or Whiteensville, Massachusetts where at least half of my family is from and where my mother lives. And you can find those UU churches because they become Universalist Unitarian churches. And there are a bunch of steps that happened and many of these had been New England Congregationalist Calvinist churches in the past. But they believed that Unitarianism was the wave of the future and that Trinity was going away. Now Thomas Jefferson had a fair degree of anti-clericalism with him. He and Benjamin Franklin, I'm going to classify more as a Christian deist because Benjamin Franklin was a big fan of George Whitfield. George Whitfield, you know, one of the key figures of the Great Awakening. One of these English, you know, one of these, Whitfield was a Calvinist. But one of these remarkable preachers that, and I read a couple of years ago, I read a very interesting biography on George Whitefield or Whitfield. And a very interesting figure, very, you know, people were just, they just fall all over themselves to get to hear his sermons. He was that popular and he could preach to crowds of tens of thousands of people who could hear his voice. Really, really quite remarkable man. Now Benjamin Franklin loved him. I haven't seen Thomas Jefferson's opinion of him. Likely wouldn't be very good. Many, just as today, even amongst, let's say, Christians, there was a broad, there was broad disagreement as to where one stood with respect to the Great Awakening. And figures like Jonathan Edwards and George Whitfield. So, you know, obviously a lot of religious diversity, sort of within some certain bounds. But Jefferson would very much be in the deist camp. Morality over ritual, let's say. George Washington could probably be classified as a Christian deist. Now, again, belief in nature's God via reason. A little less allergic to the miraculous, but skeptical Christian deists tended to be. And again, George Washington quite sort of following the line of how Christian deists would relate to churches. They would often support churches financially. Benjamin Franklin would support George Whitefield and other churches in Philadelphia financially. Again, Franklin, very, very interesting figure. George Washington was born and raised in the established Church of Virginia. Many of the American colonies that would become states had their own established churches, similar to the way the Anglican Church is the established Church of England. The Dutch Reformed Church is the established Church of the Netherlands. And some of these historical relationships still remain, although quite different in the case of Europe. But at this point in time, many of the states or the colonies had their own particular established churches. Nine of the 13 of them did. And George Washington was born and raised in the established Church of Virginia. And he attended church with some regularity. Attended often, but he never took the step of becoming a confirmed member of the church. And that's an important distinction, which the book nicely fleshes out. As I mentioned before, often in many of these churches, Holy Communion would be served four times a year in sort of a separate little service after the main preaching service. And Washington would often leave for those or wouldn't attend those particular services. So he seemed to avoid the Eucharist. He saw religious institutions as beneficial for society. And again, Franklin is very much on this scale. He thought religion was important, but you shouldn't take it too far because the real truth was in nature's God via reason. And so in that sense, the term Christian deist, so Christian is the adjective and deist is the noun. So more deist than Christian, trying to figure out in terms of a label sort of where to to peg George Washington in this group of people. Ritual was supportive of, you know, would be would be a fine thing as long as it was supportive for morality. And, you know, you can see this idea permeate continue through to this day. Many Americans who don't necessarily have themselves a lot of religious commitment might send their children to Sunday school in order to really receive some moral or religious instruction. And so ritual was supportive of morality within reason. All right. So those would be the Christian deists. Now, a great example of Christianity at this time was Samuel Adams. And I noticed on the discord that that that Sam R. Sam Tideman was a little upset that I didn't mention Samuel Adams in my previous video. Well, Sam, your wish is fulfilled, even though, yeah, comments about Unitarianism. But Samuel Adams, yeah, he was he was the real deal. He was a Calvinist Puritan, like like, you know, that had dominated the colony prior to the revolution. But already by the time of the revolution, the grip on the mass, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, to be correct, the grip on the Commonwealth of Massachusetts was already sort of fraying. So a couple of quotes from the book. As an heir of this tradition, Calvinist Puritanism, congregational Calvinist Puritanism, Adams believed that God rewarded or chastised a society according to the morality it exhibited. And again, this is a longstanding belief in American culture and it's a longstanding belief in American evangelicalism. So, of course, when when Katrina hit and New Orleans took a hit, certain preachers would go on TV talking about this was God's judgment against New Orleans. Now, when you see some Baptist church in the middle of Oklahoma smashed by a tornado, we don't necessarily say, well, there there you go. But but this this idea now we sort of get into God number one and God number two. And I know some of you are a little annoyed by that distinction. But again, it comes out. Deists are very much God number one. Sam Adams would you have God number one, but God number two is is also very vibrant here that well, when something happens like this, well, this could very well be God's judgment on it. And and the God imagined is conscious and he's relatable. He's not he's not sort of just part of the system. OK. And so Adams believed that God rewarded or chastised a society according to the morality it exhibited. But again, notice the the real emphasis of morality amongst the deists and the Christian deists. Moreover, he believed that the King of England had broken his contract with the American colonies. Thus, from at least 1776 on, he linked the covenant tradition. That's an important tradition within Calvinism, the tradition of the covenantal theology, the covenant tradition with the American quest for liberty. Public liberty will not long survive the total extinction of morals, he declared in 1776. Righteous heaven will surely smite a cause so right will surely smile on a cause so righteous as ours is, he similarly wrote. And our country, if does our if it does its duty, will see an end to its oppression. So you very much get the sense of very full fledged. God, number two, that if you are being obedient to God, God will see you and reward that obedience. You're not going to find that you'll find similar ideas in in deism. You'll find you much more find something like natural law there that the consequence of doing morality and having your morality in line with natural law will be that the system will work better for you. It's a much less personal situation than full fledged. God, number two, Christianity like we'll find in someone like Sam Adams. When the British left Boston, Adams hoped that their departure would allow the old Puritan Commonwealth to reestablish ancient ancient principles and purity of manners. Adams believed he saw a decline in all morals all around him in Massachusetts. Now, this is a distinction we're going to see between the religious and the not so religious and the deists because Sam Adams would likely see part church attendance and church participation and in fact religious belief, propositional belief as it's important to watch how propositional belief works and all of this stuff. It's important to the deists just like it's important to the Puritans. But propositional belief will be part of morality for someone like Sam Adams. For the deists that morality is much going to be, you know, we'll have some propositional beliefs tied to morality. You ought not think that God, you know, they would call certain things superstitious. Okay. Adams believed he saw a decline in morals all around him in Massachusetts. Late in 1776, he lamented to his wife that he wished we were a more religious people. In 1780, he complained about the extravagance in clothing, furnishings and entertainments that had become routine for the supposed men of religion in Boston. And again, you can see some of the values of austerity and simplicity within Puritanism that that is declining as, you know, as people get wealthy. And you won't, you'll see these same things in many different traditional churches too. And this is actually part of the reason why I don't have a lot of confidence that woke religion will actually yield the kinds of things that traditional religion has. Because a lot of woke people are sort of like a lot of, as Jonathan Peugeot calls them, California Buddhists. You know, they're hoping Buddhism will give them their best life now. And it's like, did you ever think about this, these, this attachment that traditional Buddhism has? But anyway, so you see people with these beautiful homes with these Buddhist statues and it's like, what are those, what are those noble truths that that guy talked about? And, you know, wouldn't, wouldn't you be better being a monk if you really believe this religion? I don't know. It's not my place to criticize them. In a parallel to what he saw occurring in Massachusetts, he argued that the anti-Puritan advisors to King Charles II of England had diverted the concern of English citizens to their, for their liberties by making them extravagant, luxurious, and effeminate. He added, I love the people of Boston. I once thought that the city would be a Christian Sparta. Think about that. Think about that. That's kind of his vision of, you know, Spartan Christian soldiers who strip things down to the bone and are so focused and intense. A Christian Sparta, but alas, will men never be free? You also notice the great, remember at this point in time, the, the impact of Erasmus had, had really formed deeply in terms of a classical education and anyone who was educated in this sphere and many of the people, especially in the Massachusetts colony, were some of the most educated and literate people on the face of the earth at this point. And so literacy and education were highly esteemed and the kind of education that was promoted was a classical education, an education of the, of the classics. And so Sam Adams imagines a Christian Sparta, but alas, will men never be free? And so for Sam Adams, again, free of what? Free of the kinds of things that our desires enslave us to. And you can see some of these ideas mixing together. They will be free no longer than, they will be free no longer than while they remain virtuous. And you very much see virtue, simplicity, self-control, all of those things coming in and that, and that Puritan impulse. His proclamation for a day of public fasting, humiliation and prayer spoke to the need for citizens of Massachusetts to express sorrow, repentance for the manifold transgressions of his holy laws. Okay. Now you're not going to hear this out of a deist. All right. Christian deists might go along because their ideas of morality are really going to be pretty much on the same page, but there's going to be an extra set of morality for religiously observant people. And again, this trend is going to hold in American culture really all the way through to the 60s and arguably to the end of the Cold War. All right. And you can already sort of see the foundation of it laid here in Sam Adams. And the assumption is that Massachusetts itself should be, again, this Puritan, Genevan Calvinist vision of the entire colony and the entire Commonwealth being one holy city on a hill. And that vision would include church attendance. In the words of the Dutch Calvinist, availing oneself of the means of grace, which would be listening to the ministry of the word and partaking in the sacrament of our Lord. That's Sam Adams' vision of what Massachusetts should be. By the post-revolutionary period, however, the religious zeal that had made Puritan New England so distinctive among the American colonies had almost died out. Although the Federalist aristocracy of Boston had long viewed the Republican Adams as a dictator who controlled a trained mob, that's the religious people that are the trained mob, as opposed to an unruly mob, the Boston masses idolized Adams. Few in any social class, however, became enthusiastic about his desire to return Massachusetts to the old paths of Puritanism. Thus, Adams did not accomplish the reformation of morals he desired, though he continued to believe in a genuinely religious people produced a moral society. There you can see some of the commonality with deism. When I was looking up Sam Adams' face, I caught this little promotional detail by the Sam Adams beer. It just seemed in striking contrast, Love Conquers All, your rainbow pride badge for Sam Adams beer. I thought, it's quite a distinct vision. Well, or is it? Again, I mentioned I was talking to Ollie from Rebel Wisdom, and there are elements of this Puritanical city on a hill vision, even in woke. There's also some Quaker, but it's very much a secular vision. The role Adams played in drafting the provisions about religion, known as Article III, in the Massachusetts Constitution in 1780 is unclear. But the Constitution's assertions that the citizens of Massachusetts had a duty to worship the Supreme Being can always see a little fudging there, because Supreme Being, Unitarians will go there, Deists will go there, but Calvinist Puritans can agree with that too. So again, we're looking for terminology that a Calvinist Puritan, a Unitarian, and Thomas Jefferson might be able to agree with. And so there's your commonality. Supreme Being, that religion preserved morality and hence was essential to society, and that the legislature could continue Congregationalism as the established tax-supported church, were consonants with Adams religious beliefs. In other words, the Congregational, the Calvinist Congregational churches, you can look at one of the remaining of those churches is actually a church where my brother-in-law and my departed sister, where he is, and my nephew and nieces, they're members of the Park Street Congregational Church right on the Boston Common in Boston, Massachusetts. And they continue to be a traditionally Christian Orthodox, small orthodox church right there on the Boston, right there on the Boston Common. And if you go to Boston post-COVID, you know, one of the one of the places you can stop on the Freedom Trail is the Park Street Congregational Church. And so in many ways, the Park Street Church is continues in the tradition of Sam Adams. Article 3 represented a distinct counterpoint to the deistic approach to the same subject. Now, there's also in the book, a really nice chapter on the wives and daughters of the founding fathers. For the most part, they were more orthodox. They were more participatory with religion and with church. And they raised, they raised children with more traditional Christian practice and language. And that also was a very interesting, the whole book was great. I very much recommend the book. Possibly my favorite chapter, though, was in fact the first chapter, which gave a really nice religious overview of the American colonies in 1770. And I'll just read you the first couple of paragraphs of it. The travelers would have further noted that the Americans of 1770 were either overwhelmingly Protestant or unchurched. Because remember, for all the attention being paid to religion at this point, religious church participation, even at this period, would not really reach the levels of church participation that you see in the post World War II Cold War periods. That's very interesting to continue to think about when we think this. Now notice that the people of status, both political, religious, and economic, were all well-educated people that we would consider religious. Because, well, deists, and we'll get into this in a few minutes, look fairly religious compared to what we see today. Where did I get, how far did I get? Okay. Yet in such ports as Newport, Rhode Island, New York City, Philadelphia, Charleston, Savannah, places where transatlantic vessels carrying passengers and crew regularly docked, the travelers would have come across not only Christian churches, but also Jewish synagogues. As of 1770, some 1,000 Jews probably lived in the colonies. By 1790, the first Federal Census counted 1,243 Jews and a total American population of almost 3 million. So, hardly any Jews. Okay. By the end of the century, the New Republic had synagogues in Charleston, New York, Newport, Savannah, Philadelphia, and Richmond. This gives you a sense of the openness to America. Now there was still was anti-Semitism and discrimination, but the Americas welcomed the Jews. In these and other port cities, the travelers would also have found scattered Roman Catholics. Most of the Roman Catholics lacked churches and priests, but some had mass stations, homes or buildings where itinerant priests and mass regularly, where they held mass regularly or occasionally. Now, Roman Catholics couldn't vote for a while. Okay, so that gives you a sense of the anti-Catholicism that was also present in the country. Now, this isn't something that many people know about today or pay much attention to, but the book goes into it a little bit. The travelers would have found most of the approximately 30,000 Roman Catholics in virtually all of their churches located in the colonies of Maryland, not after the Virgin Mary. I made that mistake on one of something I wrote once and a real historian corrected me. And Pennsylvania. Now, Pennsylvania again, because of their religious liberty, tolerant Pennsylvania, the Quakers, the Quaker state. Quakers weren't being tolerated by a lot of people, and so William Penn tolerated the Quakers, as did Rhode Island, as did Delaware. And so you have these nine colonies that had state churches. The other four had a higher degree of religious liberty, and they didn't have state churches in those other four. Now, eventually, the other way would win out because by virtue of just that disagreement, you couldn't have one state church over the United States. But of course, Thomas Jefferson was sort of responding to John Adams, Samuel Adams' less observant brother, who became more prominent in the writing of the Constitution, especially. Thomas Jefferson would sort of respond with the Bill of Rights. And you can see some of Thomas Jefferson's anxieties expressed there in that Bill of Rights. So the federal government would remain secular, but the states would eventually follow suit in affording first religious tolerance and then religious liberty. But again, this didn't happen. Boom. Just that fast. There was a process that it all underwent. I think one of the things that I've noticed and that I've noted in a variety of other videos that another good book to read in terms of the founding of America is 1493. You know, when those first, both the Pilgrims and then the Jamestown colony came over, I mean, it was a, it was, it was, it was death. I mean, people died at, Europeans died at extraordinary rates. They didn't know how to grow the same. The foods were different. And basically what happened in North America was that eventually the European colonists terraformed the eastern United States to make it Europe. And again, you can also read Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs and Steel. The viruses wiped out the Indians to a degree, the Native Americans. The plants and animals coming over from Europe and the farming techniques basically destroyed the practices of the indigenous population and, you know, eventually supplanted them. But those first, first number of years, it was touch and go. And it was, it didn't look like those, those colonies would persist. The only reason that the northern colonies persisted was that there were successive waves, first the Pilgrims and then the Puritans kept coming because of all the religious violence going on in England. Wave after wave of Puritans came and eventually established themselves in that area. The southern colonies struggled until tobacco basically became the drug of choice for the world. And then in fact, so many people were rushing to the areas south of the Mason-Dixon line where you could grow tobacco that, you know, the government, in fact, the colonial government had to order the farmers to grow food because they just wanted to plant tobacco. So because it was so outrageously profitable. And this of course, and European indentured servants would come over, but the malaria that came over with the Europeans had now become part of it. And certain, the malaria that was from West Africa was the one that really took root in south of the Mason-Dixon line, which basically set up the fact that Europeans would come over and die of malaria. But they soon discovered that these Africans coming over weren't dying anywhere at the rate that the Europeans were. And of course, nobody understood it. But the West Africans were had a degree of immunity to those strands of malaria, whereas the Europeans didn't. And so you there have the beginning of African based slavery in the continent. But these two poles, the poles of now look at some of the people that we've talked about. Thomas Jefferson, Virginia, George Washington, Virginia. They very much have the sort of educated elite status of Europe. Samuel Adams up there in the northern colonies. A Calvinist Puritan, Pennsylvania, Connecticut, Rhode Island. You know, all of these schools were started as religious schools of education for religious reasons. And now the middle colonies would sort of be middle between those two poles. But this is pretty much the way it worked out. Obviously, as the 19th century would roll on, you'd have Darwin's origin of the species. And you can read Jordan Peterson's recommended book, The Metaphysical Club, get a good sense of what the impact of that was. Now, Darwin very well could have had a big part in moving these deists over to the atheist camp, because you no longer needed a god to explain what was going on. So you went from three gods with Calvinist Puritanism to one god with the Unitarians to now no god, because you don't need that god in terms of the creation function now that Darwinian ideas of, well, this stuff just happens in an unplanned way. But yet you've got the likes of William James and the pragmatists. And note how many of them come out of the northern colonies, William James in Massachusetts, in these northern areas. And so you have pragmatism, which sort of then creates some fluidity. You've got William James exploring psychology and the varieties of religious experience. And I just recently had my conversation with someone on my channel who recommended I take a longer look at William James. And so I reread the last chapter of varieties of religious experience. And yeah, it's very much sort of fills in the gaps here. But you can see what's happened on the American religious landscape that, in a sense, deism sort of slid into atheism. But this middle way of sort of the deistic sorts of beliefs very much undergird even a lot of what Americans see now. Although the religious patchwork, because of immigration from Asia and Africa and other places in the world, has gotten incredibly more broad, Muslim immigration. So the picture is much more complex than it was today. Also at the end of the 19th century, you have a great wave of religious experimentation. Another book that I recommend, Oneida, From Free Love Utopia to a Well-Set Table. It's a great read. It's fascinating. And it very much fills in the gap. You have all these this religious experimentation coming out of what was called the Burned Over District. In the wake of the two great awakenings, and you see Jehovah's Witnesses come out of there. You see the Latter-day Saints come out of there. You see the Oneida community come out of there. At the end of the 19th century, you have the millennial movements that will create the Seventh-day Adventists. Interesting in this book on the Founding Fathers, the second... The book has a chapter of three Orthodox Christians, Sam Addis, Elias Boudinot, and John Jay. Now Elias Boudinot is an interesting character here, because he would go on to... He's a good example of one of these groups that believed in that the American Indians were the lost tribe of Israel. You see this belief getting picked up by the Latter-day Saints movement in upstate New York and being popularized and carried throughout the world. And so it's very interesting. This book fills in a lot of gaps. And if you want a nice education on the religion of America in the 1770s, well recommended, as well as this book. The religious experimentation combined with beliefs in science, combined with a broader belief in spirituality in general, combined with eugenics. The Oneida community had it all, and they were able to transform themselves into a thriving business about silverware. And the book nicely goes into how this community morphed into respectability in the middle of the 20th century as a commercial enterprise. But they had equality of the sexes, they had education for women, they were very egalitarian. It's a really helpful book in terms of understanding even the movements we have today. Westford expansion, of course, I recommend it isn't up on the internet anymore. Mark Knoll's excellent overview of this process. He's writing in terms of evangelicals creation and scripture, sort of an overview. And I'll just read the section that I've read before. After leaving behind religious establishments, remember there were established churches back there, and the European reliance on tradition and a response to the challenge of the nation's wide open spaces, American religious life underwent a great transformation. The religious practices of groups that had been marginal in the colonial period now began to set the pattern for all. Methodists under the leadership of Bishop Francis Asbury, there's Asbury Theological Seminary, of Francis Asbury, Baptist instructed by countless local preachers and disciples and Christians guided by the creative leadership of Alexander Campbell and Barton Stone, took the lead in preaching the salvation of souls, organizing congregations and recruiting young men and also a few young women to serve as itinerants. With these upstarts in the lead, the more traditional churches of the colonial era, congregational, Episcopal, Presbyterian, also accommodated themselves to the new nation's Republican and Democratic values, small r, small d. Very soon, even American representatives of European churches with strongest traditions of church-state cooperations, Lutherans and Catholics, adjusted to the approach. This continued adjustment continues today. The seeker movement in the 1980s, for example, 1980s and 1990s, you'd see Roman Catholics, Lutheran, pretty much all the American denominations and denominations all over the world followed suit. This is how you try to gather the crowd. In the effort to build churches with forms and assumptions that fit the new American nation, most of Europe's traditional authorities came under severe attack. The great exception was the Bible. Passages from scripture had been invoked everywhere during the revolution, though in symbolic ways, like referring to the British Parliament as Egypt and George Washington as Moses, rather than in deciding whether the revolution was a just war. You can think about that. It's a very interesting conversation. In the early republic, the great engine of revival preaching that proved so successful for Methodist Baptists and many others was the Bible. Scripture was preached by itinerants and by regular clergy. It was the basis for organizing churches on the frontier and maintaining stability in settled regions. In the absence of well-developed social institutions or government structures, the King James Version of the Bible was the closest thing to a universal cultural authority. And because the Bible was the people's book, which all who could read might appropriate for themselves, and for many it was the way they learned to read, it almost completely escaped the suspicion that fell upon other mainstays of historical European Christianity. The only other authority besides scripture to escape the attack on tradition was science, understood as an objective organization of facts not dominated by inherent authority. As with scripture in an intellectual environment created by republican ideology, the science that dominated early American history took a hands-on, bottoms-up popular form. Amateurs like Benjamin Franklin or Thomas Jefferson were lionized for their contributions respectively to electrical theory and natural philosophy. What's one of the first things that you learned in school about Ben Franklin? There he is with that kite in the sky and the key in the rainstorm, you know, finding electricity, right? This is as American as apple pie. The same, even though apples come from the steplands of Asia, the same popular impulse that opened the Bible to every serious reader, opened the natural world to every investigator able to persuade the populace about the results of an experiment, whether the investigator had received official certification or not. And so religion, very religion and science very much become homespun things. Now, again, one of the most popular movements in America are the non-denominationalists. They're not congregational exactly like those Calvinist Puritans in Massachusetts. They're non-denominational. They're making up church as they go, you know, quite opposite, let's say, the orthodox who know exactly what they're going to do. How does this come full circle? Now, knowing this history, how do Dave Rubin and Jordan Peterson look? I mean, when you listen to Dave Rubin talk to John Lennox, he takes a decided turn towards really sort of an American deism. Jordan Peterson has got as a necessary idea, not devoted to religious observant, but not allergic to it. So they're sort of like George Washington, sort of like the Christian deists. And you see religious institutions and community as sort of an important moral foundation for the nation. These things don't go away. They're very much with us today. And in many ways, it's part of the reason religions have flourished in America because it's deep within the cultural values right there from the beginning. Morality as the foundation. And so this is why, to a degree, the woke wars are so fierce in America because what's the platform that's being fought over? Well, morality itself. And then you get to someone like Kanye. And, well, Kanye is in many ways, are we going to have a great awakening? Are we going to have a third one? Will Kanye be a figure in the third great awakening? When you look at his services that he is doing, well, it's sort of along the lines of this grand American tradition of the frontier. Kanye buys a whole host of land out there in Wyoming that is not developed and he's going to build his city on a hill. This is his errand in the wilderness, which was the language that was used by the pilgrims and the Puritans for establishing their religious community on fresh virgin soil. So now it's a restorationist vision, what I mean by that. We're going to restore what was found in the early church and now Kanye led by the Holy Spirit. You know, there's not that much difference between the motivation of Mitt Romney and Kanye West in terms of running for president of the United States. Now, Kanye has already had to drop out of this election, takes quite a bit of organization. So, you know, we'll see what kind of stability Kanye has in terms of pursuing this and determination for 2024. He's got the money, but, you know, you've got to put someone in charge of it and keep funding it. And, you know, as someone mentioned in a recent article, running for president is one of the most difficult things you can do. Will Kanye pull it off? I don't know. He's sort of following the American script right from the Puritans in terms of establishing this. Now he's married to Kim Kardashian and so in many ways this is about as American as you can get what Kanye is living out. And if you look at this story in Forbes that Jonathan Peugeot noted, yeah, it's all the classic examples. And I thought Jonathan Peugeot did very well going through this, but, you know, abortion? Well, because the Bible says Trump is the closest president we've had in years to allowing God to still be part of the conversation. Well, Kanye is not that old. He doesn't really remember Jimmy Carter. But again, the last chapter of this book goes through that history quite well. But even that statement, I know a lot will scoff at it, but if you understand where he's coming from, you know, Donald Trump standing in front of St. John's with a Bible, well, that means something to certain people, okay? The Democrats, how the race will be decided, COVID, vaccines, you know, on abortion, on pro-life because I'm following the word of the Bible. This is very, very American. So we'll see. We'll see where this goes. But again, main purpose of this, if you're looking for a book to understand sort of the foundations of the American religious landscape, Faith of Our Founding Fathers, recommend it. You'll learn a lot from it. It's in audiobooks, so you can listen to it on Audible. And yeah, I recommend it. Hope this video has been helpful.