https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=oWQ8bUrYPhU

 I am recording, so State of California wants me to make that clear. How are you today? Nervous. Nervous? Oh, don't be nervous. I do this a lot. This is easy. It'll go very well. I have a special guest today. Do you go by your full name or Scott or what do you usually do? Whichever people prefer. Okay. I've got Scotland Morrison. What's your official title at Urban Abbey? I go by several. I'm an abbot as well as head of staff as well as chairman of the board. Wow. That's very interesting. You have a couple of corporate titles and a fairly traditional ecclesiastical title. Yeah, I'm also a fan of a quote by Machiavelli which says, Men honor titles. Titles do not honor men. I love that quote. I'm going to write that one down. I usually take notes as I do this. We are talking today because there's an event coming up next September where you're now what's the best thing to call Urban Abbey? Shall we call it a church? What do you guys call yourself? We call ourselves an Abbey. An Abbey. Okay. You are hosting an event which I will be there and Jonathan Peugeot will be there and John Havaki will be there and another local scholar who will be there. Who doesn't have a YouTube channel. We will all be in conversation. I'm really looking forward to it. It's going to be fantastic. When I got the invite for that, I asked who is in charge of this outfit and can I talk to him? Your sister put you forward. Here we are. Most of the people watching know something about me. Do you have any hard deadlines that we have to finish by? I do not. We could go Joe Rogan style. I'm in for the long haul. I have stuff a little later in the day. We will probably go between one and two hours. It depends on how interesting I am. I can already tell you are interesting. I'm interested. Let's begin with you. Tell us a little bit about yourself. Then we will go into how you were raised, religion, all that kind of stuff. That's usually the way I do it. My wife has helped me fine tune this delivery. I go for too long too often. You have to shorten this story. I will be the judge of too long. You go ahead. I was born in Thunder Bay where this conference is occurring. My grandfather on one side of the family and my mom's side was a Baptist minister. For 35 years at the Baptist church. My grandfather on the other side was a firefighter. Both in the city. I was born in Thunder Bay. At two years old, my family moved to southern Ontario. My dad was working for a computer company called digital equipment. In the 1980s. A lot of my story is my parents' story. I'm dragged along as a willing and unwilling victim. Not a victim. My parents are both serving in a Baptist church. I think you're getting a recurring theme here. My mom, Kimberly, was a youth leader there. My dad was a lawyer. My dad was a lawyer. We're all getting a recurring theme here. My mom, Kimberly, was a youth leader there. My dad, Bill, he was working in children's ministry. They get a call when I'm about seven years old. To go into Christian camping. They had their dream house, two cars, the whole deal. that into like missionary poverty just you know at the edge depending on God for everything so tons of stories about that but we end up in the interior of British Columbia at a place called Lake of the Trees Bible Camp and my parents become full-time Christian camp directors. That kind of dynamic plays until I'm about 12 years old. During that time my parents they loved doing Bible Camp but they also loved doing the counselor training and they would actually go for about three weeks before camp would start they'd get their team they'd start training for three weeks. They got these two crazy guys guys called Franz and Wes and and one of them was like former Green Beret another guy was outward bound and they did this thing where it was like team development activities push you to your you know extremes and then you grow together as a team and and anyway so my parents are really kind of like loving the discipleship team development stuff they start writing camp curriculum limit training was a thing that they had done life ministry training and so a bunch of Bible camps in Canada started using it but then my mom's older sister had come back from the mission field she was in Papua New Guinea for a number of years so they're like let's do something together let's go to somewhere else together and we're going to do like a discipleship school and my dad's strategy was I'm just gonna jump into the car with my brother-in-law we're just gonna start driving east and when we feel that God is like this is the spot then we'll just stop and this is the spot as crazy as that is so anyway so that we end up in I love it I love it okay we end up in we end up in Pinawai Manitoba which is a nuclear waste disposal testing ground for the government of Canada in that like in those rocks that are far far far down under the surface you know and they're trying to bury the chemical waste and stuff so my parents start up at discipleship school there for two years so that's my grade 9 and grade 10 then they're like hey we're spending so much time on other people's kids our kids are getting older I've got an older sister year and a half older than me Sarah myself then Katherine who we've spoken to she's a year and a half younger than me and then I've got a baby brother who's three years younger they're all like a year and a half spaced out they're like we're spending so much time with other people's kids let's focus on our kids a little more let's change it up a little bit we end up in Apple Valley in the high desert in Southern California for you Presbyterian Church Church of the Valley I think Wow so I go from like you know middle of nowhere interior BC to small time small town Pinawai Manitoba to Southern California where we've got like security guards sheriff's offices packed like part of the school razor wire you know the the school security guards had like rearview mirrors on their bike helmet so that they could see if they were getting jumped from behind living in what was called felony flats just like okay crazy so but it was really good really good and then from there my grandfather who was still a pastor of a Baptist Church here his heart starts failing and so there were some issues coming up in the I don't know if it's the PC USA or the whatever the Presbyterian Church was going through its own kind of like thing and so then my parents moved to actually we've made one stop before that we go to Winkler Bible Camp which is a Mennonite camp in Manitoba my parents run a year long discipleship program there they put their foot down a little bit on some Neil Anderson teaching that that the camp director wanted to ram down everyone's throat and they're like no we're not teaching this stuff and so he's like then you're leaving they're like okay fine we'll leave so then my grandfather's heart was failing so my dad goes and takes over his church for a while but basically escorts it gently into gentle repose and and while we're there now I'm had just turned 18 graduated from high school my parents start up a discipleship school in Thunder Bay so I attend that for two years then I meet my my wife who's my older sister's age she's a year and a half older and actually her parents had gone to the same youth group as my parents so it was like family friend kind of thing but she was always older than me my older sister's league right and until you hit your like 20s or whatever that's like that's too old but then I'm like oh and so then weird funny story I was actually we used to have this Baptist pastor from Tennessee flown up his name is Mark Webb flown up to do like our family camp in BC so he was actually a guest speaker at my wife's Baptist Church and he was friends with not only my parents but my but my wife's parents so so we're going to the summer conference together and he's speaking and afterwards it's the classic Baptist potluck kind of like midsummer you know communicable communicable diseases just everywhere all over that table but this guy Mark Webb he's like Scott Jen single you're single what's wrong what's going on I'm like all right all right so that happened so then we get married so I get married a month after I turned 20 so I'm just like let's go let's do it yep and and what it happened was there was this thing called the Sovereign Grace Movement CJ Mahaney and all that yeah now this is going back 14 years so before and we don't need to get into it but before all the disaster actually I was following Warren Throckmorton for quite a while his his posts on pathos I think primarily about Mark Driscoll in later years but I mean he details some of this stuff I did so so they're like hey and and and what had happened was my parents are more the dynamic pioneers than they are the settler type so you may have noticed in their narrative they're popping around and so then they are running this discipleship school still small it has like 14 students they moved back to Southern California and I'm skipping some parts of the story I can't make it a comprehensive thing right but essentially myself and my older sister take over this discipleship school that they had I'm like dad what am I supposed to teach for an hour and a half every day he's like son I've left you my Matthew Henry commentary set so am I okay so so I'm kind of doing that we encounter strange people as you would if you have a discipleship school for 14 um and and so but I but I but I love some of these guys and I'm like this is beyond this is beyond my skill set I spent years as like a youth guy I always like the one-on-one mentoring stuff my parents sort of poured a lot of that into me based on like what they had gone through so then I'm like you know what I can't run this school anymore my sister is like she's like 22 I'm 21 some of our students are older than we are I'm like you know I'm like no I'm out I can't do it I can't I can't do it so I'm like mom and dad I really want to do like counseling so what do you think and they're like well we'll ask some of our new sovereign grace friends who they had met in Minneapolis and we really like the worship music and there's two surface level all seem great and they're like hey these sovereign grace guys recommend CCEF with Ed Welch David Powelson out of Westminster Seminary in the Philadelphia area oh yeah yeah yeah and you're talking they're counseling stuff yeah okay yep yep yep so then I apply to go down there I get accepted so my wife and I we moved down to the Philadelphia area not knowing anybody except we got plugged into a sovereign grace church and our landlords were like sovereign grace like Bible study leaders so we get our community group right up front we get our apartment right up front I don't even have a cell phone I'm commuting into we were living in Southerton which is about 40 minutes outside Philly so I'm commuting up these American highways and stuff and driving into like pristine glenside and and then you see like these mansions that these campuses are on right it's like the guy who made Dickie's work where that's where CCF is based out of his personal mansion and it's right across the street from Westminster and so that is pretty cool and then we get involved in our sovereign grace church so I go to CCF for two years taking Christian counseling get four counseling certificates ie they're useless as far as like wanting like good information great never told up front hey man you know what this isn't gonna help you anywhere like you can't get a job with more counseling certificates as an ad junk from Westminster and I'm 22 and I'm an idiot and I don't know but it's really good so we're going to this sovereign grace church and you know what really liked the church like the people there some strange dynamics okay 99% of the kids were homeschooled their youth group they had a mandate they didn't allow kids to come to youth group unless they brought their parents with them the parents would sit on the left side of the room the kids would sit on the right side of the room for like the teaching the parents are like you were never out of your parents like site Wow so that was a little strange yeah then there was a few things that happened so I so I do my two years and the guys what happened was a guy had come down from Ottawa Canada we want to do a sovereign grace church plant in Ottawa and they're like okay come here for a year then go to our pastors college shave your head bald like CJ and Joshua Harris do that bit and then go do your church plant in Ottawa but you got to do the year internship and then the year in school yeah so in my second year of school this guy's act Martin comes down he does his internship then he goes to the past their pastors college well he's going to their pastors college they're like Scott you know what maybe you could go up there with him you want to do ministry he could use another church planting buddy you've been with us for two years now why don't you intern here he does the pastors cause you go together like cool let's do that sounds great a couple of things came up during my internship I saw some that like that under workings of what was going on and I was like oh there's just too many there's too many troubling things too many and I couldn't even necessarily put it like a finger on it one of the things that came up was so now I'm an intern I'm sitting in these day-long pastors means they'd have every week on Tuesdays at Starbucks in a different restaurant and as we're drinking coffee and eating lunch on the church's dime this this this poor woman had donated to the church after an ask and then she asked for some of her money back because she had fallen on hard times she's like hey I need I need something back I over gave and in the nation church and in the meeting in the meeting there is a to be fair there is a variety of opinions okay that's there would be but at the end of the day it was she gave the money to the Lord he can provide if she needs to be provided for she doesn't get her money back and I was ticked that was like that was the like you know what guys and we're sitting there and basically she's paying for us to have this coffee in this and this and I'm just like no no so I'm out so so anyway so I'm like but you know what I feel like God's calling me to Ottawa to do a church plant anyway and as I'm thinking about this I'm in the shower and I'm gonna talk to you I'm not a super charismatic person there's a couple I've been reading James K Smith's book on Augustine a little bit okay he's talking about journeying through the darkness and you've got a couple constellation bright points where where you have this encounter with God and it's like enough to guide you because you don't get those all the time right at least I'm not the kind of person who gets it all the time so I'm gonna talk about a couple of these charismatic encounters and some would even say that's that's that's just child's play but anyway there'll be plenty of commentary all over this story I know it already and I love it this is wonderful keep going you're doing great okay so I'm in the shower and this verse pops into my head because I'm like God I'm gonna go do this thing anyway you've called me and and at this point I'm on the Mark Driscoll x29 bandwagon okay I'm like yeah Mark Driscoll is cool he's got this Jesus is my homeboy shirt and he's just happening and and then one time he shows up with a hoodie and I'm like I own that hoodie okay yeah okay it's like be the man you know what you can be the man you can do a church plant you know don't be a loser playing you are you are forced up in your way all over young restless and reformed I had I had I had what was his the Jesus church thing he had a book I had a signed copy I'd signed copies of his books but but so I'm in the shower and I'm like God I'm gonna go to this church plant and then this verse drops into my head I do not attempt things that are too great for me it's drops in and I'm like no God that's not you and then and then again I do not attempt things that are too great for me it's in Psalm somewhere I'm like no I can't be wrong whatever still gonna go do this thing so I'm like okay Jenny we're gonna go do this thing and we go up to the Ottawa area oh this okay okay I gotta include one so I become a Starbucks barista to work to work while I do this church but it'd be by vocational great by vocational strategy oh yeah people plant the church perfect yep and then we we hit up acts 29 church planting network there's these guys in Troy New York love them seriously good dudes but part of the acts 29 church planting network saying back then they may have changed policy then was you can go up a certain level in the application process and then you need a congregation 60 people and for me I'm like I don't need you guys at 60 people 60 people that's sustainability right there I so so I'm like okay that's a broken that's a broken model I'm just gonna say it now again also broken is a guy who goes up to do a church plant when God plants in his head I do not attempt things too great for me but okay all broken around here so here's what happens I've got my guys I've got about six families they're all kind of like me though young broke their wives are like pulling them out of my meetings because they're like so-and-so is acting I'm like sitting down in a restaurant with like my six guys we got blueprints for it was gonna be cafe skate park in the back then we can do church in the cafe some of my guys had cafeteria type experiences whatever so then what happens is I'm like okay but guys you know what we can't do church quite yet because we don't have enough people so let's just go to another church together because I'm working full-time I'm doing Bible studies and stuff but I can't I can't pull off a service or we didn't have the alliance or connection to properly do that so we start going to this little church in this little theater in Kanata Ontario which is just outside of Ottawa and we're going there for a few weeks and I had now been doing this for two years I've got two kids I haven't been around family for five years now and I'm trying to do this church plant thing and we had connected with the Southern Baptist Canadian Southern Baptists didn't didn't end up panning out I didn't know that anyway no that might be too personal for anyway so not for me but for someone else so I don't want that so it didn't work out I'm bringing my guys and their families to this small church plant in Ottawa area and then all of a sudden we're like three weeks in and it's one of these small church three go up for communion and come back and my guys come to me and they're like Scott we just took communion behind Carrie Underwood because she was dating Mike Fisher who is playing for the Ottawa Senators so they're dating they're engaged Mike Fisher was going to a megachurch in Ottawa but the story is 20 women every week at least would show up trying to hook up with him at church because they an NHL player at church so Mike Fisher to his credit I suppose and I heard this you know a third hand said I'm not doing this anymore I'm gonna go where I can just be obscure and anonymous and in a small little place so that I can actually like worship and you know so good on him but now my guys are like oh we're going to this small little church plant got some celebrities hanging out here this is like amazing at the same time I go to my one of my best friends of old Colin Slade he gets married from California he was my high school friend he gets married in the foothills of San Diego okay in this like amazing ranch I'm looking out between the mountains and you can like just see the ocean glimmering through and he's got like 150 friends and family and everybody's so connected and I'm like the next week I'm slinging trash into a Starbucks bin at like 7 a.m. it's like 30 below Ottawa middle of winter my guys are enchanted by Carrie Underwood so then yeah so then what happens is I'm like okay well where am I gonna go my in-laws let's do a fit let's get connected back to some family let's get some support I'm burned out I'm tired so my in-laws were living here in Thunder Bay still and at this point my mom had just taken on a job in White Rock BC just south of Vancouver and my dad was running like a painting business it's very small it's him and my brother and the occasional worker and I'm like you know what I'm gonna actually get an actual degree in psychology with through Athabasca work work with my dad do school part-time and do that so that so then I make the call and we go now the way my marriage works I think I've made maybe three decisions where I don't really like I I make the decision and then I talk about it with my wife now this is one of them we're gonna get some more but this was one of them so then I'm just like we're moving and at that point Jenny my wife she was like yeah she understood it she didn't mind so then we move I'm painting I'm going to school going to this Alliance church then all of a sudden we're my mom's the women's pastor there and we're leading a Bible study there's about 15 families in it and then one by one they're like hey there's this new church plant it's called village church in Surrey and we love the pastor Mark she's super dynamic can we go to that church but still go to this Bible study and I'm like well that choice is yours I don't care that's fine like I you know whatever they're like well well now that it's okay can we just talk about it for a minute so then they just like talk about how amazing it is next week another couple we're actually going to this church now too can we yeah yeah yeah yeah so eventually the entire community group except for Jenny and myself have like moved over to this other church and my uncle lives in BC and he had a friend and and Jenny and I go to my uncle's 40th birthday party because he's quite a bit younger than my father and I meet this this guy this man and his girlfriend and we're driving them home we've never even met them we're just driving them home and they say to us we haven't been to church in over 30 years but we both want to start somewhere we'll go wherever you take us and Jenny and I were like oh and then we're like well I don't think the Alliance Church is really a fit let's go check out this this new thing and see what what what could come of that so we go to this village church thing and they're meeting in a gym there's 300 people per service there's three services a day there's people standing out in the rain with like umbrellas just craning it's like and I'm like okay you know what if I'm gonna bring somebody it's here so then we do and and then I meet this was yeah back I guess village church had like nine nine hundred people at this point in this gym and so I go and I talked to Mark the pastor I'm like listen my whole community group defected go for like coffee I'm like my whole community group defected there's this couple who want to come get us to bring them to church so so I just wanted to explain or let you know if there's you know some additional new faces this is where we're coming from I didn't know that the Alliance Church was bleeding about a thousand people there was another large church in the area that because of moral failures a huge chunk of that church was emptying out and all into the village right so that so a misconception that a lot of people have is is that mega churches have all these conversions right that's not technically accurate in many cases in many cases many cases and so so basically it's 900 Alliance Church people this other church it's kind of like Walmart showing up setting up and and now all the mom and pops are closing down I was actually going to carry seminary and I'm going in I'm in this course for spiritual direction and this is like a couple years later and I'm talking about my my job and what I'm doing and I work at Village Church and this one's like yeah my husband and I were trying to do a church plant in Langley and Village Church set up a campus and we lost over over half our people so I don't know if we're gonna survive the year so but I'm skipping ahead so I meet with Mark he's like okay then he comes back to me and he's like listen we're moving to a new Kansas it seats 1100 people but it's 10 minutes down the road my current community groups guy I want him to stay here to shepherd the people who don't want to move from this location and I want you if you'd be willing to be the community groups intern and so to be clear I never advanced past intern stage but community groups intern I was like okay sounds great like sounds great and at this point my parents had once again moved to California again so they're at this point back in California my brother he thinks working like 10 a.m. till about 3 p.m. is a good hard workday and I'm like I can't I can't do business with this guy the way he's working so so I was ready to jump back into ministry so I start doing community groups at church I do that for two and a half years and village grows by a thousand people a year I think they're still doing that I left for four and a half years ago they're doing campuses and and all kind of stuff and but while but I'm there I begin to experience all the angst of being in a mega church and and just seeing so so here's the thing I have friends they invite their friends to an Easter service we're hanging out afterwards and my one friend asked the invited person are you gonna come back like you think you're gonna come back and the and the guy says well of course I'm gonna come back there's so many beautiful people here and it's like based in White Rock but also Surrey ultra rich ultra wealthy my brother he's like dude I go to the club and women are dressed more modestly at the club than they are here it's like I don't know what's wrong he's like I can't even handle it here and my chat and my struggle is not just not just village but any large you know excellence was the mantra yes yes excellence yes and you're and you're and and you're getting books by Pixar and Disney for the excellence for the experience for the you got to have the branded umbrellas when you walk out to bring people into the church and you've got your parking team and you've got everything color coordinated there's no questions in anybody's mind they know where they're gonna go and there's a creek not built this thing yep yep yep and and so I'm existing in that until they hired a until they hired a professional counselor I was doing a ton of counseling I was mentoring about 16 guys we were doing a Sunday evening thing where guys could come and do speaking or share what's on their heart because there wasn't much of many outlets in this model it's like either you're the best or you can't even be on stage right that's just and and my question is and not just for village because I you know I still I still like mark but the question is when you're bringing people into the church what are they being converted into what what is the appeal what is what is being taught or not taught shown and it's like worship team everybody's a nine out of ten on the attractiveness scale they're showing up in their convertible Lexus's they've got contracts pending in the music industry you're hiring your worship guys from downtown New York or like ginger Jesus's you've got you know mark and everything just like pow pow pow pow and it's like you bring in us just a regular dude and he walks in and he's like so this is what being Christian means that so this is what following Jesus looks like and it doesn't matter what content your sermon has you're impeccable you're successful you're everything and and so I was just my heart was just breaking so anyway so so two and a half years I start I start buying books on what year are we at right now we're talking March March of 2015 okay okay March 2015 okay so I'm buying different books on neo- monasticism contemplative communities prayer I pick up you know brother Lawrence's book the practice of prayer and I'm like okay I'm also paying attention to Warren Throckmorton's continual blog of the fall of Mark Driscoll I'm getting interesting input from the other pastors in the church about their opinion on on that how they think he's being unfairly treated the funds he's using for his book promotions to get on the best sellers list in the New York Times is completely legitimate because it's promoting his churches image because he is the church and and I'm just like no no no no no so I'm going through a little bit of a crisis I'm like okay what am I gonna do what's gonna go on and I'm not sure and so then Mark's about to make an important decision and he asks me my opinion on what's on the decision he takes me out for coffee and I'm a yes man like I like some people don't like the Enneagram but I'm a nine peacemaker nine wing eight okay challenger but nine I've learned that sometimes I have to tell people I I'm probably gonna agree with most of what you say in the moment if you push me on so give me like present and then give me some time to reflect so that I can come back now that's kind of chipping away as I'm living in this role that I'm in right now but that was me primarily so so marks like I want to do this here's all the reasons why I'm like so then my mom is sick for ill had fallen ill and at this point what had happened was my parents had moved to Thunder Bay they were living in the East End which is the worst part of town or the most socially deprived part of town and they're trying to start up a church they're trying to they're trying to do a community initiative maybe a community library childcare services church services like this kind of like grassroots thing my mom was like finishing up her PhD from Fuller seminary she's now working on a second PhD but that's another topic because she is a mind brilliant mind and and so I just know they're trying to do this thing in Thunder Bay and I know my parents are always have always got something on the go so my dad I find out from my dad or my sister Oh mom's not doing well so I'm like I'm just gonna drop by and give a surprise visit let my dad know but don't let my mom know and surprise her and just be there for a couple days so I get on this plane and I didn't have any good books on me I think I'd forgotten my Kindle and so I had prayed I said you know what God I'm gonna be like an hour and a half in the air talk to me if you want to talk to me I'm here I'm here tell me something I want to hear so I'm flying so then I you know start praying and and this is one of those bright points right a message comes through if you do what I'm asking you to do I'm gonna take care of you and I was like oh okay I didn't really like the sound of that though because well first of all I had a follow-up email I wanted to send to Mark and and I was like do I send it do I not send it he's not gonna be happy about it I don't I don't want him to be unhappy with me so I'm like okay okay God I'll send it so I arrive see my parents say hi whatever pull out my laptop send a response to the conversation we'd had send it but that kind of pressing emotion or whatever you would say there was no release in that it was still there and I'm like okay well this is kind of weird I thought I would have followed God and then a you know rest easy but no there's still something there so then my parents say Scott you know what we're gonna go to this first Baptist Church now I know you know it because your sister was a youth leader there for a year and I've been there a couple times and I remember seeing my wife there before we were even dating for a like a food drive at Halloween and she was actually dressed up as a Braveheart like a two-handed sword because she's got curly hair so she had like the curly hair like Mel Gibson did so that was kind of cool back in the day but anyway so so it's like yeah yeah I know first Baptist Church okay it's like big old musty and they're like yeah we we put in a proposition because your dad has done this like roofing and renovations company in Thunder Bay while my mom was finishing up her PhD while they're trying to do all these other things and there's a guy called Andrew who's still with the Abbey a young guy at the time 22 and his parents are on the board and they're trying to figure out what they want to do with this church building because they can't afford to keep the church open and pay their pastor and my mom was like you know what I'm gonna write up a nine page proposal tell them I want to be an Abbey and this is what it's gonna be and she does it in a matter of hours and so then sends it into the meeting and and they actually agree they're like okay and my parents are like you got to give us the building just straight up just give it to and they're like okay so so my parents are like Scott let's take a tour through this building that has just been given to us that we're gonna move into and when I say move into like they literally moved into it so I'm like okay so then so then we start walking through and it's like old dusty church everything needs to be redone and they're like this is what we're gonna do we're gonna have we're gonna pull out all the pews it's gonna be a community space see this tower thing that's never been actually nobody's actually been up there since the 50s they don't even have there's nothing there but like floor joists and pigeon crap and bricks that's gonna be a 24-hour day prayer tower and we're gonna have residents for people in need here we're gonna feed the poor and we're gonna do this we're gonna do this we're gonna do this they lay out the whole thing as we go room by room by room and I'm just like yeah okay that's okay and they're like in five or six years maybe you can come and take over when we're kind of like done and I was like yeah that seems like nepotism era parent kind of stuff and at this point you know with all kudos to mark into village church they're they're paying 85% of my master's degree as I'm taking a spiritual formation course from Carrie they're giving me paid time off to like be at the classes and do stuff they're taking care of me and and I'm doing all kinds of stuff for them too but they're taking care of me and and I'm set up in Surrey and I love Surrey I love the West Coast I love I hate snow the cold all that so then then my parents after taking me through they're like hey let's go to your dad's favorite breakfast spot in the States because it's like 45 minutes south so we're driving down there and a thought pops into my head and it's this project is so huge they need more people here so what if what if I quit my job and moved here to help them and so like the second that thought comes in peace I'm like are you kidding me I'm like are you kidding me and then I was like all right and it's one of those things where it's like now here's the second time maybe now we're up to number three I don't think I text my wife because we're in the States and I'm like hey Jenny we're moving to Thunder Bay and she responds back it's a good thing that I love you that's oh I did that to my wife I think there'd be blood so yeah so so what happens is I tell my parents okay I'm gonna come I'm gonna help you I'm gonna move I'm gonna move and my dad had this tiny little house that he just finished renovating and his current tenant was just moving out he's like hey we can move you into this place right away so I fly back to Surrey and the next day I walk into Mark's office and I'm like hey man I'm quitting I gotta go do this thing I'm gonna do my two weeks and the next day I already have my truck packed and I flew my family out I didn't want them to have to go through the whole road trip and I'm driving a moving van across Canada and I'm here in Thunder Bay and I go from everybody wants to be my friend because I'm one of the paths to power as a community groups guy it's like oh if you want to jump into Village Church and you want to start Ascension how do you do that oh you become a community group leader okay volunteer at the community group desk we've got a whole right make those connections baby so so I go from that to the first day at the Abbey is let's go into the grungy old kitchen pull out all the plates and utensils and everything start washing them and start taking in account of what we actually have to work with and that's day one what happened to the Baptist Church did they go to did they just disband or go to a new facility or what what did they do so the part of the agreement was we agreed that they could meet in their sanctuary for a full year okay and we would absorb I think we absorbed the cost of the building day one but they still have a year and then they could find another location and what was your seed money my parents the building yeah yep my parents Wow yeah so basically my dad had a couple like projects he had been working on yeah how is it that he had renovated restored sold all of them all of it so everything that the Abbey operated on for the first two and a half years was basically my parents selling everything and putting it into like the Abbey account Wow yeah yeah so so that's where the that's where the seed money came from and then they eventually took out even like some loans from personal friends that they're still paying off to this day Wow so you're you would get into the kitchen you're starting to take inventory okay what do we have here and so then and that's part of like the journey down right yeah and because I remember you mentioned that recently I've been trying to I've been introduced to you lately so there's a lot of videos out there oh dude yeah yeah but I love your content it's actually really good and so what happens is there's this Anglican mission connection where and this is what happened I forgot this one part I had my two-week time period there's a guy called Kaylin al-kama and he had just come back from surf the nations which is like why whammy in Hawaii somehow he had gone to this conference Francis Chan was there and Francis Chan laid his hands on him and gave him the gift of prophecy so he comes back to Village Church and all of a sudden it's like the spirits moving in the youth group and there's like hundreds of kids like just like laid out and and then who is a youth guy at the time he's like listen Scott you're leaving you got to talk to Kaylin because he spoke over me and it's changing the way I'm doing ministry so I wanted I wanted to speak to you and again I'm like okay sure you know it's like yeah I don't I don't say no like I never say no I'm just okay I've never spoken in tongues or that kind of thing but of course it's possible great and all that just not me yes so so um so Kaylin so I go talk to Kaylin I'm like hey man I need you to say something for me message from God it'd be great whatever it's like okay well you know it doesn't just work that way you got it like I got to wait and you got to give me some time I'm like okay okay so then I asked him every couple days and he's still like no don't have anything going on like okay and then I'm like then I go up to him and like Kaylin this is my last day here he's like okay it's like let's make it happen let's go to the parking lot I'm like okay he's like okay Scott just stand there close your eyes and hold out your hands like you're gonna receive a gift I'm like okay so I do and he does the same and then he just like closes his eyes and just thinks for a minute and he's like okay he's like I've got three images for you I'm like great he's like the first is of a ship in a storm and you don't know what's going on or why things are so stormy but you're moving through this storm and the second is of an archer and actually it's a javelin thrower javelin thrower God is throwing you like a javelin exactly where he wants you to go okay this is all pretty generic so far and then third is of a tree and you are this tree and there are many smaller trees growing up underneath I said okay thanks Kaylin like okay and and I'm just like that that doesn't really mean a whole lot to me he knows where I'm going you know like this is all pretty generic my mildly pessimistic to some of the charismatic creeps in and I'm just like so then I'm like thank you nice tell my wife about it okay so then we're only at the Abbey for two or three months and then we start getting in connection with the Anglican mission my mom was friends with this one woman who was going to an Anglican mission church in White Rock so like well let's just go check them out Anglican is Abbey like they're kind of in that you know English stream of things and so so we go and then this is the the piece where they they had this one guy who was a bit of a prophet I suppose like not one of those like whoa I'm a prophet but too many of those but so anyway so he so he says hey it's the end of the it's the end of our first evening any you know it's been a long day we're all coming from different places if you'd like just to come forward for prayer for sleep just come forward for prayer for sleep but we'll also have if you want a prophetic word or something there's some people at the front and come up and we'll pray for you so we're just so Jenny gets up my wife gets up to go and there's like a line of like 30 people in front and we're just kind of like you know back and I'm like yeah I'm not getting up I don't I'm not into this kind of thing and I don't ever have a problem sleeping so so then there was this guy Joshua Sue though up at the front and and he he looks at Jenny and I we've never even spoken and he walks right up to us past the whole line he's like you know I'm kind of new to this thing but God just gave me three guys and I was like okay he's like the first is of ship in a storm and the second is of an archer and God has shot you and you're an arrow and the third is of a tree so okay Lord somebody else so so that happens and so of course like I'm encouraged you know you only need a couple things like that yeah yeah be like that's that's sustainable enough and even though it's been a hard and rough ride for lots of different reasons I know that I'm where God wants me to be so that's enough for me and everything else is like secondary and so I just try to live into the calling that he's called me into and that's why that's why I also really like the you know men honor titles titles do not honor men like God calls you into something and and it's never something that you hold onto as though it's something that you can wield it's a it's a huge responsibility you have to live up to and I know myself I need something like that otherwise I would just I'd be a floater I feel a close heart connection with God so I'm I don't naturally operate in like any kind of urgency or desperation or needing shows of anything you know I'm pretty passive sometimes and happy I'm a pretty happy person passive and happy hard to shake me you know into action unless I have to so I have a lot of I have to but also very willing I mean you get that from I love your story I love I love boy I love your parents just just hearing about them and their heart and their willingness and their commitment it's it's just thrilling and I completely understand that the the real-life people are also complicated and all of that because you know I I I had amazing parents too they stayed my father stayed in one place but for most of for most of his which which probably my mother made him but that was that was a good thing so wow wow I love your story I love your story I am so glad you didn't tell me the short version yeah dude I did not keep it to like the 20 minutes we're already an hour in and so I know you did not and I'm I am very very okay with that I I've loved every minute of this and this is this has been great and I'm glad I recorded it and something like this this is the kind of story that needs to be told and recorded and accessible for people to listen to because a story like this inspires people to do all the kind all the right things and a lot of crazy things that probably will end in shipwreck and things like the Apostle Paul had to suffer but that's the way this thing goes so I and I love how you're I mean you did sort of Forrest Gump through the entire you know both through the the seeker movement and the emergent movement you know I love it I mean all different sides you've got the the sovereign grace folks and the Westminster folks and the the the seeker corporate you know church growing like crazy thing and now the new monastic thing which is of course in many ways I was in Australia in March and and the the guy who put together brought me over to Australia which I thought was just the craziest thing ever talking about Jordan Peterson and then I visit his church and it's this it's this it's like the building was the first Anglican church our cathedral in Melbourne Australia and the pastor is just doing like the traditional Anglican liturgy and he's just this liturgical nerd of course Australia is just you know swamped by Hillsong and and he's he's just all like you know all the Anglican churches they're all doing Hillsong and I said dude you know your day is coming just just keep doing it you're trust me your what you're doing now is the new hotness it's coming your way it takes a while to get across the Pacific but it's it's on its way so something that something you kind of mentioned there what was interesting is there's been some people in my small little congregation we're like hey you should be recording your sermons and this and that but then I'm looking at this movement where people are coming to these events where no cell phones are allowed and no recording takes place and it's like a once-in-a-lifetime unique event and even talking to and hearing from some other people even knowing that you're gonna be recorded change is how you absolutely talk right so I'm so I'm still pushing back on that and I'm like if that's kind of if that seems to be like the trend why do like the the 1980s 1990s let's get those cassettes filled with all my sermons and have a catalog sitting in the back you know what I think when we took over the First Baptist Church they had like one of those old like wooden for them like for the for the catalog of the sermons on cassette right who in their right mind like those sermons are safe from history majority of cases but then again Tim Keller wouldn't be Tim Keller if it hadn't been for all of those Martin Lloyd George sermons that yeah you know he listened to and and so as the so I got my BA in history and so the historian in me is sort of like and just just just keep records of some things but I completely agree with you like our meetups we do here at Living Stones no no recording nothing like that because it's it's the wrong it's you have to figure out the right thing for the right thing yeah yeah but tell me now more about the Abbey so yes has this has grown and I did a little bit of you know the first call that I had a little bit of poking around because I'm yeah resistibly nosy sure yeah okay okay so I jotted down a couple of notes that I wouldn't be completely off the hip okay so obviously it's an Abbey for like we try to make that first and foremost but beyond the sound of music I don't think a lot of people know what an Abbey is yeah Maria and the Abbey and that's about it yeah okay so we go back to St. Patrick but before that we go to St. Anthony the Great the first monastic who goes into the desert and he hears the sermon of the rich young ruler and then he just goes literal on that and and now he's out in the desert and then it spawns the church fathers and all those cool church fathers sayings and this you're going out into the wilderness to fight your personal demons and going to war and takes on it takes a very different perspective on spirituality and and and what a walk with Jesus looks like and what I find beautiful is in walking in parallel steps with each other are the golden cathedrals in Spain in France where thousands of people died and were murdered to get them to that state and Christianity becomes a path to power and then you have the monastics who have a life of poverty and simplicity in its ideal form I know it can be corrupted and then you find out the order of Francis of Assisi the reason why they have their like big sleeves and their robes was so that when people donated money they could just put it in the sleeve and the monk refused to even touch it Wow so so it's just like so it's like how and so one of the one of the pieces is if you ask a person who's outside of the kingdom or who's close to people who are in the kingdom and and observing and speaking and saying what is the narrative of Christianity according to you not according to future thinking guests that you would have or other people have on their shows who are deep into the literature and see all kinds of different things but just your average person they have a narrative of Christianity and and what it means and what it represents and for many of them even from my own friends I hear it's the oldest pyramid scheme in the world it's it's it's path to power it's primarily men at the top ruling over people they don't want to work a real job they're just fooling people with this religion they're hypocrites you're self-absorbed you're like cannibalistic all of these things and your lives look no different than anybody else you've got this you've got the same checklist going on then you pair that with the Canadian experience with a First Nations approach where on a theological perspective there's a vein of we need to decolonize the church reparations to First Nations people looks like giving every church to First Nations communities and and walking away I've got a person who I'm in contact with she's working on trying to get all the public libraries and Thunder Bay given back to First Nations people just like straight up given to them and you have to pull the colonizers out of scripture and all like just and so when you say you know and then the whole priest situation is just as alive and real in Canada and then you have the residential schools which I think you've probably heard of or been familiar with and so now they talk about the generational trauma that suffered from parents and grandparents in residential schools coming down into their own families to this day and it's to say that you're a Christian person carries a ton of baggage and so so particularly also with First Nations people colonizer residential school person abuser part of the system all of this all of it so it's interesting is particularly so so Thunder Bay is a hub city we're a hundred and twenty thousand people ish there's at least 35 First Nations communities north of us who use Thunder Bay as like a hub as well as to look out in a couple other places but and right now we're between 14 to 17 percent First Nations is our makeup in this city and it's the highest rising population because some of the First Nations communities are becoming urbanized and they're coming down into the city I mean I know I would so so here's the Abbey story st. Patrick as many of you know it's the patron saint of Ireland he's actually kidnapped as a child brought to Ireland as a slave he's a shepherd kind of boy person he has lots of encounters with God out in the wild but he also falls in love with his captors and loves their culture and loves who they are regardless of that he still escapes when he's in his teens gets back home and then goes to France to get a theology degree comes back but then becomes a missionary to Ireland what's key to note though is the Irish people were tribal were they had their own religion customs all of that right and so what's interesting is Patrick comes and he actually offers something that those communities embraced and desired and what's interesting is the Celts had this idea of like sacred spaces so we're like a forest would end in a field would begin or where like a river would would go in the river bank and on those kind of like we call them lay lines or whatever they have this idea of sacred spaces and understanding of the spiritual very strongly and so you actually find accounts where Patrick and people would say if you give us this land to build this church we'll pray for you and that was enough of like a and what was interesting was there also a warlike community and they love the dedication of the monks because they were just as dedicated and hardcore as their warriors were so so they had this like respect and and the Irish missionaries found ways to properly bring in some of the spiritual elements that the Celts had like for example some people theorize that the Celtic idea of soul friends is a precursor to confession in the Catholic Church and so the Catholics saw the benefit of it but then of course back in the day wanted the proper authority structures in place for it and so then they turned it into well you can confess to your priest but they saw this mutual confession piece and even the early Abbots and the and the monks and the and nuns in these Abbey's would do their hairstyle like the Druids would and they wouldn't do it like Catholic monks and so that was one of the complaints that the Catholic Church had against them was you don't have our hairstyles you still look like the Druids of that place but what they but what Abbey's were was unlike monasteries that are a little different than monasteries monasteries were more for a time a withdrawal from society cloistered dedicated lives dedicated to study and to religious practice and to battling those demons Abbey's it seems were far more community oriented you could come and go out of an Abbey you didn't have to like permanently reside there if you see the ruins of Abbey's there's huge buildings all all surrounding them and that was actually for widows orphans the poor so they'd come into a community and when they build they build community hubs and resources and build places for art for culture for technology to be developed for like all of these beautiful things and so when they'd come into a community the community would say oh wow look at all of what they're bringing to us and enhancing enhancing what we have and there's always this focus of work and prayer where where you would work and pray and it wasn't all one or the other it's like the two pillars of like a monastic community so they shared some pieces of monasticism but then they had their own Abbey expression and Abbey's actually spread from Ireland some into England but also into France Italy and some of them are still kind of like their buildings are around but what we saw in them was a Christian movement that could work hand-in-hand with the First Nations people of Ireland primarily by coming into a community and not just preaching good news but being good news for that community right so and they also Billy Graham sort of set up much love to him and and all of that but he set up the like believe behave belong trajectory and Abbey has a belong behave believe trajectory where it doesn't matter who you are you can belong here from day one this is this can be your home this can be your community doesn't matter where you are on any spectrum and and then once you have found that peace and that safety and security in a community that loves you and cares for you then your behavior can can move from like your survival mechanisms and your like an animal cornered to actual now you can begin to make some choices for yourself in in better circumstances and possibly some may come to faith through that some may not never a requirement I haven't personally had a conversion at the Abbey we don't really like go for that primarily especially we're four and a half years old scripture talks about the different seasons and what you're called to and what you're called for yet many lives are changed and let's see I'm just gonna throw in just a couple last things before you can jump into questions huge emphasis on service and sacrifice work and prayer work with the city and Isaiah 58 our primary go-to passage the kind of fasting that God desires is to feed the hungry cloth and they could throw off the chains of oppression and then it says and as we look at the state of the church in the West in Canada we're losing 30% of our churches in 10 years CTB came out with that article and in Montreal now this is third-hand information so but the municipality of Montreal has banned church new church buildings from being constructed because so many are being emptied out their rationale is why would we let more people build more churches if you can't even sustain the ones that you have so even from the very beginning though the one difference between my parents and myself was my parents always wanted an Abbey in Thunder Bay and from day one I was like this is a prototype and a model for what Christian communities can do in churches that are emptying out and becoming vacant you seed them with community loving purposed people and ask your particular community city town what have you always wanted or what do you need that is not there or needs to be established and they will tell you and then you make your purposes every day of the week that in addition to a Sunday worship expression but what do you do the other six days of the week and even that day we do a dementia cafe on Sundays at the Abbey from 2 to 4 and people struggling with dementia Alzheimer's come in with their caretakers and we work in correlation with the Alzheimer's Society Thunder Bay Lakehead University and we like pull this thing off together that's just one very small piece but and what's interesting is we have filled the Abbey with sacred art we continue to want more but there's a couple of particular pieces one is of Jesus sitting at the Last Supper and that's down in our like eating room and then we have Rubilev's Trinity up in our cafe which is essentially symbolic for us of God sitting at the table and there's that third or that fourth empty space which is like a welcome I come and you can sit as well and then in our prayer tower to emphasize our belief in the in thin spaces and special sacred spaces and we can't quite articulate it but we just say we believe they exist in the vein of Abbey's of the past is the hand of God reaching to touch the hand of man and there's the life cosmic energy of God reaching this cold hand of man which is being warmed by the by the life of God so and and although we have between 25 to 40 people who come for our services on Sunday or service on Sunday we have between 1,500 to 2,000 people a week who come through the Abbey from all the events that we run the cafe that we have and so every so Sunday is actually our least busy day as far as like people coming in so that's one of the like the paradigm shifts like there's a narrative changes and so for me and as you and as you sort of mentioned the little the little hits that I've done along the way of different kinds of Christianity expression has caused me to I'm deeply passionate about the church and I and I love the people of God and I love God also like very intensely and so I want the Abbey to be potentially a rewriting of a narrative for many people and an alternative means for what what could a what could a church look like or if we were gonna plant an intentional community in a city or in a town or wherever and part of it is the megachurch model works in like large population bases what do you do in like small town Alberta small town Saskatchewan then Montana whatever it's like what's your model you've got these churches they're all emptying out what have you got yeah yeah and and if you think you're gonna put a charismatic man or woman up at the front and they're gonna do this thing and it's gonna be church as usual and you're gonna somehow resurrect that thing you're not gonna respect no no no and so yeah and and you know and for me I don't you know when I was younger and okay I'm only 36 so that you know I am younger but when I was even younger when I first tried to do my first church plant I was like these are all the things that I'm against I don't like this I don't like this and then I realized I'm not for enough things all my distinctives were like negative but the way but what my prayer life looks like because it's it's overwhelming like what what I'm engaged in and what my team is engaged in my prayer life looks like God if this is your thing I'm here and I'm willing but you have to make it work yeah and here's a possible model but maybe the West is under your judgment so maybe you don't want this you don't want these buildings resurrected you don't want this to happen but if you do I'm willing and some I preached about this which was really interesting this passage in second Kings I think where it's the death of Ahab and God called and it's this weird little passage where the prophet opens up sort of this piece of the kingdom says that God is sitting there with his host of angels and God says I want a have dead right I wanted how is that gonna happen so then it says the whole congregation of angels start talking and it says for some time they're all thinking about ideas they're all talking and then it says one angel comes forward and God says okay so what's your idea and the angels like this is my idea I'm gonna put a false word and the prophet and then God says okay sounds good go do it and many people use that passage as like oh does God cause like they turn it into this moral quandary as though that might be the point how I've been reading it though is we see all these problems in these issues in the world the church is failing and disappearing 40% of in the West 40% of babies born in Thunder Bay are addicted to opiates or other kinds of drugs we have hundreds of homeless people we have all of these huge issues and a lot of people are sitting around and they're like well what does God want me to do what's God called me to do I don't know what my calling is and and the way and the way I preached this like peace I said listen you have been given eyes to see spiritual eyes to see too you can you can see all of these problems and God is sitting there saying what are you gonna do about it come up with something and I said all those angels they're perfect beings they have all kinds of amazing ideas there's like thousands of ideas but one of them steps forward and says this is this is my best shot and God says sounds like a good idea go ahead and do it and so my challenge to to the people in the in the Abbey and was here's all of these issues here's all of these you know injustices and here's all of these people who need help and I don't think that God wants us to sit and wait for a perfect word even in my own story sometimes he'd like drops it but he's he's he's wanting to see you step forward and say here's a challenge and this is a little Jordan Peterson ask here's a burden that I will bear for the kingdom here's a challenge that I will take on for the kingdom and God says that sounds like a great idea go ahead and do it and God also backs up the angel and says and I will be with you you know like it's my power moving forward but um and that's part and that's part of what the Abbey is and and and so my heart with even the Abbey model is I just lay that before God and I say if you want this to be an effective model and a prototype then let it be but if you only want one Abbey in Thunder Bay I'm okay with that too I'm here this is your ride I'm on it but I can't dictate or control it I don't want to and I can't like I can't I don't want to I've seen the dangers of like a celebrity pastor stuff just the dangers that are out there and I don't think I'm strong enough to resist them yeah at this point especially in my age maybe when I'm in my 60s but I hope I don't I I yeah I so we have a common rule of life because we're a new Manassas community I would like to see more Abbey spread and something that we would share would simply to be a common rule of life and a big long-term project I'd love to have as a four-year lectionary based on the four Gospels where you could just each Abbey community contributes artistically through written word and through songs and prayers and art and then you build this so that when you say ten years from now plant an Abbey in Chicago you're like what are we gonna do on Sunday because this isn't based on a charismatic leader who's like dynamically engaged this is just a community coming together you can you know open up your PDF file of the Abbey lectionary and have all the resources you need from 50 other Abbey communities that are like and then you can begin to pick and choose this prayer is beautiful these works of art are beautiful it's inspired our community to do something similar and then and sort of have this network of community focused people and right away from day one at the Abbey we went before City Council made a deposition before City Hall and we said we're a new organization here in town we exist for the good of the community what do you want us to do and their first response was well had you have you read our drug strategy yet like no we haven't read that they're like okay go read that go talk with Cynthia Olson she'll tell you what's going on and so then from there because we read it because we responded back they're like okay come to the housing and homelessness coalition there's 35 organizations to deal with homelessness and and and join them and get involved in the dialogue so then we go there we open up transitional housing at the Abbey it's had to be put away for now because we're going through a residential permit status we put the cart before the horse a little bit so they're kind of coming back and they're like you know and we're like yeah but people are dying in the cold on the streets and they're like yeah but do this so it's like okay yeah that's the city yep we opened up a thrive house for young women who are either pregnant or young moms who are like giving birth to children and needing a place that's not just like a recovery home but like something sustainable we ran that for a few years that's on in hibernation right now while we wait for another director to come in for that and our major project right now is the city hasn't had a youth shelter for over a decade and so we're building a 15-bed youth refuge and again it was we pursued an owner of a building that had 10 apartment units above and three storefronts on the main level in the worst part of town most challenged part of town and and after we we walked in to make an offer and he said since now that you've shown me that you're serious about it all and you've gone through everything I'm just gonna give you the building for free so so that's pretty pretty cool and those ten apartment units help keep the whole thing sustainable so we have sustainability built in so we have a high-end cafe in our Abbey proper we have I think 17 events a week that happen every single week in addition to all the other ones our space is always free so nobody has to pay for anything and so tons of different groups use it tons of other organizations use it for their own fundraisers and all kinds of things like that and then after the refuge is set up our community does want to do an Abbey in the woods which would be either on a river or on a lake and it would be a sustainable community you know green farming gardening raising livestock off the grid retreat center but also we'd also like to relaunch thrive there so women can sort of unplug and distance themselves from all the craziness of the urban setting and find some long-term healing we'd also like to work with some First Nations groups and allow them to sort of have a larger space on the on the land to grow their medicines and to learn and to begin like training their people in like building canoes and different like cultural pieces that are important to them so anyway so that's like a little down the road but I kind of think you always need a very clear focus on like what the next few years are gonna look like and make it challenging enough so that you're always dependent on God to to make it happen because if it's always manageable sometimes it's challenging to know if God's behind it you throw something large out there and you're like okay God you have to be behind this are you because if you're not then it just won't happen and then it's no no big deal but if it's always manageable you know I had a friend who was fairly wealthy in Surrey and I was having a conversation with him because I used to meet with all these different guys and he said you know what Scott I've never had to ask God for anything literally my marriage is fine got lots of money my kids are healthy and everything has just fallen into place and I don't know if I'm even in God's will or what I'm supposed to be doing because I've never talked to him about it I've never had to and so then I've used that example for other people to say you know poverty can be a blessing living on the edge can be a blessing because when things open up or you feel led in a certain way and it works out you know that God's behind it and then that can provide you with a confidence and an assurance that you're in the right place doing the right thing. I love how you've taken this you know this the the the previous the previous missional moment usually gets beat up by the next missional moment because you know and sort of this we're responding against it but you know when I came to Sacramento in the late 90s with you know the we're still sort of at the tail end of the of the seeker thing and the denomination was pushing that and so I you know I grew up in the in the urban ministry days of the 60s and 70s that's what that was my father's main venue so I had all that DNA in me but then I you know got back to North America doing ministry read a bunch of those kind of those standard church growth seeker books and the b-hags and big hairy audacious goals and I love how how you have incorporated that idea into your DNA and and I you know I would I think just you know I love the I love the vision I love the vision of the tree and you're exactly right you know it God is the author and we are the books and so if he's going to do something he's going to do it and if he's going to use you he's going to use you and you know you get some say about it but not always a lot so I and and I think you know I think you're you know so in the in the late 90s the the the seeker thing was all you know the state seeker thing was tailing off it's still hot in certain areas of the country or the two countries you know now the doing with you know doing with with the community not for the community I mean all those things are all those things are are pretty hot right now and just because something's hot doesn't mean it's bad I mean that's true too and but I love you know I've seen many attempts at what you're doing it's just like church planting you know whatever you know eight out of ten church plants fail probably 98% of them grow to something less than 100 and plateau for ten years and then die and then you've got the the few we used to call them when we were doing a lot of church planting in Sacramento we used to call them lottery winners that would have the experience of a village church and in Surrey because they're that rare it's the right it's the right place at the right time right in circumstances that the planter has no control over that's right and it's perfect storm right moral failure here something happening over here some guy gets back stabbed over here everyone's disillusioned and there's thousands of them and it's like and here's and you had that month window and if you missed that month window it would have been somebody else entirely you had it that's right and now look at you oh wow you're you're dynamic you're you're a thought leader you're you know it's like and it's the right person I mean it's it's it's that it's the Mark Driscoll or it's the Bill Hybels or I mean not to take away from any of them to yeah that it's exactly the right person because that's a rare breed that can actually do that and then lots of other things come my my wife and I were watching the crown yeah that's what serious yeah love the thing with Reverend Woods and that whole thing I was a little emotional talk where are you where you at I've seen I'm through three of episode of season three so if you're further ahead don't tell me anything okay but the Queen is taught once you get to the place called moon dust that's my favorite episode of the whole series but the Queen is talking to that uncle who abdicated uh-huh and the uncle says to her essentially you're the right woman for the job you're the right person for the job because the crown always ends up landing on the right head yeah and so I think that like you know in essence sort of what you're talking about these different large church kind of leaders it's like that crown of sorts kind of lands on the on the right head yeah but but at the at the same time you know when I hear what you're doing it reminds me of of you know Northside Chapel my father's church in Patterson they started heroin was just sort of raging through in the 70s raging through Patterson and so they start these little you know halfway houses for heroin addicts and of course AIDS would come at the end of it but you didn't know that you know during the heroin and and urban ministry urban ministry has been like this forever you know but maybe not forever but for a long time and and so I love I love what God is doing there and and the thing that occurred to me as you were talking was we do we do in a immediate saturated culture pay attention to the I got a I got someone debating other doing a knock on my door in a second might be Daniel you know it's a certain knock we'll see what happens but um in a media saturated culture we look for the charismatic leader but it's almost always the sacrificial leader and and here's the thing and for every sacrificial leader that might be remembered in 50 years you know thousands of them are forgotten by the standards of this world yeah you know I saw that I saw that in my father and I saw that in my father's church and you know my YouTube channel is just like I I made a video in exactly the right time and you know had a little following because of it I mean it's that that's the whole thing I yeah I listen to Bishop Barron I think oh gosh why can't I talk like him but you know it's just it's it's just God doing what God does he uses who he wants and yeah yeah yeah not to get and not to get sidelined but again just loving the Kanye thing right like that can't yeah yeah about and I sent a little link I don't know if you've looked at it is a little obscure I guess Dr. Dre is remixing Jesus is King oh really yeah and and Kanye is dropping a Christmas album on Christmas Day Jesus is born and then I don't know if there's Kanye who tweeted out it takes it takes making a gospel album to get Dr. Dre to remix your material something like that I was just like oh this is cool now I'm looking forward to Christmas Day to kind of like just get that and just yep and just see it yep and yeah yeah I've got lots to you know think about about all that but I love but I love all of it yeah I love all of it you know I see I don't know I have I have this heart where it's like I look at all kinds of different media or storylines and any time it begins to touch on the true I just get like your heart just responds right yeah yeah and and even in like Kanye songs like there's enough in that enough of the true in there where I you know I just love like God is King we're just soldiers even that just like yeah yeah good that's good so so let's so we have about 20 minutes left yeah let's talk a little bit about this crazy conference that you folks that organized because it's just I had actually I had actually been thinking about I was gonna have Peugeot and verveky and I was working on a venue in Toronto and because I have some connections and I always just work in my church connections but I didn't get the person I approached didn't really bite so it's like okay I'm not gonna push just like I fed him the idea and he didn't bite but but there we then we get this invitation from you so yeah what the heck is going on okay so here's a couple of things um I guess it's like a confluence of things so then maybe you know that it's good or something um so part of Abbey's were part of what they accomplished or what they were engaged in was philosophy culture making art all of these pieces they were like the city center also like the church used to be and and I'm not bemoaning the departure from that necessarily but I want to have included in the Abbey's life I always talked to my team about the judgment level that we look at as far as when we look at our organization or the Abbey if Jesus and a kindly monk or none the two of them walked through the doors and the question was if you had this building what would the two of you do with it as long as the pieces that we're trying to accomplish would be somewhere close to that then that's kind of like our navigation piece kind of like James K Smith talks about that quote in his new one in his new book about the rowboat and you're looking at the past to guide where you're going and I think that's what we're trying to do very strongly so it's like okay we take care of homeless people or people on the fringes good we're offering meals every single day lunch and dinner okay that's good we've offered transitional housing we're doing a youth refuge we're hosting everybody else's events and their cultural pieces where's where's our content where's where's our contribution to the community not just let's host some things but let's actually accomplish some what we think are essential pieces that a Christian community should be offering to the community that looks like an informed fair lively generative dialogue between people on different views and viewpoints and I loved how you had talked about a couple weeks or a couple months ago this creation of a language this ability to break down the isolating you know the markers of this is a person this is that you know and I think that in our increasingly polarized world where it's like left and right and and everybody's like siloed they're not talking to each other anymore we need to create avenues where and this is where I was talking to Dr. Richard Mondrell from the University because he had sat sat down with me he's like why would tell me why I want to come tell me what this is even about and so hang out a second I will go church pastor yeah yeah okay okay so just just making sure or reinforcing the fact that we need to have these conversations and dialogues where people from completely different viewpoints or what you would think would be different viewpoints can find some common ground and some understanding when I started talking to him about this I said he was like well why don't we get why don't we get a Jordan Peterson he actually like threw that out without me even I said well well right now there's there's a little bit too much too much heat on that I said this is a first impression people make up their minds in 15 seconds we have to have we have to have a fair balanced loving conversation where every person who comes would feel enriched and felt that their viewpoint was presented well and not attacked we have to get a couple of those under our belt before we can start bringing in some more polarizing people which I'm not at all opposed to but but the community the Thunder Bay community has to be like oh well I was at that last one and and one of our local professors was there and he had his say and and he was heard and understood and actually and they can have some frame of reference and actually what was interesting was he had talked to me about his lamenting there was a locally famous agnostic woman who was leading this atheists and agnostics group she had passed away two years ago he's like we're kind of this directionless we barely need any more and group and I said well if we pulled off a conference like this every six months this could be a unifying thing for you for this group that you have that you care about that you love where you can start suggesting your own speakers start getting reading lists that you're going over before the speaker even comes the world is your oyster for the for this group of yours and and as I began to talk about that I could see that he that all of a sudden he started coming alive to that idea and he started getting excited about that and so Thunder Bay doesn't really have anything like this going on that I'm aware of at this level and and in conjunction to that so that's kind of floating around then what's also floating around is my sister and brother-in-law they introduced me to Peugeot like a year ago so I'm paying attention they're like hey let's commission him to do some work of art for the Abbey he'd love the Abbey I'm like well that's interesting let's have them come in and and run workshops because I'm I was friends with Father Nick who is one of the local Greek Orthodox priests so it's like okay Peugeot is Orthodox I've got some work and they were coming to help make food and and they were up in our prayer tower at times and different things like that and what's nice about the Abbey is we exist pre schism before East West whatever st. Patrick is an Orthodox saint he's a Catholic saint he's he's safe and as we try to be ecumenical and like keeping the main thing the main thing it's it's great to sort of have a pre troubles yes model yes yes and so so anyway so with all of that we're like okay well wait a minute if we're gonna have Peugeot come here who else is is in that orbit who else is who else can contribute to a conversation and let's not just have one person let's make it a well-rounded conference because I remember my grandfather started up the Baptist summer conference where they bring in Baptist speakers and they do lunch afterwards and have picnics and it would be like for like two full days and you get notable people who would like energize and you know and now that's like who does that anymore yeah you know so so rare and then I'm also talking to one of our like we don't have membership in our congregation but one of the people who attends and it's like hey what if we got like the Symphony Orchestra in for an hour between sessions and let's make this thing just exceptional and innovative and just and you know and so I do have some small remaining tendrils of that excellence piece from the larger church right where it's like these things actually kind of matter yes they do even like name tags like when we do village stuff it was it wasn't like the clear plastic whatever it was like the thin you know dark gray slate with like the white and it was like nice you know next next level nice name tags yep swag bags and all these kind of so we're like okay let's let's actually pull off something meaningful innovative excellent let's get a conversations happening because lots of people also wonder what the Abbey is yeah or what we stand for yeah we don't have a lot of branded events that we do that say here's some people who who were very comfortable with who who we enjoy and benefit from and and here's some streams of thought that we'd like to introduce you to or or a new way to have conversations or these kinds of things and have it be like in an Abbey way which is arms open wide to everybody welcome to the table you belong here and let's have a balanced dialogue discussion let's talk about meaning let's talk about consciousness looking at dr. Richard Mondrell stuff about when you determine neurological death and when you think yeah the consciousness is gone and it's like okay we've got some we've got some interesting things to talk about and then also as Catherine's like our speakers are loving the fact that they're all able to like come together and like hang out I'm like you know what this sounds really cool so as soon as like the first little let's see if this might work let's just put out some requests and see who would be willing to come soon as the confirmation started coming in and some energy building we're like oh all right let's do it let's make it happen so yeah like that's that's the broad broad strokes for that I think I think it's I think it's gonna be great I I we don't know we we obviously don't know Richard but but you know Jonathan and John and I have been talking and watching each other's stuff and thinking about each other stuff and and so for us for the three of us this is this is very exciting to get to be together in person but I'm you know especially after this conversation I am so I am so excited to to see the Abbey and see this work and I'm going to share this video with some people who don't watch my videos normally because they're pastors and they know me real well they're like why would I sit and listen to you for two hours right right right I say no this one you want to watch it's not just me talking it's you want to hear about this because this is this is something this is something I think people will want to come to maybe they'll come to the event but I think they're also going to want to come and and see what God is doing through your Abbey and have an understanding and sort of get their mind around it the part of the the the amazing thing about the church is is how is how it grows organically and you see this in church history I mean you and I in terms of both of both of us grew up with parents who were deeply committed to the church deeply committed to the gospel and and also weren't too fussy about denominational boundaries that's that's that's very evangelical of course but it's it's also it's also ecumenical and that's that's a good thing too so well well we just have a few minutes left anything you want to ask me I've been a very poor host and dominating forcing you to just keep talking this whole time and so and any questions for me that you have yeah the one question that had popped into my head was as you're sort of interacting with all of the content that you're that you're bringing what are you what are you bringing your your your people through recently like what's on your heart for the people in your church like what are you kind of like leading them into the real heart the heart it the difficult question for me is always which is my church so there's the Living Stones congregation which is a aging Christian reformed church in Sacramento which has never sort of been a I mean there's a Christian form church in Thunder Bay so you have some idea of what the CRC is like I can tell you a funny I can tell you a super funny story as soon as you finish I mean so that's my congregation and then there's the meetup group which meets here at Living Stones which is sort of another congregation and then there's this discord server that started which has sort of become another congregation and then there's people who watch my channel I and I'm working with a friend from Southern California John and he I knew him before this he used to be a Christian reformed minister that's a whole nother story that you can find on my channel with my first talk with him but you know when he saw people watching my channel and he said oh you got to do a meetup it's like okay we'll do a beat up no no one will come you know no one will come but then people came and so I go now people are coming what I do that and so you know he and I are working on something that will be for his church in Southern California we're still working on what is it called and our last conversation was you know conversations on the edge where to sort of so he started a meetup which is kind of a small thing but we also recognize that a big a big difficulty for people are finding spaces where they can have free flow conversations that are both safe in a certain way and risky in another way it has to be both and how can we create spaces and actually invite people into them and will they come and we're seeing that happening and I see this as an essential part of what churches need to do and having listened to you now this is very Abby ish for us because this is you know people come to my meetup and now it's still a Jordan Peterson meetup and that's you know that's how we started in some ways it's problematic but just is what it is and but then people come and they will say things at a meetup which are just about anything but but that's been so of course you know my my father's ministry and my grandfather's ministry and my ministry here at Living Stones it's always had sort of that you have no idea what's gonna walk through the door in it's gonna be okay we're gonna at least try to make room for this people and you can never make room for everyone that's that never works out that way but so what I'm seeing is an increasing conviction that the church has to come to terms with a lot of things one of which is so there's the practical things that I'm doing that in the meetup in terms of so you don't believe in God okay so you've got all these other ideas some of which are problematic in one way or another okay yeah we're gonna have a conversation we're gonna sit and talk and and it's gonna be okay and the church the church in in many ways right now is one of the few places that this can happen the city can't do it the university can't do it the church can do it and how can churches do this that then is the question and that's where a lot of these philosophical theological issues get enjoined in terms of a lot of the verveky stuff you know I learned a ton from Jordan Peterson with a bunch of his things I've learned a ton from Jonathan Peugeot so my monologue videos are basically just me I'm trying to think through all this stuff in a way that people may be able to follow and so so I'm but I but the Abbeys concerns and the Abbeys witness and practice I are very much in alignment with you know I with why I've always longed for a church where people could come and talk about their stuff and and you know okay they don't believe in God they or maybe they believe in ten gods or half a million gods or you know whatever but they're people you know it's interesting we have this couple who come on Saturday mornings who are atheists to the core she's one of the professors at Lakehead and she said you know what as an as an early in my early childhood I had some church in me and for me and my partner this is our church experience to come here to sit at because we've got a bit of a bar at the at the counter so she sits there with her partner and a guy called Tony and and and either Andrew is there Saturday morning and he'll talk for an hour and a half with them or I'll be there and then I'll slide in and it's like a they're very and and they've even said we don't believe everything that you believe and we're we actually think some of what you believe is problematic but that's okay this is church for us this is where we find community on the weekend and we you know and it's this conversation of meaning that happens so it's fascinating and I love it okay funny story but this about a Christian reform church I think there's three in Thunder Bay okay some of our greatest volunteers at the Abbey come from Christian reform churches and so I get this invitation to preach and I don't know what kind of Christian reform church you happen to have because I know there's some variations obviously I'm not a so I'm not aware of how liturgical this one church is and they invite me to preach and I'm like okay so she sends me the the woman who doing the follow-up the secretary she sends me an attachment she's like here's the order of worship I don't pay attention to it and like I'm there to do the sermon yes sir you see where this is going so then so then she's like okay so she's like so then I get to the church that's my Bible and sermon notes and there and she's like okay so they're like the first thing you do is you go up to this upper room and pray with all the elders of the church okay and then they're gonna come down and then and then so and so it's gonna walk you to the front I'm like okay so so how like after how many songs she's like no no what's gonna happen is you're gonna go up you're gonna pray and then he's gonna walk you to the front I'm like okay but like what about the song stuff she's like oh well there will be piano playing like okay she's kind of being vague so I go up we pray I go down and then I'm standing there and and she's like you need the official handshake from the elder to like transfer the stuff okay so that the authority or whatever so then as soon as the music starts playing the guy looks at me like okay so then I walk up to the front and then I'm just kind of like standing there and then he like goes to shake my hand I'm like okay and he goes and sits down and the church is all just sitting there staring at me and the piano player is looking up expectantly at me and as soon as that happens instant back sweat just like materializes on my back and then also the woman is like I can see her like panicking and so I'm just standing there and I'm like am I expected and I just like I just said I'm like am I expected to leave this whole thing and they're all like and then the lady's like didn't you get that liturgy there's like 80 people she's like didn't you get that liturgy I'm like so then she so then she quickly like opens up her iPad she like finds it and she like runs it up and she like gives it to me for me to like and I've got like the hymn books and stuff and I'm like well and then I'm like reading that like the hymns so then afterwards I'm like I am you know I am so sorry and it was just all the older people they thought it was like the funniest thing they're just like no no that's that's funny that's super funny so I felt a little relieved but it was like the most stressful preaching experience I've ever had my whole stat my whole team when I told them both they're all just laughing just like you are yeah well that's in you know that that's the traditional Christian Reformed process where the minister runs the whole service it's not you know you've got a worship leader and three fast three slow one to get ready and one to go none of that it's here's the liturgy and yep and and on through it so well I I'm not I'm not surprised that you have my father's church was started by you know there's a clump of about a dozen Christian Reformed churches and of that there were there were people who had a heart for the inner city at that point African Americans moved up from the south immigrants weren't coming anymore because of the world wars in the middle of the 20th century and and so many so many it's it's deep in the CRC DNA that that service and giving and so I I'm glad that I'm glad that at least some in those churches have have seen your witness and embraced its mission and and decided to participate that's that's wonderful yeah yeah well I have to run along but Scotland this has been tremendous and great I was I was so nervous about this is my first podcast thing of any sort but I know we've done ah you were great and I I am I have a problem in that I have not enough self-discipline so when I have something that I really want to post right away for everyone to see it so I don't come out it'll come out soon it'll come out soon okay well final thing that my sister would kill me for if I didn't say oh yes the conference we've got the urban abbey.ca website that you can go on to you can also look us up on Facebook so and I'm supposed to be creating a conscience and consciousness Facebook page so I'm gonna be actually working on that as soon as we hang up okay so when you get it done send it to me and I'll put the link in the show Perfect. And people will find it and you know it's a little ways away so there'll be time but but folks folks will want to fly into this I know it it's gonna be a it's gonna be a big deal in a rather small community yeah I'm so looking forward to it oh it's it's gonna be great fun so thank you so much and and you and I will talk again all right all right take care bye bye