https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PCKVO1ZMMWQ

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. We got an echo, so what's really going on like Donkey Kong? Go ahead Paul. Where we're using the new, all the setup that we just used for church. Everything is snazzy. Everything is snazzy. Rick is able to put little slides underneath the Freddie and Paul show. We have graphics. We're going big time, Fred. Oh wow. We're going big time. What's up T-Grizzly? What's happening? T-Grizz, faithful watcher of the show. He never leaves a comment. T-Grizz, you should leave a comment. Oh, you should talk to the camera. The camera is up there, not to the screen. Yeah, go ahead. So what are we going to talk about today, Fred? Okay, the A's are in first place. 13 in a row. 13 in a row for the A's. And we have 13 in a row. And the Giants beat the Dodgers last night. But they're not, I think they're in third place. Why are you wearing a Seahawks hat? Oh, someone gave it to me. I thought you were being a little not terribly faithful. I like the 49ers. You got Kittle this year. We got one of the Raiders players, number 95. He's a lineman. And he's going to the 49ers. Okay, okay. And don't ask me how I remember all this. I guess God gave me the gift to remember all these athletics. Anyways, no, the Seahawks hat someone gave it to me. But I do like Wilson. He's a pretty good quarterback. Wilson is a good quarterback. And what's his name? He used to play for him too. Sherman. Yeah, yeah. And a couple other players used to play. Yeah. I was told, is it true that Brady is going somewhere else? Brady went to Tampa Bay. Okay. So who will the Patriots have? I don't know who the Pats will have. That'll be something to watch. When we find out, we will let you know. When we find out, we will let you know. Because I'm sure this will be the first place you'll hear it. Now, okay. I mean, okay, I understand what you were saying in the sermon, but I had one question. Okay. Why did all these people act so ill? And why weren't they chilled? Because we're not over the hill. I don't understand it. Are you talking about the Egyptians and slaves? Yeah, why are they so crazy? People are like this, Freddie. People are cruel. I'm a positive person. I can't listen to that stuff. I got to do positive uplifts. But I got something out of it. It means if you report to so basically. Well, that's a lot of truth to that. And if you have a lot of friends and you get along with your friends, that's a good thing. That is a good thing. That's true. And if you have camaraderie and power structure and total velocity of the signal motion, that's always good too. That's I'm sure you like that, Mom. All right. We got a wrap, right? Yeah. All right. No, you got to tell me a little bit more about do you think we'll ever have another softball team? We would have to have a church that had people able to play softball. We'd have to have a lot. They'd have to be younger. Which watch them on TV? Are you up for softball? I could play. Yeah, I know your father had a little gut like that too. I mean, you get a little gut. Okay. I think that's a good point. Oh, one more thing. What about that guy? What was that guy's name? I can't think he's a rapper. Am I supposed to know a rapper that you don't? Oh, and you were on Kanye West? Did he back out? No, I guess he's still kind of running. I'm not sure. Oh, Kanye's Kanye. You're getting a stimulus check? Yeah, because like the social security. Okay, I haven't heard that that one through yet. No, it's approved. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, it'll be here August 24. Oh, wow. So what are you gonna do with that stimulus? I'm gonna get a tablet. I'm gonna get maybe a selfie stick. And I'm not sure what else. Maybe some music on it and stuff. Okay. All right. Well, stimulus check. Stimulating the economy. All right. I'm ready when you are. Oh, you've been recording the whole time. No, we don't need the beat. You just go ahead and rap. Really? Yeah. You're gonna get better with the beat. I know. We've only got that one beat. We'd have time to set that up. So we have to play. You're gonna. You're gonna. You know, I want you up here. You want me up here? Yeah. So you can just sit down and be a translator. Ready? Everlasting God, this how it goes. Strength will rise as we wait upon the Lord. We will wait upon the Lord. We will wait upon the Lord. We will wait. Strength will rise as we wait upon the Lord. We will wait upon the Lord. We will wait. Our God reign forever. Our hope, our hope, our strong deliver. You are everlasting God, everlasting God. Don't you know? Good to go without a word to say the everlasting God like kid in play. You do not faint. You won't grow weary. You're the defender of the weak. You comfort in need. You lift up our wings like eagles in the sky. See the first, the kingdom of God. Jesus be the century. Be source. Be my light. Jesus. Jesus be century. Be my hope. Be my song. Jesus be my fire in my heart. Be my wind in these sails. Be reason. I live. Jesus. Jesus. Jesus be my vision. Be my path. Be my God. Be like the 49ers. That ain't odd. Jesus be my century. Be my source. Be my Jesus. Be my source. Be my light. Jesus. Jesus. Light. Jesus. Jesus. And that's right. Alright. Okay. Okay. Let's hope the A's win today. Hope the A's win today. They play the Astros. The Astros used to be pretty good. But they're kind of falling off a little bit. Okay. But anyway, I thought this was a good show. And your comments, let us know what you'd like us to, you know, if you got a topic you want me to rap about. Just get back to me. And anybody out there like talent agents and whatever, our videos are covered. We got it right here. We got everything we need. So maybe one day when CJ has his day off, we'll do a special rhyme together. Me and CJ. Hi CJ. And hi Gordon. Hi Gordon. Anyways, okay. Well, we better land the plane. And Seattle might be good this year, but the 49ers are going to be better. And I don't wear a sweater because it's too hot. And that's the plot. Alright. So we better hit this one love. Alright. One love. We're doing great. We're doing great. We don't speculate. We don't speculate. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We're doing great. We