https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=geL9E62CpQE

 Now he's doing something else. Did you say yes? Yes, we're ready. Okay, here we go. What do you want to talk about? Just basketball and baseball? What do we always talk about, Fred? We gotta have a little social distancing. We gotta do the right thing. Who's going for president? No, I wouldn't ask. Who's still going for president? Trump and Biden. That's it? That's it. No Kanye no more? Kanye I think right in. He's still in? I think so. Someone told me he wasn't. Well he said he wasn't but he was. Okay, he is. Alright, go ahead and start recording Rick. Already are. Okay, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. There's the camera right there. That's what we gotta talk to. And today is another Sunday. Sunday. Freddie, how you been? I've been good, man. I've been Sacramento talking. I've been keeping it real like a Vanderhoof Holyfield. The rhymes are tight. They probably got to speak up a little. I've been kicking up, you know what I'm saying? So yeah, the Kings play today. They play the Magic at 3 p.m. So if anybody wants to tune in to the Kings game because we're a Kings sponsor and we greatly appreciate the Kings. But we just wish they would do better sometimes. But God so loved the world, gave his only Son for that he shall not perish but have everlasting life. Anyways, so basically what I'm trying to say is what have you been up to, Paul? I've been streaming your YouTube program. I've been watching it. I really think I dig it, man. You watch my other videos? Yes, I watch all the time. Really? I've been watching the stuff. Wow, thank you, Fred. I really like it, you know. Good. Yeah, and the Giants have been doing good. A's are tight for first place with the Mariners. How many games have they played? Eight. No, I'm sorry, six. Shorter season though this year? No, I'm not sure. I'll have to find out and let everybody know next week. I'm just wondering, what I'm saying is, can you give me the rundown on, I mean, I understand what you were saying about Paul and Saul and John and Job, but you didn't talk about Job today. We didn't talk about Job today. But what did Job do? That's what I wanted to know. Job was a good man. Was he with Samuel? No, Job was not in that storyline. He's a very early character. He's about time of Abraham, probably. I have a question for you. What did you think of Zacchaeus? He was a wee little man. A wee little man, what's he? Yeah, I like that. That's good, that's good, that's good. That's gonna give us ratings. One love. Are we done already? No, I'm just giving props. Okay, okay. Anyways, so I guess I'm gonna do a wrap, and I hope everybody likes it. I'm gonna do good to... You want me to start the beat? Yes, sir. I'll start the beat. Alright. Paul's funny. Hey, if you check me out on YouTube, you know what I'm saying? CRC, doing it big, G. One love to the brothers on 3rd Street. Coming up like this, like trick or treat. But I'm back to good to me. I cry out for your hand of mercy to heal me. I am weak, I need your love to be free me. Oh Lord, my rock, my strength is my weakness. Come rescue me, oh Lord. You are my hope, your promise never fails. Me and my desire is to follow you forever. For you are good. For you are good to me. For you are good. For you are good to me. For you are good to me. You are good to me. You are good to me. You are good to me. You're good for me. I'm from the 9164 Shake a D.* Don't get it twisted when I walk down the red carpet I'm walking through cause my crew is cool Don't you know? Good to go without a word to say My name is Freddie B from the USA Coming up like this, coming up like that Enough to check, my stuff is fat, I'm tired Like this, you know? And when I'm on a microphone I'm good to go, Jesus is the king of this earth We gotta keep it real, like His birth The Son of God, the one we see Read your Bible and you will see That God is the one that died for us And yo, in God we trust, one love Yeah, boy! How was that? That was good, I can edit it at home Alright, we're done? We're done! We gotta do one love though 3, 4, 5, 6 Oh we're good to go, okay I can record it, I can edit it at home so Go ahead and say what you wanted to say So what's going on Paul? So yeah, like I said The A's are doing good, the Giants are doing good And the Kings play today at 3pm like I said If you have anything to add And if you, anybody out there that has connections with marketing and Please let me know because Are we making videos? No, no, I'm saying what I'm saying Ricky's abandoning me! No, you're not listening He's starting to abandon me You're not listening Out, you know, out in the venues making videos And make more and more And put them on market, I'm saying Yeah, we can put this on market But what I'm saying is It would be cool if we could put it all over the place Which it is But we need your guys' comments And your suggestions And what we could do Because we are what's happening And we are adapting Taking it to the top Until we get the rooftop My beats are chill Don't you know it's another Sunday And peace out yo Alright, you ready? I'm ready One Love Yeah, we make videos all the time Really to bust a hardcore rhyme No, I meant out in the Yeah, you gotta give a little moment So that I can cut the video So yeah, we're done What I meant is out and about You know, going like that I thought you were gonna forget me when you go big No, I would never do that Freddy, who's Pastor Paul? You took it wrong I'm just teasing you I know you wouldn't forget me No way No, I meant like out in like