https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vXUSq6rZJTw

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Welcome Nancy. We got Fancy Nancy back in the house. Fancy Nancy in his house. But she can eat my diggity eat floaty. What's up eat floaty. So it's been a while since Fancy Nancy's been in the show. But Nancy got her second vaccine. I gotta get mine. Freddie needs to get his yet. I'm reluctant but I'll do it. He's reluctant but it'll happen. Yes. And I got good news. Good news what's that? Me and Charles went in the studio and laid down five tracks. You and Charles laid down five tracks? Yeah so they'll be out for market later on. CJ's gonna work on that. I make half and he makes half. So it's a joint conversation. He did two songs and I did three by myself. Alright. And I'm going back in the studio Tuesday from 6 to 8 to lay down three more tracks. Wow. So I'll really be doing it big. Alright. Piece out to Snoop Doggy Dog, Ice Cube and Tee Grizzly. Tee Grizzly I opened up for you with 103.5. What's up DJ Tosh. Anyways if anybody has that footage please email me or Paul. Thank you very much. Okay mom what did you get out of the sermon? Okay we haven't had a sermon report in months. So Nancy what did you hear Pastor Paul say today? Well there's a few things that I would like to know the answer to. Oh we got a question and answer then. Okay good. No I probably won't get them from you because you said we won't know. But anyhow our flesh, our own flesh is in heaven. It is? Yeah that's what he said. Wow. But he also said we can't know all about it. Oh. So why is it, why do you feel our own flesh is in heaven? Well where is Jesus? At the right hand of the God. Does Jesus have our flesh? Yes. Oh I guess so maybe. Because he talks to us through our soul. Yeah but he also, that's the next one. We really don't know what the spirit is. I do. Do you know what the spirit is? The Holy Spirit. Yeah the Holy Spirit. Within you. Right what is that? My point was we use this word and we're not real clear on it. That's what I'm saying. Okay. Okay. Alright. I thought I could look in the concordance and find out what the spirit, the Holy Spirit is. But anyhow I'm going to do that when I get home. Okay what else is on there? Okay and the other part is when we are in the temple, we are in a sacred place. And our temple is our sanctuary and I feel that. I feel it. That's why we're fishing the men, we reel them in. Yeah I feel the cross in the back. Okay. Because you and your dad put that cross back there. Okay. And I feel it. Anyways Paul, I wanted to know what is it called, hold on I got to ask you a question. What is it called when they were eating at the table with Jesus and the disciples? Lord's Supper. Lord's Supper. Yeah. But does that have to do with the bread and the wine? Yes. Yes. That's what we celebrate? Yes. It's nothing else. Well it is more else. It's Jesus' crucifixion, His forgiveness, the sacrifice of Christ. It's all those things. And all lots of these things put together. Okay because I wasn't sure if it was that but I was on track. Yeah you were on track. Okay I'm pretty knowledgeable. You're pretty knowledgeable. Anyways we got good news mamas, tell them. Next month I might have a place to be. Good. I'm not done with my sermon. Okay go ahead and finish. Okay. Now another part of the temple is where we focus attention on God. Yeah put your mind to God. When we go in there we should be reverent. Obedient confession. Amen. Amen. Well I have a question. Okay. Okay so if you bring somebody to the Lord, if they don't know their Lord and Savior, Lord and Savior, and you disciple to them and just like bring them to church sometime, what do you call yourself, a disciple? Yeah, disciples, disciple. Discipling. Yeah, discipling. And like you said in church today, we are members of the church. We are like stones of the church. We are stones of the church. That's why we are called living stones. Exactly. We have a lot of love on that. That's right. I understand that. Now I'm going to get my hair done this week I think. It's getting kind of long. Is it? Don't you think? Well look, I mean. Yeah you can get it short like mine although you still got more hair than me. Bro, flat top. Remember how you used to get flat top? I remember when you had a flat top. I got pictures of you with a flat top. Oh wow. Anyways, like I said, yeah, Tuesday we're making, we'll probably make three to four more songs. Charles will make two with me hopefully if he has the beats. And we'll be back in the mix. The Magic is back. Hello FM 102. Hello Gordon. How you doing over there? Anyways, thank you. It's awesome to be back with Mama. Mama, I apologize. I wasn't here for Mother's Day. But we made up for it today. And we have a new, we got something for you to look forward to. We're going to move Moshe on down over there. But you stay here, Mom, because I don't want you to fall on that hill. Because that wouldn't be good. Freddie wants to wrap up on that. I got to go to the stump. Okay, go ahead and pause it please. Just keep it rolling. No, no, that won't look right. No, it'll look fine. Yeah, it looks fine. Yeah. That'll test the image stabilization on the camera. Oh, the people want to get a view. They want to get a tour of the Living Stones World Ministry Center. Are you coming, Mom? She never wants to come up here. Don't come up here. She wants to come up here. Oh, you. She's just like her son. Okay, no talking to her. Ascension Day. It's Ascension Day. Okay, I got it. You got it? I'm in heaven, right? Yeah, Jesus goes up to heaven. Okay. On three. Oh, the door's open. That's okay. That's where I could put the chairs back. Oh, okay. Yo, yo, what's up, y'all? Coming out of the 916 for Shigety my diggity. Here we go. Lord of all. He stands tall. He's the man. He knows it all. He's from heaven. And we're in earth. We came to him and saw his birth. The rhythm I touch is somewhat stunning. When I see my homies, they don't be running. They come up to me and give me that. That's a fact I could never be whacked. Mom is Nancy. Paul is Paul. CJ, well, he knows it all. He's the man of the music connection. Gee, Grizzly, I got affection. Snoop Dogg and Dogg, Dr. Dre. And don't forget about Ice Cube. We came to pray we don't be thugs on this block. We're the MCs and we got the hip hop. Hip hop, rockin' nonstop. I said hip hop, rockin' nonstop. Hip hop, rockin' nonstop. I see cars go by. Rolling on the mic, I don't cry. I wear chains and jewelry by the pair. Gold jewelry and I do not swear. The women I take out to wine and dine. And afterwards they tell me they're also fine and divine. Just like cherry wine. And I got my nursery rhyme. Coming up like this. Coming up like that. I pop my collar because I'm the Big Mac. Coming up like that. Coming up like this. And no, I don't get pissed. One love. Thank you very much. Ready? One love. You gotta get Nancy one love. Go ahead and get her. One love. All right.