https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Xmk1b0J6n0M

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Well hi Paul. How you doing Fred? Oh good. Good, good. How have you been through COVID? Okay you got your mask there. Yeah it's just it's just kind of messed up you can't go nowhere or anything but that's not true because they did they do open a few restaurants and they have like patios outside so you can sit outside and they play music over the speakers. That's true. And you can just be chilling in the mix and stuff. Just chilling in the mix outside. COVID styling. Yeah. What about Kanye running for president Freddie? What do you think about that? I think that's a good thing. Think that's a good thing? Think Kanye would make a good president? Yeah because the Trump party is overrated. Trump is overrated? What do you think what do you think Kanye would do as president? What do you think he'd accomplish? Probably more poetry towards the organization that they work with. Definitely more poetry with Kanye. Like poetry in motion. Yeah. Like there would be poetry and then they would make treaties out of poetry. Kind of like the Boston Tea Party but it'd be Poetry Tea Party. Poetry Tea Party. I think that's pretty good. I think that's pretty good. Do you think he should fill his cabinet with rappers? What other rappers should be in in Kanye's cabinet? Kalman, Dr. Dre, Slim Shady, M&M, Limp Bizkit, and Fred Durst, and me of course. What department in the cabinet would you like to run? What part of government would you like to be in charge of? Sure, I'm kind of mediocre. Okay. So Kanye would bring more poetry to the government. We would watch his press conferences. Everything would be. How do you think he'd do with foreign policy? Foreign policy? He'd probably do right because they all want to walk in his footsteps. Follow the yellow brick road basically. Yeah. What do you think of the change that Kanye did with his music when he became Christian? I mean he's really taking a Christian turn with his music. I think it's good. That's what I did. I used to be regular rap and I went to Christian and everybody loves it. They give me all kinds of comments. Thanks for the comments. Oh, I auditioned for AGT, America's Got Talent. Yeah. And who knows? Maybe I'll be on there one day because you guys gave me 480 looks. So, you know, just if you know anything, just email Paul. We're not going to say what we said last time. No way. No way. We're not going to give your mother's email address. No, no. Anyways, yeah. You got to rap for Kanye. Do a Kanye campaign rap. I got to think of what I'm going to say. Okay. But anyways, one more thing. Yeah, sports will be coming back. So basketball starts this Tuesday and baseball starts. It already started but it was preseason. Now it's going to be season next Tuesday. Okay. Yeah. So. But the fans are going to be empty. Yeah. That's, that's, I can't, all these years I've seen people, the guys play and they're not there. It's just hard to believe. I mean, what is the world coming to? I mean, God said let there be light but COVID-19 is just saying no joke. All right. So I got to do a Kanye West rap. All right. Give me a topic and then I'll. Well, Kanye for president. I think you should, I think you should do a campaign rap promoting Kanye for president. All right. Kanye West. He is the man. He's got the rhythm like Shazam. Coming up like this. Coming up like that. Yeah, Kanye. I think you got it going on. That's a fact. The rap is like that. Enough to the chat. Like I said, your rap is fat. Don't you know? Good to go with the campaign really though, but you got to persuade all the ability to come up just like a new MC. Step into the top like this one, two, three. Don't you know me? Yeah. Freddie B from the nine one six for shickity, but Kanye West, please get us to get the best, to get our votes and quote that we got the time to bust a fresh rhyme for you and me and him and who rocking on the mic like Kazoo. Good. Good. All right. Very good. Thank you. All right. One love. One more thing. What was I going to say? Yeah, I guess I said that. I can't think what I was going to say, but that's not important. Okay. Okay. One love. Amen. Amen. Hallelujah. All right.