https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sgVOHbgpbrk

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. This week on Twitter ran across a video by a woman, Mona, I can't say her last name. I just can't pronounce it. I don't know how it's pronounced. Hashtag 16 days of activism. I didn't know what that was about. Apparently it was International Day of Elimination of Violence. A number of days ago. Again, violence against women. It was the start of 16 days of activism. I didn't know anything about that. Well, really, there are a lot of things about her video that caught my attention. One of which was the refrain that was repeated again and again and again throughout the video. What blank world is this? And she was expressing outrage. Arrogance is an outrage against a really horrible thing. Violence against women, usually by men. Don't we want violence against women and by men eliminated? Absolutely. We certainly do. What's peculiar about this refrain though is where do her expectations come from? What other kind of world has she ever known except one in which women are victims of violence? All of us have known a world of death, of disease, of harm, of violence, of pain, yet something in us rebels against the traumas of this world. What is that? Who of us have ever known a world apart from the traumas that are common to this world? This woman wants to know why there are not more outrages. In many ways, I'm curious why we have the outrages we have at all. All of us have lived all of our lives in a world filled with suffering and trauma. It's a sort of like demanding that water not be wet. Now this Sunday is the beginning of Advent. And Advent is the beginning of the Christian liturgical year. Now over the last couple of years, as my awareness of the whole bunch of things have grown, I've become more and more aware of these old Christian traditions and what they mean. This marks the beginning of the new year for Christians, at least in terms of the liturgical calendar. The Christian Reformed Church, I grew up in, didn't pay much at all, much attention to the liturgical calendar. We had the 52 Lord's Days of the Heideberg Catechism and we had the prescribed worship services of the church order that sort of follow the Western national calendars, Thanksgiving and Easter and Christmas and New Year's. These nations in the West that sort of have all of these holidays. One of the things that I've learned is that Advent is, well Advent sort of came into the Christian Reformed Church as a sort of pre-Christmas, but were we trying to compete with the Black Friday before Christmas sales? Well, the liturgical calendar has some rhythms of feasting and fasting and Advent, as might surprise you, is a season of fasting and Christmas is a season of feasting. And so if you know the old song, the 12 Days of Christmas, it begins on Christmas and ends with Epiphany, the day of the kings. And if you grew up in Latin America, Kings Day was the day that you got gifts, not Christmas Day. And so we have all of these competing traditions in the West from the liturgical calendar, but yeah, Advent is a time of fasting, Christmas is a time of feasting. Lent is a season of fasting, Easter is a season of feasting, and that's sort of where these rhythms come from, this traditional calendar. Now in a Protestant tradition like the Christian Reformed Church, these things were sort of pushed away, but they're emerging again in the CRC and in other places. Now America sort of has this in reverse because of course all the Christmas parties normally, not this year so much with COVID, but all the Christmas parties come in anticipation of Christmas, and then after Christmas and into, well, Christmas sort of goes Christmas to New Year's, that then sort of becomes this season of feasting. But after New Year's, well, the media will tell you that January is, January and February are the most depressing months of the year. And I see this in Sacramento because, well, the sun is starting to go away, not that the sun actually goes away, but we actually have clouds and rain and some of these things, and so December, January tend to be the darkest months, and I can tell just in the attitude of people around Sacramento, it's the most depressing time of year. Now with COVID and isolation and separation, it'll even be more so, I would imagine, but here we are. Now like this woman in the video, she was so full of righteous indignation in that video against those who do evil, and I can completely understand that. The Bible gives voice to this. Surely God is on our side, but that then leads to the question, why doesn't God break in and fix it? In the lectionary, there are four readings each week. There's an Old Testament reading. There's a gospel reading. There's a Psalms reading, and then there is an Epistles reading, and the Old Testament reading is from Isaiah 64. It's a dramatic reading. It goes like this. Oh, that you would rend the heavens and come down, that the mountains would tremble before you, as when fire sets a twig ablaze and causes water to boil, come down and make your name known to all your enemies and cause the nations to quell before you. This is a dramatic demand of God to come and set the world right. We know what's right and wrong. You are on our side. You are our hero. Why don't you come down, rend the heavens apart, come down in your fury and set the world right? For when you did awesome things that we did not expect, you came down and the mountains trembled before you. Since ancient times, no one has heard, no ear has perceived, no eye has seen any God beside you who acts on behalf of those who wait on you. You are the living God. You are the one who hears. Why don't you hear? Why don't you act? The season before this, we were in Exodus and we saw, well, Israel cried out. They didn't even remember God and he came down and he smote the Egyptians. He parted the heavens and he lifted them out on eagles wings. Isaiah isn't quite so unaware of where we are in this. You come to help. You come to the help of those who gladly do right, who remember your ways. But when we continued to sin against you, you were angry. How then can we be saved? And notice the turn here. First come down and drive out our enemies, the evil ones, the people against you. But now we have awareness of our own evil. It's a sort of the other side of karma. Everybody loves to talk about karma as if somehow, of course, we are on the proper side of the ledger. All of us have become like one who is unclean. Someone who is unclean in the Old Testament tradition is excluded from the community. They live outside the camp with the lepers. And all our righteous acts are like filthy rags, righteous acts that would perhaps atone and make one clean and allow one to reenter the community. No, even our righteous acts are like these filthy rags that would make us unclean. We all shrivel up like a leaf and like the wind, our sins sweep us away. There's a haunting idea here that perhaps the reason God doesn't rend the heavens and rescue us is because we are not worthy and we have not done right. No one calls on your name or strives to lay hold of you, for you have hidden your face from us and have given us over to our sins. In other words, the passage starts with this level of righteous indignation similar to what we saw in this video, but it ends with the recognition that perhaps you don't show because we're unworthy and we haven't done what's right. And if you in fact do reign the world with the scales of karma, perhaps, well, if karma is true when things are bad, we deserved it. Yet you, Lord, are our father. There's a relationship that is not easily severed. We are dependent. Yes, we are the inferiors. Yes, but he is our father. Can a father forget his child? We are the clay. You are the potter. We all we are all the work of your hand. Do not be angry beyond measure, Lord. Do not remember our sins forever. Oh, look on us, we pray, for we are all your people. Now we move into a posture of of supplication. The first coming and second coming because liturgically we're in preparation for the first coming. Historically, we're in preparation for the second. The day of the Lord is this theme that I talk about often in scripture. You can find it in the Old Testament launched by the Book of Joel. It's the day of the coming of God when he rends the heavens and comes down and it's a day of reckoning. It's a day of judgment. It's apocalypse, but it's also a day of reward. It's this day when everything is set right, but also everything is exposed to be as it is before the face of God, not with all of the distractions and illusions that we currently see ourselves. And when we come into Advent readings in the New Testament, the gospel reading, we jump right into, well, the last bit of the gospel of Mark, not really the last bit. Jesus is leaving Jerusalem when we get to the passage, but well, how, why is he leaving Jerusalem? He came to Jerusalem as the triumphal entry, hailed as King of the Jews. He curses the fig tree. He debates the powers that be in Jerusalem and watches the widow's offering and lauds her before his surprised disciple. As Jesus was leaving the temple, one of his disciples said to him, look, teacher, what massive stones, what magnificent buildings. Do you see all these great buildings replied Jesus? Not one stone here will be left on another. Every one will be thrown down. This is not what the disciples are expecting. Jesus coming to maybe purify the temple, but that the temple will be destroyed. This one physical center of God's rule on earth will be destroyed. The Babylonians did that. Surely God won't let this happen twice. As Jesus was sitting on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, so they're on, you know, the temple's on a hill, then there's a valley, then the Mount of Olives is on the other hill overlooking Jerusalem. And he's sitting there with the disciples and they're probably pondering what he said about the temple. Peter, James, John, and Andrew sat asked him privately, tell us when these things will happen and what will be the sign that they are about to be fulfilled? Why do they want to know? Do they want to gain the system? What purpose is this? Well, what sets out is often called the little apocalypse. It's only part of it that is in the lectionary readings for today. But in those days, following that distress, the sun will be darkened and the moon will not give its light. The stars will fall from the sky and the heavenly bodies will be shaken. William Lane makes these comments on the text. No other section of the eschatological discourse that's the discourse about end times, as we call it last things, is more indebted to scriptural imagery and language. The entire description is drawn from Old Testament material, which has been brought together through common motifs or keywords, which present the coming of the Son of Man in terms of the Lord's theophany on the day of the Lord for the gathering of his people. Jesus sees his work as, in fact, the coming of the Lord. Now, this surprises people. In fact, people continue to be mystified by Jesus because they expected what John the Baptist seemed to expect, which was God coming as a righteous judge to reward the faithful and damn the unfaithful and scourge the wobbly. The references to the celestial phenomenon which accompany the appearance of the Son of Man are appropriate in this connection. In other words, the heavens declare the glory of God. Well, certainly they would also declare his anger. In the prophets and later Jewish apocalyptic writings, the dissolution of the cosmic structure frequently orchestrates the intervention of God in history. Remember when Jesus is born? A star tells it. The imagery employed indicate an important turning point in history, but not necessarily the last of the historic process. Fundamental to this manner of speaking is the profound concept that the universe is united with man in his destiny and the prophets, who envision a radical reversal in human fortunes, spoke freely of an upheaval in the heavens themselves. In Chapter 13, the judgment upon Jerusalem marks the passing of one era and the establishment of another, which the glory of God is no longer concentrated in the temple, but in the Son of Man. The cursing of the fig tree symbolizes the destruction of the temple, which will happen in 70 AD. And now suddenly, instead of a temple, another one is being followed in this story. And so this woman's cry, well, she doesn't cry that God would act, she's just yelling at us, but you would wonder how much yelling can really reform a person's soul. I would argue not very much. She doesn't cry to the Lord. She has no faith in the Lord. She imagines that if anything will be improved, it must be us that improve it. Looking at human history's track record, I wouldn't be optimistic, but the focus comes on this Son of Man figure. This is of course the name that Jesus takes for himself, borrowing from Daniel 7. At that time, people will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory, rending the heavens. And he will send his angels and gather his elect from the four winds and from the ends of the earth, the ends of the earth to the ends of the heavens. Now learn this lesson from the fig tree. As soon as its twigs get tender and its leaves come out, you know that summer is near. Notice they're not telling time by the calendar. They're telling time by nature. Even so, when you see these things happening, you know that it is near right at the door. Truly I tell you, this generation will certainly not pass away until all these things have happened. That verse has mystified a great number of people. What does he mean by generation? Heavens and earth will pass away, but my words will never pass away. Two thousand years and we're still reading his words. But about that day or hour, no one knows, not even the angels in heaven nor the son, but only the father. So be on your guard, be alert. Do you not know when that time will come? It's like a man going away. He leaves his house and puts his servants in charge, each with their assigned task and tells the one at the door to keep watch. Therefore keep watch. Now, what's this a story of? This is a story of a master and his servants and the master is about to go away and the servants are told, I'm coming back. Be ready. Keep watch because when I return, I expect my servants to have managed my household as I wish and for it to be ready for my return. Therefore keep watch because you do not know when the owner of the house will come back, whether in the evening or at midday when the rooster crows or at dawn. If he comes suddenly, do not let him find you sleeping. What does that mean that we don't sleep? No, the meaning seems quite clear. Remember the disciples have asked for a sign. How are we supposed to know the sign? Are you going to wait for the sign and just catch up at the end or are you going to manage the master's house according to his wishes until he returns? Be diligent and awake. What does that mean and how do we understand it? While ago Netflix had a show on called Mr. Sunshine and it was about basically the dissolution of the Korean monarchy at the beginning of the 20th century at the hands of the Japanese and some of the Western powers. And the story revolves around the dissolution of one nation and the end of times for one period of a nation and a couple of people that were well, patriots of the nation as it were from different places. One young American man and one high stat who had been basically an outcast of a slave and one high status Korean woman. And of course it's a love story so they fall in love but she doesn't know what the word love is in English and of course he was raised in the United States so he's fluent in English but he's back there as part of the American army and as they're falling in love she asks what is love? She doesn't know what the word meaning means. He knows what the word means and he understands well what this will mean in a time of trauma and he says it's much riskier but on they go. And of course this is a Korean soap opera so it's let's say far less earthy than an American one, far more defined and they have these steps to love. Well he says there are steps to love. Well there's the handshake and there's the hug which was quite bold to have a hug. But then he says longing. And I remember that from the show longing. Americans aren't much into longing. We're always rushing into the feasting. What are the steps to love? It's longing. Do we just keep the master's house out of fear? Or in fact do we love the master and anticipate and await his return? Yes we wish that the heavens would be rent. Yes we wish that all things would be set right. Yes we wish that all things would be made new. But right now we're in a period of longing. Longing for what? On this mountain the Lord Almighty will prepare a feast of rich food for all people. A banquet of aged wine. If you're going to age wine you have to wait. There'll be the longing for the wine to be aged. The best of meats and the finest of wines. On this mountain he will destroy the shroud that enfolds all people. The sheet that covers all nations. He will swallow up death forever. The sovereign Lord will wipe away the tears from all faces. He will remove his people's disgrace from all the earth. The Lord has spoken. This is God's work. We wait on him. We are the servants of the household waiting in obedience, longing. Is longing a bad thing? Longing is not a welcome behavior in a culture of instant gratification. But we probably are missing out on something. If mingled with hope it can become anticipation. And anticipation is sometimes almost as sweet as fulfillment. The coming of the beloved is the sweeter if its absence is realized and marked. You will not wait in vain. You will not long in vain. This is Advent. We begin a season of waiting, of anticipation, of patience, of longing, of looking. Because we know our master. We know who he is. And he will come.