https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=XqhgqRllnks

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a special guest today, Rob Torstra. Rob has been on the channel a couple of times when I've done some group conversations. And a couple days ago, Rob sent me a video that he had made with a skeptic and they were talking, they had a friendly conversation about whether or not it's justifiable to believe in God and some of these things. And so I saw Rob dipping his toe into the YouTube world, so I thought I'd bring him on the channel and do a conversation with him. So I really appreciate your willingness to talk to me today, Rob. Yeah, and thanks Paul. I appreciate your willingness to have me on your channel again. I've always really enjoyed our conversations and the other conversations with the guests that we've had together. And I thank you for the example that you've set in terms of engaging people on matters of faith and meaning and purpose in life and all manners of theology. So I've enjoyed your channel and the audience that you have and I appreciate the way that you've sort of modeled that. And so, yeah, it's good to be back. Thanks again for inviting me as I get a chance to stand with you again. Appreciate it. All right. Well, I thought as I often do, I like to do sort of a biographical interview with people who've been on my channel because so often a lot of the kinds of things we talk about are both personal and sometimes a little bit complicated and can get quite tribal. And in my experience, if we know each other's stories, the tribal dynamics tend to go down and we can have more productive conversations, which is why I often do this with, I try to do this with as many people who are willing to do it. I found that a lot of people are quite interested in one another's stories. So let's begin with, why don't we begin with your parents? Tell me a little bit about your parents, Rob. Yeah, so my dad was born in Canada, but just barely. My grandparents immigrated from Friesland back in 1852. I know I saw you talking with Rod Huygen the other day. You know, hey. So many people on the channel are going to be, what's with this thing? Friesland? What is that? But yeah, so Friesland is a province in Holland and that's where my grandparents were. But my father was born in Canada shortly after they had immigrated, after my grandparents had immigrated just a few years after the Second World War. They were part of an immigrant community in Edmonton, Canada. And there was quite a large group of Dutch immigrants there that were part of the Christian Reformed Church there. And anyways, my dad was born and raised in that community. He still attends the same church today, him and my mom, where my dad grew up. And it's the church that I was raised in as well. And so that helps you understand a little bit. I was raised in that Dutch immigrant church community there. Dad was a firefighter for over 30 years with the city of Edmonton. He met my mom just before he joined the fire department. Now mom was raised in a Christian home. My grandfather on my mom's side was a minister, but he was minister in the United Church of Canada. So it was a very different worldview from the Dutch Christian Reformed worldview. They met and married. They've been married a little over 40 years now. And I was born a few years after they were married. I'm their oldest. I was their firstborn. And born, yeah, I was raised in a very Christian home. We were taught Bible stories from the time that we were real little in Sunday school and Catechism class, which was sort of like a midweek teaching group. I went to all of those things growing up, youth group a little later on. And yeah, my mom and dad modeled the faith in a lot of ways and were in some ways very different people, but in a way that generally complemented each other pretty well. So dad was, yeah, my dad was, yeah, he had his, he took, well, both my parents took their faith very seriously and they were real committed to raising us in the Christian tradition. So that's something I'll always be thankful for. Went to Christian schools growing up. That was a big part of Christian Reformed. The Christian Reformed community, of course, was a big emphasis on Christian schooling. So all the way through 12th grade, I attended a Christian school in Edmonton. So now you were baptized as an infant long before you remember it, as I was, I assume. Yes, I was. I was baptized at a time when, so I was a premia. I was about a month early. And even so, even at that real small size, I think I was baptized about 10 days after I was born because there was a real push in that early community to get them baptized as quickly as you could. We sort of lessened from that. We backed off a little bit from that. But yeah, I was baptized real quick after being born. So what was your sense of Christianity growing up? You were probably swimming in it. All of your friends went to the Christian school. You were going to, I mean, if you're like many who grew up at that era in the Christian church, rather insular, what were your conceptions of personal faith as a kid? Was it just something that was around you? And when was there any point in growing up when you sort of had a turning or a quickening or some kind of time when it became real to you? Yeah, that's a really good question because you described it real well. I remember when I was, I don't remember, I was pretty young driving on the way to church and there was another church a block or two away. And I remember asking my parents, you know, are the people who go to that church going to hell because it was not a Christian Reformed church. And of course, they were quick to assure me that no, those are believers too. But that was the mindset that, you know, there was a very strong connectedness within the Christian Reformed community. And so the same people that I went to church with, I went to school with and the other kids at school, if they didn't go to my Christian Reformed church, they went to the Christian Reformed church, you know, on the other side of town sort of thing. And so that was always a big part of, yeah, just who the community that I was part of. The downside of that, I think, as you're getting at a little bit is Christianity can almost become an institutionalized thing. It's just what you always do. It's your community. I was in about the 10th grade and I went to what was then called Youth Unlimited, which was a youth organization that promoted various events and activities for Christian Reformed high schoolers around the United States and Canada. And they put on a convention in 1995 in Fort Collins, Colorado that I was attending. And I point to that moment as the moment where I sense the Lord calling me to faith. In reality, there were probably many other moments along the way that were getting me ready for that. But that was the moment where I count as my profession of faith, where I, you know, claim the promises that God makes of forgiveness. So then after that, then it became about what does it look like to live this out on my own as a believer? What does it mean now to be a Christian? It's not just my parents' religion or my parents' faith. It's something that I'm professing. And I sort of went, you know, so my 10th grade year, I was dipping my toe a little bit into what it would be like to be a rebel. Now, that was pretty mild. It was, you know, consisted of listening to Guns N' Roses and stuff like that. But I was not a real happy kid in 10th grade. I didn't have a lot of, you know, I was trying to figure out who my friends are, where do I belong, you know, all those things that high school kids have to wrestle with. And after that experience at convention, then I would say I began to see that my, and I probably wouldn't have put it in these terms at the time, but my identity begins with my relationship with Christ, being loved by him, forgiven through him, belonging to him, those kinds of things. And then that then it was almost like, okay, so not having all these other friends, I didn't feel as alienated anywhere. Now, the ironic thing is after that, I started to make more friends because it wasn't so much of an insecurity thing, if that makes sense. So then from, you know, then I was involved in a number of mission trips after that and service projects in Southern California. And and that's we'll get into that maybe in a minute. But that was where the Lord started to lead me into ministry. So what was that? What was that like? Because a lot of people wonder why pastors get into this. Like, is it money? Is it for the groupies? I mean, you know, because, you know, the jets, the travel, the, you know, that's that's what the pastor's life is like. Right. Well, no, of course not. Although, you know, I can't I can't complain. The Lord has given me I've always loved to travel. The Lord has allowed me in my in my work to do a fair bit. That's right. You have traveled. I forgot about that. But I didn't go into it knowing that I you know, it's a strange story in some ways. I was I went on a mission trip down to Ontario, California. So Southern Southern California. And I was the leader of that team was a guy by the name of Dave Clomping. And and Dave was was a real at the time at that time. And that experience was a real example. He was a pastor of I think of evangelism and discipleship, I think something of that sort. And it would be hard for me today to put my finger on exactly what it was that I liked about what he how he was living about. You know, he was about his job. I kind of got to see what he did on a daily basis. And I thought, you know, this is kind of neat meeting people and talking to them about spiritual things. And and I began to sense that, well, maybe God is calling me in. And at first I wanted to do youth ministry. And my my primary reason for doing youth ministry was that if I went that way, I wouldn't have to worry about studying Greek or Hebrew, because that was way too intimidating for me. And so so I was kind of headed on that track. I at first was considering going to college in a place in in central Alberta, Prairie Bible College, Prairie Bible Institute, I think it was called at the time. And well, after talking with Dave, he kind of steered me towards a place in West Michigan called reformed Bible College when I attended there. It's now called Kuiper College. And so the more I started to look into that, the more it caught my attention and my interest was really piqued by that. And then I had to admit I was starting to get really excited about studying the courses in New Testament and in theology. And so I thought, well, maybe I could handle the Greek and the Hebrew if I if I go that track. And over time, I began to sense that just a pull into into preaching and into teaching that seemed to just resonate with with who I was. At the time, I was also getting involved in some youth group leadership and I was getting more involved at my church. And the more I was involved, the more I was sensing affirmation from people who were watching this. And, you know, I was I remember one thing I was involved in on a calling committee. Our church was vacant at the time. And so participating in that and, you know, people just like well, first of all, I love doing that, listening to sermons and considering, you know, where does a pastor fit into the life of a church? And and all of that were sort of the things that God was, I think, using to say, OK, this is what, you know, a life of ministry would be would be rewarding. Now, you know, is it is it an easy life? No. You know, I look back now and say sometimes the challenges are such that you say, you know, you better know what you're getting into. But but on the whole, it has been very rewarding. Studying God's word and finding ways to communicate it effectively. And and so anyways, it's been a very rewarding. So you went to RBC back when it was RBC. And you went to Calvin Seminary after that, then I did. Yeah, I graduated from RBC in 2002. I met my wife on our my second day there and I met my wife, who was a senior at the time, which I like to brag about a little bit. I managed to snag an older woman and. And we were married with with me having one more year of college to go. And then I graduated in 02 and then six weeks later, I started Hebrew at Calvin Seminary and I completed graduate from Calvin Seminary in 2006. And then I at the time, I had calls to three different churches and I after weighing them all out, we sort of boiled it down to two that we thought would be a really good fit. And then out of the two, we ended up here in in Salem, Oregon. So that's your first that's your first charge in Salem. That's correct. Yeah, I've been here since 2006. Wow. Good for you. Well, it's your story is I know for probably a lot of people listening to this. This sounds your life sounds very strange because it's I mean, if you grew up Christian reformed that you've got a very standard narrative. But to a lot of other people, it's it's a it's a it's a very unusual thing to live within a community, to stay within the institutions of that community. And then you go to Oregon. Now, Oregon is the Christian Reformed Church, for those who don't know, sort of have these deep pockets around the U.S. and Canada, Edmonton, Western Michigan, Chicagoland, North Jersey, little little cluster in Rippon, California, some in Southern California. And so what often happens is that people in the Christian Reformed Church kind of stick with these little clusters and go from one place to another. But Salem, Oregon, is not one of these places. So so what kinds of things did you learn when you when you endeavored out to Salem, Oregon? Yeah, on after I had I had just graduated from Calvin Seminary and I was back walking through the Seminary building. And one of my my effective was my Hebrew professor, a guy by the name of Carl Bosma. And I told him where I was going. And he says, Well, that's good. You go preach to those pagans. And so I had I had no idea what I was getting into. And I think he meant that in the best possible way, which is that, you know, this is a place that really needs to hear about Jesus. I've learned a few things about our area. Number one is we are definite free thinkers, meaning we are people who and I think I trace it back to the pioneer spirit, right? I mean, Oregon is the end of the Oregon Trail. And these were people that were very determined and they had to be they had sort of the adventuresome spirit that led them out this way. And and I think that mindset still persists today here in Oregon. I think that that sort of my mentality continues to shape people here in addition in addition to being very much lovers of nature and lovers of creation. You know, you I think I read somewhere that there's more Subaru drivers in Oregon than in any other state. And that makes sense because there are always, you know, people are always off going hiking on Mount Hood or Detroit Lake or, you know, Crater Lake. And so there's there's a love for nature. There's a love for creation. There is also a love for for justice. And by that, I mean, there are real passionate concerns over any kind of social injustice, whether it be economic inequality, whether it be LGBTQ questions, whether it be, you know, environmental creation care. I would I sort of put forth a hypothesis to people before that says Oregon, you know, so you'll often go through Oregon. And if you say walk through downtown Portland, it's not uncommon to find people protesting about this, that or the other thing. I think there's a sense in which that is, you know, the protest is almost a form of secular lament. It's a way of saying we see something wrong with the world and we are upset about that and we want to change it. And of course, the difference is that the means of change often rests with with government in Oregon. I mean, Oregon tends to favor more involvement at the city, state and even federal levels of government. So you see that. But and you see a lot of that sort of we want to fix the world. We see the world is not the way it's supposed to be, which, of course, I would argue is a contact point for what the gospel is all about. Right. And so anyways, that's that's yeah. But now the interesting thing is maybe just one more comment on this is that the church, you know, the Christian Reformed Church, at least my church, tends to be a more conservative church than Then you might find in other like if you if you imagine a spectrum, even on this in within the CRC, we would be one on the more conservative end of things. And I don't know exactly for sure why that is, but I suspect it has something to do with the fact that people that that landed here and came here and began worshiping here saw and recognized the the changes in the culture around them. And they wanted to they wanted to make sure that they were protecting themselves and preserving some of the traditions, many of them, which were good traditions, but they wanted to preserve themselves from what they saw the influence of the world around them. And so that we're kind of an anomaly that we were very we're a more conservative church in a very progressive and liberal state. When you're using conservative and progressive in in these sentences, can you flesh that out a little bit? Because that means a lot of different things in different places. Yeah. So when I talk about progressive, I mean, more progressive churches tend to be ones that I would say are more You know, they're more aligned with the values of the culture, whereas maybe a more traditional church would be one that's trying to hold on to the either the theological or the ethical or even liturgical worship kinds of practices from the past. Now, there's pros and cons to that. I'm not trying to say one is better than the other. But look, we need to change and adapt and fit into the world around us. And as I said, there's there's always a tension there within especially within the church. You know, how do you how do you maintain the traditions that are good that have been that have shaped us and have been healthy? And how do you also adapt to a world that is changing whether we we like it or not? So, yeah. Now, now you it's it's interesting that The insularity factor, because in some ways, the way you've described the conservatism of your particular church, which probably isn't homogeneously Dutch CRC Is interesting because the I mean, the CRC in terms of the immigrant dynamics had some of that conservatism as a buffer. The thing that they were buffering against wasn't necessarily progressivism or any particular political orientation as much as the kinds of aspects of, you know, for a long time, especially in Canada, Because a lot of the Canadian immigration, as with your grandparents, happened after the Second World War. The Canadians tend tended to hold on to, although, you know, the people outside of your church were called Canadians. And by calling them Canadians, you meant that you were not now. You might not even have a name for what you were. And and it's interesting how in some ways the church, at least in that immigrant in that immigrant dynamic, the church kind of becomes a nationality as such. And you're partly because the Netherlands after the Second World War changed so rapidly and dynamically and the immigrants brought with them and sort of preserved the culture that they left behind. It didn't change within their church like it changed over in the Netherlands. And so it's interesting how, especially for Christian reform churches in the Western states, there are some of these dynamics that have sort of that have sort of taken root. Partly also, I think, imbibing some of the Western independent spirit, which ironically, so and I often find this with conservative communities. There's always there. They're changing in ways that they don't recognize in order to not change in ways that they don't wish to change. No, I think that's that's very accurate. And I think that's a good insight. So we are we have been known for a long time as the Dutch Church in our area, because many of the people in our church actually are Dutch immigrants. They immigrated from Holland a little later in many cases than some of my like my grandparents, maybe more like late 50s into the early 60s. They settled actually in Southern California at first as dairy farmers. And then they were essentially they were priced out of the land and they just migrated north. And then they landed in Salem and and they clustered together. And so many of them were these Dutch like authentic Dutch immigrants. And and now we've we've changed, and especially in the last probably 10 years or so, as some of those members are growing older, some of them are passing away. But part of that change then has been we've brought in new people or we've had new people come in who are not ethnically Dutch anymore and not thinking in those ways. And yet that that whole you know, there is that tension between again, it's old and new, but it's not a new thing. And again, it's old and new, but it's multi layered. I think it's some of it is OK, you know, this is you know, you're holding on to an ethnic culture as well. And in some ways, you don't want to dismiss that or diminish that or you actually want to honor it, I think, in a lot of ways. But at the same time, you don't want it to define you and you want to make room for other things. But you're right. You know, you do change and you change without realizing it in order. That's an interesting way to put it in order to not change in to try to not change in other ways. But you're still changing. Yeah, that's very true. Now you've done a couple of other interesting things since you've been there. You've been in both involved in a well, why don't we talk about your ministry in Europe and what you've been involved with in that? Yeah, so I should back up a little bit and say I went back to school in 2012 and I completed a doctoral degree in in the area of preaching. That was something that I in terms of all the things that I do in in pastoral ministry, preaching was probably one of the things that I enjoyed the most. And I've heard a lot of affirmation about it. So, OK, I I follow that and completed that a few years ago. I did not want to go into actual like teaching in academia. I think there's some things there that would not be as good of a fit for me, but I do like to to teach. And so a good friend of mine by the name of Bill Wilton was volunteering at the time and he was connected in with an organization called item, which is International Theological Education Ministries and item has gone into countries. It started out in Eastern Europe, going into countries post communism. So countries like Ukraine and Latvia, Lithuania, and they've tried to equip local pastors there to minister in their own context. And so a lot of these places have their access to quality teaching has been very limited. Now, what I've seen is these many of these pastors with very little training have you know, God has used them in very powerful ways to shepherd these churches. And it's really amazing to hear some of their stories. But now the opportunity since since the early 90s, the opportunity has been around to go in and train and equip local pastors. And so I've been involved with that since 2015. I've taught in Ukraine. I think three times, maybe four times. I've taught in Romania twice. A couple of years ago, I was in India and in Indonesia. And Lord willing, next month I'll be in the Philippines. And we're we're doing this work in all these places. So essentially, the work that I do is I lead preaching seminars. And so we meet together with pastors and the elders and others for about three very busy days. And we we will take I say we because I usually will travel with with someone else. Usually it's it's my friend Bill that we brought some others in as well. Guy that you might know Fritz Harms is kind of from not too far from your neck of the woods. But and we go in teams usually. And we we work with the pastors so that it's not all just us telling them and sort of filling their minds with knowledge. But then we also we put them to work in groups and we have them work through a text. And and we focus on different genres of literature in the Bible. So we've done we've done letters. We've done narrative. We've done like Old Testament law. And we so we take them through a genre at a time and we're teaching some very basic principles on biblical studies and on and on preaching. And then the goal is to help them become better better preachers and better teachers of the Bible. And so and it's been a lot of fun. It's a you know to see the differences in churches around the world the different cultural distinctions and the way that each church takes the gospel, which is sort of this one core idea but then embodies it in many unique ways is really it's just an enjoyable thing to see. So terrific. And you also wrote a book a few years ago. I did. In fact, shameless promotion. All right. Here it is. Naked and unashamed. And it's how the good news of Jesus transforms intimacy. So it's a book about sex. It's a book about which as strange as it might sound. It's a book about how sex intersects with the gospel, which I realize does sound really odd. But but but the idea there is how how it's it's not just about OK if you're a Christian here's the rules that you need to live by when it comes to sex. It's what does the gospel do for us that allows us to be vulnerable and and transparent and how does sex even give us a gateway into seeing something of the supernatural and so on. Tell me more about that. So, so I'll start it off with a little anecdote and it is in the book. It's it was a line from Ray Menzen Eric. I think that's how you pronounce his name. He was from the doors. I think he was the drummer. I might be a little off on the details there, but he was a musician anyways in for the doors in the 1960s and 70s. And I watched a documentary with him at one point where he said something to the effect of you know as he's reflecting back on the 1960s and the culture of you know sex, drugs and rock and roll. And he was talking about sort of the groupie culture. And he makes a comment that says something like you know what we were really looking for in all of this was joy, cosmic infinite joy. And of course he's kind of going on to say we're using all these other avenues to pursue that. And what I got to thinking about is how you know the sexual experience is yes okay it's about physical pleasure but many people seem to be seeking more out of it. And I would make the case then that what it's meant to give us is the is the joy of what it is to be fully known and fully loved. It's not just about a physical release or a physical experience. It's something so much more profound. And there's a reason I think that one of the main metaphors in the Bible for the relationship between Christ and his people is marriage. I mean the church is called the Bride of Christ. And I think that at the very least that has to entail this experience of deep, soul satisfying, lasting, eternal, infinite joy. And that's something that okay we begin to experience little glimpses of that in this life but ultimately you know the picture of eternity is something where we will be fully known and fully loved by people. By our bridegroom. And so then you know I began to think of how okay that's I think what the sexual experience is meant to be. It's meant to give us a little glimpse and a little foretaste of that joy that will be ours. I mean the ultimate fulfillment of that will be found in Christ I think is what the biblical message is. But in the meantime this gives us a little pointer to that. And then one more thing maybe just to build on that too if I'm you know before I'll let you I don't want to take the spotlight away from you but I know the spotlights on you. This is where I'm trying to find out about you. People hear lots about me so that's not a big deal. The other thing too is so when you think about the nature of God I mean the doctrine of the Trinity is very complex and it's you know it's obviously much more than we could really realistically get into here. But at the very base we're looking at how does one God exist in three persons. And when the Bible talks about marriage there's I think there's a parallel there. I mean when two people come together as a married couple there's a sense in which they are still two independent persons. But there's also a sense in which they are one. They have been joined together as you know biblically the language is one flesh. They are one. And so I think we're meant to see just a little glimpse there in and I would say in the full context of marriage. We're meant to get just a little peek into what does it look like that you know God is existed as one God in three persons of loving and sacrifice and giving and towards you know within the the bounds of the Trinity. We're meant to see that I think in marriage we reflect that and then you might even go take it a step further yet and say. So when God creates the world when he creates the universe the biblical story is is creation out of nothing but it's it's this God of relationship and in the context of that relationship there's no it's not like God needed the world in order to continue his existence in order or in order to somehow make him more complete. He already was everything by himself but it's like the world is then created that the joy of God and the delight of God may be sort of might say increase not increase but shared around with with creation. So so God creates out of this overflow of love and then if you think about what does it mean to actually create a new life when you know when two people come together and in the experience of deepest intimacy and what is supposed to be an experience that is not supposed to be an experience of great love and commitment and you know delighting in one another out of that we are able then to create life and it's it's in some ways I mean that experience is a transcendent experience to be able to to love someone enough that it actually produces life is when you stop and think about that it is really a remarkable gift that God has given and so and I think it's meant to just give us these little pointers into something that's bigger than than who we are and bigger than our own material experience. Why did you write a book. Yeah, that's a good question, especially because I, in some ways I felt I was too young to have enough wisdom and knowledge to write a book. But on the other hand, I, I had been at Sunyslope for really only a few years, and I don't remember which year I've maybe been three four years, and there was a span of like one summer where I did I think five weddings. And then the next year I did a whole bunch more so I was doing a lot of weddings, and what that meant was I would get to do premarital counseling which I just love doing. There's just something really rewarding about sitting down with these couples that are ideally very committed and very excited about each other and they have no idea what's coming up. And, you know, you get to kind of work with them through that. But one of the things that that I, so you know you start to you have to talk about sex because you know that's a part of marriage and, you know, not talking about is like ignoring the elephant in the room and, and it's also setting them up for potentially for, you know, frustration or disappointment or whatever else possibly. But what I found was that, okay, when I came down to talk about sex, you know, the couples would, you know, I would always say so tell me some of the things that you've heard from your church over the years what kinds of messages have you picked up on about sexuality. And mostly what it would come back to was, well, we know you're not supposed to have the church says you're not supposed to have sex until you're married. And I was like, okay, well, yeah, generally that's consistent with the traditional teaching of the church but tell me more when we what is, you know, what else about sex well and then it was kind of like, well, they didn't, there wasn't a lot to add to that. And so I was also dealing with, you know, more and more couples that were living together. And they're without casting stones, it was just a question of we didn't, we didn't see what was so wrong about that. You know, it's like, okay, look, we're committed to each other. So why is this a big deal. And I didn't want to write another book that says here's the rules about sex that was, you know, there's enough of those books out there. And the message is when that happens the message tends to be almost always a very negative tone, right, it's like now the church one more book, the church telling you what you're not supposed to do. And if you do it, you know, shame on you. I didn't want to write that book, what I wanted to do was, was try to provide a compelling theology of sex and by theology I just, I just mean, trying to make sense of what does God think about sex. And one of the things I started, well, I, in addition to what I've already said, one of the things I tried to point to was, number one, it's about vulnerability, right, it's sex is meant to be more than just the physical act of sexual intercourse. It's about becoming vulnerable as a whole person. And so, you know, sexuality, sharing your sexuality is sort of, it's your sexualities in many ways is the most personal part of your, of your being. But you're not just meant to share that with them, you're meant to share your mind, your heart, you're meant to share, you know, your thoughts and your ideas as well as, you know, a good, a good laugh with someone from time to time. Because then, then it's about sharing the entirety of yourself and then sex becomes just the next logical extension of that in some ways. And so, so that's, that's kind of the first thing and I, I didn't really intend it this way, but that tends to speak mostly to men because men kind of approach it from the physical aspect of things. And they need to be reminded and encouraged to say, look, don't settle for just the physical experience. You need to take the risk, which is sometimes very scary for men, of being vulnerable, right? I'm a man and I have to still learn that frequently, like, okay, my wife doesn't just want to hear, you know, my wife wants to hear more about, you know, what, what stresses me out, what has me, you know, in a good mood. And so it's about building that kind of vulnerability with another person. So that's part one of the book. And then part two, I spend a fair bit of time working through the book, The Song of Songs, which in the, in the biblical, in the Bible is a book that is all about sex. And that's a couple. Right. There's a book in the Bible that's about sex? Well, and that's just it. That there's no other book in the Bible that focuses on just one thing. The only single topic book in the Bible is all about sex. So what does that tell us? And not only so. So a funny little thing there was always as a kid, there was a song that we would sing in school sometimes that that had the law. It was, you know, he brought me to his banqueting table and his banner over me is love. And so, you know, we're all these little fourth grade kids singing this song, having no idea that this song is all about this sexual encounter with this husband and wife. So I look back on that now and I just laugh. But but that illustrates the point that for so many people, the idea of of God and sex just oil and water, those two things don't go together. And if they do, it's like God is okay, you know, he's sort of giving some sanctions towards like, okay, you know, the idea that as C.S. Lewis puts it, the idea that God is a hedonist at heart or a God who delights in pleasure is so far from our way of understanding things. And yet, I mean, the book is the Song of Solomon is a very, very graphic book. If you begin to understand and unpack the imagery there, it is far more graphic than most of us would ever imagine. It is far more graphic than most of us realize. I've preached from the book a couple of times and even then I had to be very careful about which passages that I chose. I think I've kind of narrowed it down. There's about two good sections that are easily preachable and the rest are going to be ones where you're blushing a little bit through it. And so I worked through that and I talk about how actually God intended sex not, I mean, to be far more enjoyable than most of us readily realize. The imagery there, what it suggests, the creativity, the spontaneity, the openness, the sort of the mischievous fun that you might say that's all a part of it is all woven into the Song of Solomon. And so now again, there's where not to be too stereotypical, but there's often where that tends to speak more to wives because at least stereotypically they tend to be they understand the intimacy part. They understand the vulnerability that they get that way more than men. They sometimes have a harder time appreciating that. The old mindset is good girls don't have good sex. It's like that's not what good girls do. And so it challenges both. Now the way that you kind of piece it together is both both men and women are after the same thing. Husband and wives are after the same thing. What they really want is that connection, that deep soul satisfying intimacy. Now often for men, what they begin, the way it works for them is that the sexual experience is the beginning of that. So that sort of when they feel sexually connected to their wife, then that actually opens the door towards being more vulnerable in other areas of life. So when the sex life is good, then OK, it's easier to open up about other things. Now women approach it from just the opposite. For the wife, typically what has to happen is there has to be connection in all of these other aspects of life, emotional, mental, recreational, etc. And only when that connection is made, then that leads into the sexual connection. Now you could look at that and say that's either the worst design in the world or it's the very best design in the world. Because depending on how you're approaching it, ideally it's meant for both sides to really be in the same place. It's meant for both sides to recognize this, both husband and wife to sort of recognize that and then to work within that dynamic. And then it's a recipe for, I mean, it's perfection in a lot of ways, right? Because you have, they're both working towards intimacy from their angle and they're coming together. And then the idea is this really almost transcendent kind of intimacy that is really unmatched by anything in the world. Now it can also go very wrong, right? If you have either a husband or a wife that says, I can't open up and I won't until you open up sexually. And she says, well, I'm not doing that until you open up emotionally. Well, you're at loggerheads. And that is indeed a recipe that many marriages have struggled with. So, you know, in all of that, I'm trying to always go back to say, OK, how does the gospel help us overcome our resistance to vulnerability? Right. How does, you know, so the book is called Naked and Unashamed in the Garden of Eden. That's the very last thing ever said about creation before sin enters the pictures. They were both naked and they felt no shame. The very first thing that said after the fall is that now they are they realize they're naked and they're covered, you know, they're ashamed. So the gospel is so that's that's what happens when sin enters the world. The gospel then becomes the sort of the bridge back. How does the gospel help us to read to realize that because of how God now looks at us in Christ, we have the security that we need to become vulnerable. Right. So to press the point a little further, how does the fact that Jesus on the cross is hung naked and ashamed for us so that we might be clothed in his perfection. Right. So to try to work some of that out and then to say that can help you, you know, husband be vulnerable and not worry and not be insecure. And, you know, how does the fact that the the what we have in Christ allows us and sets us free to find that pleasure and that delight in the garden of song with Solomon takes place in a garden. Right. The imagery is a garden. How does how does the gospel how does what Jesus endured in the in the darkness of the garden of Gethsemane allow us to experience the delight of the garden that he that he created and intended for us. So, so now you don't have to buy the book. That's about it. But if you want to hear a little bit more. I'll put a link down in the is it available on Amazon. You know, I have to check my publisher, just a couple a month or two ago. They ceased publishing they kind of went under. Unfortunately, I think the book is still on Amazon, however. But if you if you I'll I'll I'll post a link as well to I think I know a place or two, you can still get it. I'm hoping to get it's maybe a long shot. I'd like to still get it published by another publisher have someone else pick it up. But we'll see. Is it on Kindle? It is on Kindle. Yeah. Well, then that usually sticks around then because perpetual. It doesn't cost Amazon anything. Exactly. So a little bit of money from it. Good. Good. This this has been great. This has been great, Rob. I really appreciate. I really like how I think you walking through that for I mean, this might sound to some people. This will be well, that's kind of the standard thing. But for a lot of other people, I think that will be very helpful and and something something perhaps a little bit new and insightful for them. Any any questions for me in any of this? Yeah, Paul, maybe I'm just kind of curious. Just tell me a little bit how you're so you've been involved with the with the Jordan Peterson and this whole new sort of serendipitous Internet experience that has cropped up for you over the last couple of years. And I'm just maybe curious for you to tell me how that has shaped your pastoral ministry. How is that just given sort of a new direction or maybe refresh you in all directions? Just how has it made things different for you the last couple of years? Oh, it's made it's made things a lot different because how much how much what's your average attendance on a Sunday morning? About one one seventy maybe. Oh, that's pretty good sized church there. So as ours is, you know, fifty sixty been that way for years. And so to, you know, to be a pastor of a small church, spent a lot of my time helping random people in the neighborhood with random things, doing stuff with the homeless, obviously caring for the small flock, so on and so forth. And then I'd always been very curious about I blogged for years. I'd written, I mean, in the CRC, probably before the videos, the thing I was known for was my my leading church blog where I would blog about synodical things or denominational things active on the CRC pastors Facebook page. So I was a little bit known for that. I'd been involved with whole missions, planting the cluster in Sacramento, some of this kind of thing. But then bumping into what Jordan Peterson was doing and and noticing the the interest, you know, there's there are plenty of empty seats and plenty of churches with people like us who maybe have degrees from a Bible college or a theological degree, even a Ph.D. Maybe even a degree in preaching. And there are these empty seats in your churches. And here I see Jordan Peterson, this professor of psychology and University of Toronto, who is packing out a 600 seat auditorium at 40 bucks a pop, you know, and people traveling all over the world to listen to him and then goes on YouTube. And he had about 300,000 subscribers when I when I sort of found him, maybe a little bit less than that. And so I was wondering what on earth is going on. And I thought, well, maybe he's some crazy evangelical who was kvetching about pronouns and, you know, wanting to talk about the Bible. Then I listened to him as well. That ain't it. You know, I had his biblical series was the kind of stuff that I had known pieces of it. But a lot of the science and the psychology, he put things together in ways that I had never thought of before. And I found it extremely engaging. And I noticed that lots and lots of other people also found it extremely engaging. And I had been doing a lot of reading C.S. Lewis's book Miracles is a favorite book of mine and really trying to sort of piece together this split world that we're in in terms of this world of the Bible, where, you know, when I when I came to the Bible, you know, you know, the Calvin Seminary teaches you Greek and Hebrew. Well, now they're just giving me tools to make mischief by reading the Bible in original languages. And so then you start reading things like Genesis one and you realize, oh, you kind of have a flat earth and you kind of have a that firmament sort of a dome. And we're all talking about, you know, these globes in space moving around the sun. Will that be impact? Listen, I watched the fighting over over science and and Genesis and all of that. So I was very interested in those issues. And I was also I had just because of just my family. I'd never, you know, usually once you get your mid 30s or so, you get that doctor or you get your D man or something. And I'd never done that. But I'd always been very much very much a lifelong learner and just out there investigating things. And so I did a deep dive into Peterson. And I'd also noticed that people don't read books much. Sorry to tell you, Rob, but it's you know, if you sell a few thousand. You know, Kevin Adams just up the street says he says, you know, you know, I don't know if I mean if I even make minimum wage in terms of the time that I pour into a book, sell a few thousand copies and that's sort of it. And I thought people they listen to podcasts and they watch videos much more than they do that. So maybe I'll play around with YouTube. And so then, you know, I was doing the Freddie and Paul show and I'd done a couple of videos connected with the CRC. And I was thinking about C.S. Lewis and I did some early videos on that. And then I was really interested in this Jordan Peterson stuff. So I thought I'll make a video. We'll see what happens. And then that sort of takes off. And then and then my friend Rick shows up the next Sunday and gives me this poster and says, you know, I've never been to church before in my life, but I saw you on YouTube and you're right here in Sacramento. So here I am. Okay. And so and then more people came and said we should do a meetup. And John Vendoc says, oh, you should definitely do a meetup. It's like, all right. All right. So paid my 80 bucks to meetup.com for six months and did a meetup. And, you know, a dozen people show up and, you know, we had run VBS church fairs. I mean, all the usual church stuff and never anything from that stuff. And here I've got a dozen people showing up in my church and they're not like, you know, where's the hot dogs? Or can you can I get free babysitting for my kid for a week? And I don't care if you teach him about the Bible. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You know, plus Sacramento's like Portland, you know, it's on the left coast. So little suspicion about church. And then I have all these people in my church and they want to talk about Jordan Peterson. They want to talk about the Bible. They want to talk about science and faith and all of this stuff. And it's like. Well, this is the greatest thing that ever happened because it longed for these conversations and they don't happen. And and you try and get into them and, you know, pastors try all these things to have these conversations. The church planters were, you know, trying to interview people. And, you know, that was kind of a standard way to sort of plant a church. And here I've got people now coming to me and I've got so many people coming to me. I don't have time to talk to them all. And it's like. Well, this is crazy, but good because, oh, you want to talk about the Bible. I want to talk about the Bible and we're going to have disagreements. But yeah, that's normal. People disagree. People in church disagree. So let's talk. And then so I'm wondering, Paul, if I might just jump in on that. That suggests two things to me that I can think of. First of all, there's been a huge gap between what we might call the world outside of the church and the church. Right. Because you're talking about all these people paying 40 bucks a pop, fill an auditorium to hear Jordan Peterson. Somehow they're and they're hearing a lot of things that you you might hear in a church. It's not exactly the same. But but. Somehow the church is is missing out on that. Somehow there's this gap between what people in the church are thinking that the world wants and what the world really wants. And then the other thing is that kind of related to that, it suggests a. In many places, they'd almost a dumbing down. Right. Right. Because I think for a long time, the mindset was, you know what, if people are going to come to faith, don't bore them with theology, don't go, you know, don't have sermons that are real hard to complex. And just, you know, we call them felt needs in in church language, right. Just preach to what people think they want to hear. And in some places that may be worked. But I think on the other hand, what we've gotten is this growing divergence where all these people have got the sense that Christianity is really unintellectual. And therefore, they're out in the world and they're still hungering for something. And along comes some guy who's really smart and really thoughtful. And they want to hear every word of it. So I'm wondering if you think that's accurate or. That's exactly right. Because the truth is, you know, so sometimes pastors are kind of watching this go on and they're telling me, well, I don't know if I know enough about Jordan Peterson. I'd say, well, you know, yeah, maybe you can watch some videos. But what you really need to do is probably earn a lot, learn a whole lot more about Western civilization and the history of philosophy and science. And no, it's not that you have to dump things down. You need to know a lot more. And so in the last two years, so I've met Jordan Peterson a couple of times and we have a we have a conversation that we did online. But, you know, one of the things that this has opened up for me, this has been the most intense. This has been the most intense learning experience of my life. Suddenly, I've got people asking me questions about Jung and Nietzsche and and Kant. And so and so it's like, holy cow, I've got to I've got to step everything up. And and especially when you're out there on YouTube, yeah, I get a lot of stuff wrong. Well, people call me on in the comments section, but I read the comments. You know, I was when I started this, it was kind of like I almost didn't know what to do with the Freddie and Paul show because I was worried they're going to be nasty comments or something there. So when you start, it's kind of like, you know, do I dare look at the comments? But the comments fill up with gracious, intelligent, well-educated people. And I almost always learn more from the comments than, you know, than I would have imagined. And and so then people are kind of and then and then I start having conversations with people. And so, no, you're exactly right. We imagine that people out there were sort of dumb. It's far from the case from it. Well, and so the other kind of related to that, it just occurred to me that probably seventy five years ago when when say my immigrant grandparents are living in Edmonton, you know, they're working hardworking people blue collar because they're trying to make a living in the new country. They're trying to, you know, figure out this new culture that they're now a part of. The minister was in many cases the educated one of the bunch. He's the one that had gone to seminary and to college and he's the one with the decree with the degree. So he's like the resident expert, not just in theology, but probably in a lot of other things because he's the educated one. Well, in some ways we've come in some ways full circle and other ways not because the demand now, I think, like you're saying, is the minister has to be at least not an expert in everything, but has to be familiar with all of these other fields, but has to also know how to then integrate them with faith because that's now it's not that the people that they're with are uneducated. It's just the opposite. They're highly educated. And if they have a minister or a church that is dumbed down, well, then, you know, it's like, why would you why would you believe in something like that? And so that was one of the things that I've really enjoyed talking with the video I made with Chris. We've had a lot more conversations over text and that and he's asked a really thoughtful and really good questions that yeah, then it's like you say it's like, I've got to go back and think about that a bit because I'm not, you know, before I might have just spouted something off, say from the pulpit. And it's, you know, I would have even given a second thought to it. And so now it's not that necessarily my conviction will change, but I'm also in my mind hearing, okay, how was a guy like Chris going to hear this? And am I making claims that I can't support in any way? And so it forces me to integrate my faith and to try to have my worldview engage with a lot of different other areas. And I don't think, you know, in terms of our tradition in the in the Dutch Reformed Christian Reformed Church, this isn't new for us. I mean, I went to Calvin College, but this this kind of thing was, you know, a demand, you know, not to take easy outs of various questions, premature dismissals of challenges. And, you know, and then, you know, after Jordan Peterson came up this, you know, what Eric Weinstein called the intellectual dark web and a facet of that was being open to the influence of challenging questions. And I think one of the things that has impacted people most about what I've done is that people are surprised that I open myself up to the challenges of others. Now, that tends to scare and frustrate some of the Christians in my audience. And so it's it's almost it's almost often the case that I sort of have to I get more heat from the Christian side than I do from the non Christian side. But I'll take that heat. I mean, that's that's what happened to Jesus. Right. Right. And Paul, right. And so one of my one of my favorite New Testament stories is a story that's found in the Book of Acts in Chapter 17. And you get the Apostle Paul, who's on this essentially it's a missionary preaching trip, but he's got a little spare time. So he's wandering through the city of Athens. And I was very fortunate last fall, actually, to to go there. And so the story kind of came alive for me. But so he is walking through the marketplace, which is I guess the best way I can describe it is a little bit like what Facebook would be like if you got all the people off the computer and in one place where you're all discussing different ideas and you go to one booth and you talk about stoicism and you go to the next booth and you're talking to the Epicureans and and so on and so forth. And so Paul is going through one of the things that he does to try to convince his his audience is he quotes their own poets to them. Right. He's able, in other words, to quote from Episcetus, I think was the poet, but I could be wrong on it. But the point being is that Paul is able to borrow. Well, he's able to draw on the common cultural currency in order to say, OK, this is what the culture is about. But let me show you how the gospel answers some of those longings. And I think, you know, so in other words, he doesn't come right out and say you bunch of pagans, you know, you dumb, stupid people. Just you just need to believe. Give up on all this Greek philosophy. Come be a Christian. He actually engages the culture in a way that is knowledgeable of the culture and in a way that responds to it. And that's that's one of the stories that I find very enlightening or maybe exemplary for how Christians ought to engage in our in our world today. Well, one of the things that started up where we started was the meetups. And, you know, if you the meetups are in some ways, you know, the Mars Hill Market, because anything can walk through that door. People have all kinds of positions. Usually Christians, at least at my meetup, Christians are in a minority. Most of the people most of the people do not go to church or are skeptics or avowed atheists or I mean, they're all over the map. And we then wind up spending hours together just talking. And, you know, we call it a Jordan Peterson meetup, but we'll go months without talking hardly any Jordan Peterson, just because we'll talk about it. Unless it's overtly, partisan Lee political that we kind of push that to the side because that usually doesn't go well. But and almost always the conversations have to do about religion or philosophy or social issues or something like this. And, you know, again, so the you know what this had done has done on the local level just completely surprised me. So a number of the people who are who, you know, so one or two of the people from our meetup, you know, come to Living Stones. So people are like, well, this is some grand, you know, church grow thing. No, it's not that, you know, long term. Who knows? But some of the times the people in church are like, well, why? Well, they'll come on Sunday night to the meetup. Why won't they come on Sunday morning to the service? And I understand. But a lot of the church people won't understand. But at the same time as the pastor, it's like the the rich opportunity to build relationships and, you know, share life with this community. This is this is something that is invaluable and something the church needs to do. John Van Donk, who who you know, John, you know, I John came up. He's got family up here. So we'll often come up and then we'll do breakfast. And he said and he gave me the words for it. He said, you know, this is this is outer court ministry. You know, I had the court of the Gentiles in the temple, which was sort of a. And so the conversation I did yesterday with with Rod and John and Job, you know, the church needs to have a space where anyone who is willing to just, you know, be a person of goodwill and have a give and take. I'm not I'm not trying to turn anybody into any prospects. Nobody wants to be somebody else's prospect. But let's let's sit together down together and talk. And where in where right now in our culture can you sit down and have honest, meaningful, respectful, productive conversation across these different lines? Yeah, tremendous hunger for it. That's that's exactly right. And I think I think you, you know, so much of our culture and that's what I've been trying to do in the conversation that I'm starting to have is to to to model respectful conversation because Christians, especially it's not just Christians, but we sort of sometimes get tagged with that reputation that we don't do it well at all. And so how do we show good listening and even honoring our our our non believing friends and neighbors and family members by giving them a space where we can honestly engage their their ideas and their point of view. And I think you know, you said it well, because so after the church has done these things, but they're almost it's almost a bait and switch kind of thing. We're going to do this. But our ultimate goal is to hook you in the door. Now, maybe that happens, but we have to be so careful that we don't measure the results of it by how many people what's your conversion rate, right? How many people could you make the sale with? You know, but that's incredibly liberating to when you when you get away from that as the the standard of measurement, you know, what's this all about? Well, let's try to get people in the door. Forget that. Let that all go aside. Go and have an honest, intellectually stimulating conversation. And the fact that there are so many people that are are open to doing this, I think says something right again. There's a mentioned the kinds of good conversation. There's a dearth of that today. You know, you read Facebook in the comments so quickly devolve into name calling. And it's like, yeah, some people do that. But there's a lot of people left that want to have thought provoking conversations and not be condemned outright just because they disagree with you. Right. If they change their mind, fine. But you people, I think, want to want to have the chance to just have the conversation, a meaningful conversation. And we have, you know, some of our heroes, you know, C.S. Lewis is a hero in, you know, for many of us. We read his books just amazed that someone could be this well educated, this thoughtful. And yet C.S. Lewis had all sorts of outlying positions that, you know, C.S. Lewis would have trouble being ordained in the Christian Reformed Church. But, you know, Lewis in many ways was a model because he engaged in these conversations. And, you know, one of the key things I think, and this sounds scary for professing, confessing Christians, but we have to be open. We have to be we have to open ourselves to the influence of those we're having conversations with. And and this sounds all no, no, no, we can't do that. But that then gets sort of into this sort of weird conservative dynamic where we're going to be conservatives. But you're being conservatives looking at this thing over here and you're not realizing all the other ways you're changing by the things you're not looking at. And so I would argue that actually we are always being moved by the forces around us. And people who have an experience of immigration in in remembered time should understand that because, oh, the Netherlands. Well, 1951 when you left it and then you ask anyone who left the Netherlands in 1951, what do you think of it today? Oh, you know, so we're all moved by our environment. Why don't we why don't we up our game a little bit and open ourselves? And actually, I think this is quite frankly the work of the gospel because, you know, we have we have the Bible. But we're supposed to figure out, OK, how does that the job of a preacher is as as stop said, John Stott said, connecting two worlds. And I think, frankly, many churches are lazy in they're not connecting at all. And well, no, I and I think that's spot on. And I think I think what you see is again, this is across broad Christian communities. You get either the preachers who spend all their time on the one side of the river and they can tell you, you know, the verb tenses and the cultural nuances and the, you know, all kinds of in depth information about a particular text. And so you come away from a sermon. Your mind has been filled with knowledge, but there's been no crossover to the other side by the same token. Then you get people who are on the other side of the bridge all the time. Right. And they're they talk about contemporary issues and they talk about, you know, whether it's be social justice or whether it be immigration, whether it be racial equality, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And the Bible gets tossed in there a little bit because it has to sound a little spiritual. But really, they haven't crossed over the bridge either. They've just spent all their time in the culture. And so there's a tension there and there's a there's a challenge. But like you say, it's upping the game. It's in some ways it makes the work of the preacher more difficult. But it's the it's the essence of what the gospel is. How does that how does that proclamation of what God has done work its way out in 21st century America, Canada, Netherlands, wherever else. And to do that well requires that you've got you know, you sort of are in both worlds, that you know how both worlds operate in the underlying worldview assumptions and and how to how to affirm some things that are good. You know, again, to use an example from my area, I can affirm the desire for social justice in the sense that my neighbors here in Oregon care deeply about social issues. And so I can affirm that and I can say there this points to a longing in your heart for something better. But then I can also challenge that and say, so how do you you know, what are the limitations of human ability to fix these problems? Right. Why why the anger? Why such bitterness? Because of this and and and is this is your position on this issue making you a hardened and arrogant person? And then how does the gospel actually offer a different approach? And, you know, so you have those conversations and you sort of try to find out how do those two pieces fit together? So I for me, this has been I'm sure there are I might share this on the CRC pastors Facebook page. And I know that I deeply suspect very few people have had the courage to come out and tell me I'm, you know, I'm doing wrong. And YouTube comments, some of them, but at least CRC pastors and colleagues. But I know some people are deeply concerned because, you know, in terms of, you know, I was such a nice, you know, I went at one point. So my grandfather was a CRC minister. My father was a CRC minister. My father was at Senate once and and someone turned to my father and said, Stan, your father was just such a good conservative man. What happened to you? And, you know, because my father was in Patterson with with, you know, all of the racial issues that were happening and he was having to change and adjust and evolve and work on all of those issues. Well, I'm doing the same thing. And I've got I've got just as much courage and patience talking to atheists as I do talking to Christian reform people that might look at me and say, Vanderclay, this this you should be. Well, I should be what? Let's talk about what you think I should be. And, you know, some of the irony, I didn't know your father. And so I could be wrong on this. But I wonder if, you know, today if someone were to say to your father, you know, or to you, you know, Paul, you know, your father used to be such a, you know, traditional kind of guy. What happened to you? Right. Your father was so progressive. What happened to you? Which is hilarious to me. But but you know, so my I'll just touch on this real briefly. I think it's because I think it's somewhat pertinent here. My approach has always been that I want to keep people guessing in terms of where do I fit on the spectrum of real conservative or real liberal. There are some people that in my church, I think, would be really concerned because I'm probably way more progressive than they would like on theological issues, maybe or church issues of that sort of thing. But then I think there are others that would look at me and say, you know what, you're just not you're not you're not progressive enough. You know, you're one of these more conservative. So I in other words, to try to because I think that's the way the gospel works itself out. To some, you're going to look really way too conservative. And to others, you're going to look like one of those crazy liberals. And, you know, I think the gospel is such that it doesn't fit into those categories. And so anyways, I think I keep people guessing fairly well. Maybe not as well as I think, but that's probably a good thing. Yeah. So that's so it's been it's been it's been tremendously rewarding, fruitful ministry. And I, you know, where's this going? I don't know. I didn't plan on any of this. But where, you know, I try to, you know, I I make it up as I go along and I try to have conversations with people that stretch me. And I've had opportunity to talk to some very interesting, interesting people across the spectrum. And but again, you know, Jesus, you know, Jesus was killed because he didn't, you know, uphold the the Jewish culture war like the Pharisees and the zealots. He wasn't he wasn't against the Romans sufficiently. He didn't have that kind of zealotry like the Pharisees and the zealots wanted. But but he also was a little too, you know, pilot was willing to give him a pass. But if pilot had any deeper understanding of just how unsettling Jesus was going to be to the future of the Roman Empire, you know, but that's that's the nature of Christianity that it's like, well, you kind of want to shut Jesus up because he doesn't seem to be upholding your side. But killing him actually makes it worse. And somehow right in that mixture, you see the power of God that either way you do it with him, he's going to win. So what does that mean for you? Well, you know, I just I appreciate you doing this. I mean, the entire YouTube ministry, I think, is really taking, like you said earlier, it's taking the gospel into the marketplace and it's engaging people in a very winsome and compelling way. And and it's a good example for, you know, for someone like me that's trying to find a way into this. I could, you know, say, well, let's look at how Paul has done it and, you know, see, we won't call you the Apostle Paul yet. I encourage people just just try something, you know, and I was really glad to see you did that video conversation with your friend. And I, you know, I you don't know how to I didn't know how to do any of this. You just try it. And maybe. But you don't know. So Freddie comes to me one day and says, says, Paul, why don't you and me do a TV show? I'm thinking. So it's and he was kind of thinking because he'd go on public access TV and I was thinking, I'm not going down there and doing public access TV. I, you know, the scheduling and everything. I said, I'll tell you what, here's my cell phone. We'll do a little we'll do a little variety show. You can rap. We'll talk about football. Well, you know, we'll just talk about whatever five to seven minutes and I'll post it on on YouTube. And I kind of thought nobody's going to watch this show. Now, Freddie's all you see, man, three hundred views. This video's getting even more. But so, you know, with Freddie, it's all tell Freddie sometimes, Freddie, this whole video thing, you, you know, you're you're partly responsible for getting me on YouTube. And I've got other people that say I would never have watched your channel if I didn't see you talking to Freddie because that shows me, you know, you're a pastor in real life and you deal with people who do not have easy lives. And I think this is part of what we as pastors need to basically need to bear witness to that. In fact, this stuff scales that. OK, so someone's got a lot of money or someone's got a terrific education. You know what? Right. Not a lot of difference between us. And we might have be having different conversations. But and the joy of being a pastor is to is to minister to homeless people and minister to Ph.D. to to be in the to be outside the shopping cart and the cardboard bed of one person and be sitting in the fine living room of another. There's, you know, absolutely. What a life. What a life. You couldn't have said it better. That's exactly right. That's exactly right. Well, thank you so much for this, Rob. And I'll end the video and I'll end the recording and thank you, Paul. Do a little postmortem and I'll put if there's any links you want me to add, email them to me and the link to your new channel. You got one video, you know, got more to come. More to come. Yeah. Some people might some people might be interested in talking to you. And I don't know if you've logged down to the Discord server. We are just, you know, find a way we'll find a way that people get in touch with you if they want to. Yeah, that sounds great. That sounds great. All right. Thanks again. Oh, my pleasure. This has been fun.