https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DsBcM9--v2Q

 Hi, this is Paul. Some of the videos I've done this week on the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris debates have generated some interesting conversation. This is an email I got from one of my Sacramento Meetup members who described himself when he first came to the Meetup as a used-to-be-a-die-hard Sam Harris fan and what he wrote me I thought was very insightful. He said, imagine he watched the first of the two videos, the introduction one that I did on the last few minutes of it. I just posted the other one last night. Sam Harris is saying that religion is often misses the mark it aims for, or the entire target. I think that's right. That's what Sam Harris is saying. Religion doesn't work. It's an obsolete technology. Sam is interpreting Jordan Peterson as saying religion hits a bullseye and I think that's right and Jordan Peterson's take on religion is clearly more nuanced. Jordan Peterson is saying that religion gives us a vision of the target and a description of how to hit it. Sam responds by saying that the act of shooting a bow can be done in any direction and an individual can shoot a bow perfectly or approaching perfectly without having a target and will naturally tend towards picking a spot that is the most valuable target. In a video I'm about to play a little bit more of, someone basically charges Harris with relativism, something that Harris denies at the beginning of the conversation, basically by saying that it's well-being, it's our internal sense of well-being that is our guide as to what an appropriate target is. Sam Harris wants to say, well there's some universals under that sense of well-being and a target and this person and this other person at the meetup are saying, yeah but there's a certain amount of arbitrary to Sam Harris's targeting because obviously because individuals have have different targets. Brett plus Peterson understand that even though the placement size and color of the target may be arbitrary, I believe that Brett thinks it's arbitrary, Jordan Peterson I'm less sure, it's functional in a way of grouping our aims together and providing evolutionary advantages regardless of hitting the target actually has cosmic significance or not and I think these comments are very very helpful and very astute. What does Sam Harris say he wants? To reduce or eliminate religious dogma from world influence, that's obvious. B, to reproduce the positive effects of religious practice without religious dogma. That's exactly what Sam Harris is saying. Now this person goes on to say, well what does Sam Harris really want? The freedom to continue criticizing religion, especially religions that interfere legislatively or violently with secular society, particularly Islam at this point of time, but Christianity is safer. D, to continue a career where he's at the top of a hierarchy. I'll try not to see that as too much cynicism. That's part of that motivation we all have. We all want to feed our families and he's got a... Sam Harris has built for himself a delightful career being a critic of Christianity. E, to pursue C and D by exploring A and B. So again I told my friend I got his permission to share this to share this via YouTube and I thought his comments were quite astute. Now I have to apologize to all of you commenters. I haven't been terribly active in the comment section in my videos. I've just been crazy busy and so forgive me. I hope you're having a good conversation. I try and peek in every day but I don't have a lot of space to leave a lot of comments and I'm mostly skimming so I'm sorry about that. Now someone else sent me this video. I didn't put the link in. Someone else sent me this video this morning and I'll just pause here and I'll queue it up. Now I have never watched any of this guy's videos before and I don't know where he stands on politics or anything else but a friend of mine sent me this video and this guy goes in full-blown rant mode about Sam Harris in the Dublin Exchange. I'm not going to get into specifics just yet but I will say that the entire thing could have been a lot more productive and the reason that it was not productive was because you guessed it Sam Harris. I don't believe Sam Harris should be called upon by any other intellectuals to do so. I don't believe that Sam Harris should be called upon by any other intellectuals to do so. I don't believe that I don't believe Sam Harris should be called upon by any other intellectual to ever debate about religion ever again. He does not engage. Sam Harris just does one thing over and over and over and over again. He says no. This was exactly my impression after a dozen times listening through Vancouver. Peterson will propose an idea and Sam Harris will say no. Sometimes Sam Harris will actually contradict the thing that Jordan Peterson said. He'll come up with some quickly manifested idea about why he doesn't like it and he'll express it in the most intellectually impressive way that he can muster. But even when he doesn't have a contradiction Sam Harris will simply dismiss what Jordan Peterson is saying and then slap out some random superficial criticism of religion and worse still he'll present this as if it's a substantive rebuttal. He's very good at public speaking at presenting ideas. He knows how to express himself so that it sounds like what he's saying is hyper intellectual, irrefutably true and seriously profound. Sam Harris could read the ingredients on a chewing gum wrapper and make it sound as though he were unlocking the secrets of the universe. But this is of course rhetorical trickery. It's illusory. Not always. Sometimes Sam Harris has a valid substantive point. It's the fact that even when he doesn't that he tries to pretend that he does that's what really annoys me. It shows again that though he may have the intellect to explore these ideas honestly with Peterson his intent is merely to win the debate to prove his preconceptions true. Jordan Peterson is clearly coming to this with the premise we don't know what the truth is exactly. We may think we know but we don't really have this all figured out. So let's start at the beginning. Let's begin by exploring fundamental ideas. What is good? What is bad? What are facts? What's the nature of reality? From there they can explore ideas like is God real? Would a secular code of ethics be effective? What motivations might we introduce to encourage goodness in all mankind? But Harris is not coming to this with the same premise. He's not assuming we don't know. Sam Harris is coming to this with the idea I do know what the truth is exactly. I do have this all figured out. We don't have to start at the beginning with fundamental ideas. We could just jump to the end because I can already tell you that religion has no value. Secular ethics would be better and that's it. Sam Harris is fixed on the idea that he's absolutely right on every issue all the time. Sam Harris's worldview appears to be this. Religion is stupid and everybody who doesn't think exactly like me is stupid and that seems to be it. He hasn't actually designed a secular ethic that might work or an ethical system. He acknowledges in the previous debate that his concept of the moral landscape is essentially relativistic ethics. Relativistic ethics means whatever people think is right is right. What that boils down to is that there are no actual ethics. People just do what they want. This is not a new idea. It's typical atheistic relative morality. It's just packaged in an intellectual way by Sam Harris. There doesn't seem to be anything about Sam Harris's ideas that can actually benefit the world in any new way that I can see. If Sam Harris had simply allowed himself to go down some of the roads that Jordan Peterson had invited him along, we may have seen a productive debate. So I think this guy makes a good point that Sam Harris, he just plays, he just plays, he's just the party of no during these debates and that was my point in terms of the first 20 minutes of so or Vancouver One. Peterson is building his bridge. He's constructing his blocks. He's putting things together and then when we hit Jane Goodall, now the conversation is going to start to slide and Sam Harris is just going to revert even some of those things he conceded in the first few minutes and Brett Weinstein said, you know, later on I'm gonna keep you from deviating to the mean. Well, there's Sam Harris just keeps playing his records again. And so another person sent this into me and said, you know, but don't forget about what Peugeot said in terms of Peterson's motivation to talk to Sam Harris. Let's see if I put this link in. And I had, this was in the back of my mind and then when the person reminded me of it, I thought, oh yeah, that's right. Because why was Peterson so interested in talking to Harris? Well, this is Peugeot's take. It's frightening how they're not, they don't have wisdom to to kind of understand the propositions that they're making this idea of putting, you know, let's say electronic devices in the brain to increase people's thinking and Sam Harris is for actually is for some of that stuff. And so it's like they, they don't seem to understand the basic, the basic wisdom of humanity that how that would be problematic. They don't seem to be able to see what that is. But I think it's interesting. It's been really interesting at first, you know, when Jordan was trying to kind of engage with Sam Harris, I didn't totally understand why he was he was so adamant about doing so because Jordan really did want to have this discussion with him. I was actually at Jordan's house at the second discussion that Jordan had with Sam Harris. You know, the first one was a horrible one, the two hour like train wreck. The second one wasn't so bad. And I was actually at his house and we went over like the first time there's debate with his son and Jordan, we watched, we like, we like listened to the whole thing. Then we kind of analyze it. Where did it go wrong and everything. So Jordan was really is really adamant about Sam. And I kept wondering why him like why him and I think I know what it is. I think I think because there is something in Sam Harris, which represents a beginning of a transition. It's there in him because of all the new atheist types, he he has had spiritual experiences now and he can't discount them. Like you can't pretend like those are meaningless. He knows how meaningful they are. And and because of that, he he does have a desire to recover something of spiritual tradition. It's just that he still has like it's like he's kind of has a one foot in two worlds. And he's trying to figure it out. It's as if Jordan also has his foot in two worlds, right? Jordan isn't totally on the religious side or on the scientific side. It's just that so they both have their foot in two worlds. It's just that maybe one is pulling more on one side and the other is kind of pulling more on the other. One is saying there is value. There's more value than you think in the religious aspect. And the other is saying, there's very little value in the religious thing. The only thing that's that's worthy is the discussions about consciousness and and, you know, especially Eastern or mystical experiences, like that's all that matters. And so I think that that's why I think that that's why the discussion has been so engaging for people. People have been so wanting to to follow it because I think people are trying to figure that out. They're trying to to understand how because every I think most people do have an intuitive sense that there's more like there's an intuitive sense that there's something about our being in the world which has meaning, which is and you have to actually work really hard to to destroy that to just be a and most people who do that they they actually are deluding themselves because they say that they're just monkeys, you know, and they're just a bunch of monkeys who are saying things. But if you pay attention just a little while to what they're saying, you realize that it's not true. They have hierarchies of values. They have spirits to which they pray. They don't even know that they're praying to to certain God but they're there at the altar of certain gods and they're there there there there sometimes even possessed by those spirits, you know. And so so I know so that's why I think it's been so interesting for people to to follow this because I think that's the discussion that people want to hear now because we it's like we have we're in a moment where we have a loss of meaning. We everybody's experiencing it like there's a there's a kind of chaos of meaning a chaos of identity a sense that things are crumbling or things or we're not connected anymore together. We live in our little suburban homes. We don't know our neighbors. We don't have community. We don't so so all of that is is real and people are looking for solutions to that and the discussion between Jordan Sam is taking people just like one little step at a time towards figuring out what that means even in terms of translating it in in a way that people who are kind of scientifically minded could understand. One of the things I was thinking about listening to Joe talk about this is a few days ago I listened to the Star Wars The Last the Last Plinket review and one of the things that if you've ever seen Mr. Plinket's Star Wars reviews you'll know that you know you know the the shtick that that is that are his reviews but one of the points that he makes again and again in that last review is you might not have noticed it but your brain saw it. You might not have noticed it but your brain saw it. Every time I heard him say that he said it like two or three times in the middle of the review I thought no that's right and and a lot of that is what's going on with this stuff with Jordan Peterson and and these other individuals. Now I some of you this morning who follow me on Twitter know that I engaged in last night this morning engaged in a rather long conversation with with Esther O'Reilly and I can't forget Luke Thompson's name okay because I forgot his name last time Esther O'Reilly and Luke Thompson on Twitter on on Sam Harris and Esther last night sent me a series of tweets and saying basically this I think I think I give Sam Harris Sam more credit than Paul does I thought well that's interesting because if you know anything about Esther Esther's a pretty a pretty hardcore evangelical apologist and she's a hardcore evangelical apologist that's that's who she is and so she's giving Sam Harris more credit than I am I'm a little surprised by that yes of course materialism is false and no materialist act likes and no materialist acts like one but then again Peterson is essentially still a naturalist himself Peterson is not really giving clear or tangible answers to the ultimate questions of life for people Harris thinks religious answers suck but his point is at least they try let's face it Peterson is dodging the God question as all the monotheistic religions define God it's kind of it it kind of matters if that kind of God actually exists but he thinks that we've been there and done that so he wants to move on Harris is trying to clarify they are on the same Harris is trying to clarify they are on the same page yes and no to that tweet I think Harris is trying to clarify that Peterson and he are on the same page on this I look at Peterson more as an open agnostic I don't think Peterson is settled on the ontology question on the God question or even on the nature of the resurrection resurrection question I there's always been a lot of conversation about Peterson being duplicitous now duplicity is a standard part of our human depravity speaking as a Calvinist so of course Peterson has some duplicity within him but I have no status and there's no reason Peterson would lie to me in terms of his desire to read NT Wright's book on the resurrection and continue pursuing this Peterson continuing I think mr. Reagan has it right Peterson is on a journey of discovery he's been on this his whole life this is part of who he is is he biased is he imperfect obviously he's a human being but this is who Peterson is and I think he's I think he is being absolutely sincere when he gives us the answers that he's given us Esther continues well they're not exactly on the same page Peterson clearly does think theism has been more likely to put to bed by a Peterson clearly does think theism has been most likely put to get by atheistic arguments I'm not so sure of that Esther plus he doesn't see his value in a historic incarnation resurrection I'm not so sure of that either Esther he thinks man can save himself I think that's I think that's deep in his I think that's deep in his quote-unquote gospel there is a there it is lacking grace and almost all of the Christian the better Christian critics of Peterson have noted that and that's exactly what I meant by there's a stoicism in Peterson's in Peterson's gospel he is pulling the cross up the hill to get up the hill to the city of God but I'm gonna get into the city of God I'm always teasing because I it's new stuff happens and I can't complete anything it's my ADHD sorry about that but we will talk about Augustine and Plato at some point he thinks man can save himself he's he's phlegmatic about the afterlife okay in all those respects there is nothing to distinguish him from Peterson which is Harris's point and again I disagree and then I I was a little bit of a snark and I I quoted back Esther's own post to her but then another friend I won't say his name I've actually done a conversation with him another friend wrote to me this morning and I'll pick up the first and the last point that I'll pick up the middle point later in this video I've been watching the debates and your commentary on them and there's one thing I can't figure out why can't Sam Harris accept the view Peterson is putting forward now this gets into my friend in the meetups point he says hey Sam Harris has made a career of refusing this point he is not going to give up his career now and that's a valid point hierarchies bind and blind okay and I'm I'm riffing I'm riffing Jonathan I'm riffing Jonathan Haidt in this hierarchies bind and blind and Sam Harris is at a point on a hierarchy that it would be terribly difficult for him to change his mind and I don't think he's been given sufficient reason to change his mind with his with evidentialism in that way in what way is Peterson's world really incompatible with Harris's that's where I'm gonna go next what is it about Peterson's worldview that Sam's worldview can't integrate and this is where I will push back on Esther and maybe one of these days Esther and I will do an online interview we'll see we'll see what Esther is in for but because she and I have she and I have spoken offline and then she's she's terribly fun to talk to but but okay so how do Peterson and Harris really differ so I differ with with Esther on that what separations Peterson from Harris Sam Harris is allergic to what he calls religion and and one thing I said to someone is I watch Sam Harris and I think who has done what to you I mean this you should sit down with a smart psychologist like like Jordan Peterson and and maybe do some psychotherapy because gosh you're reactive on this stuff you need to did who hurt you Sam that's something who hurt you that's that's my if I if Sam Harris were to come into my office and say Paul I can't take it anymore I've been living a lie and I want to believe in God and I've been watching Jordan Peterson and he's been you know he's been changing my mind but I can't admit it otherwise I'll lose my fan base and I'll lose my income I don't know how much Sam makes a year I'll lose my credibility help me and I would probably sit down I'd say Sam who hurt you what what what what religious thing happened to you now maybe maybe nothing maybe maybe there is no pastoral or psychological reason for this but boy he's reactive and so he's reactive to dogma believing things with insufficient evidentialism is is front and center and anything that appeals to the supernatural and again supernatural is a word natural supernatural are words that fudge getting some feedback in my own in my own years that's a bad sign this this way to set up the world with natural and supernatural something that CS Lewis was was poking at 60 70 years ago and many people have been poking at it this this implicit construction this is a Jordan Peterson keeps talking about an a priori fill an a priori structure well this is part of the structure that Sam Harris is bringing to the conversation and he can't get rid of it and this is the line between those Peterson a la Jung and others it's it's much less wobbly and this is this is in a sense where Esther O'Reilly and Sam Harris are over there saying these are these are boxed sets natural supernatural and and I think Lewis isn't really quite there and and certainly Peterson and Jung go in a different direction Peterson is not allergic to these things he has doubts about the supernatural he's an open agnostic but he sees myth as vital data to help us orient ourselves and and what I mean by that again if you listen to if you listen to Peterson how can we orient ourselves in the world how do we know what's good how do we know what's right just as mr. Reagan said Peterson is feeling his way through this and either he's looking to convert Sam Harris as Peterson's been converting a lot of Sam Harris fans or he's looking to find a a helpful conversational partner in Sam Harris and I think after these I don't know if Peterson thinks he has found a helpful conversational partner in Sam Harris or not because I don't think Sam Harris was terribly helpful so and you can hear this in Peterson's Vancouver summary we all living things have been developing values from facts over the last 3.5 billion years in a context of Darwinian trial and error and and what we've done these these values that we have derived in fact now we one has to be careful who we means in that story because Peterson I was I was listening to this morning I was listening to the rebel wisdom Akira the Don Jordan Green Greenwald I was listening that conversation very interesting conversation very interesting conversation in terms of wholesomeness as the new as the new punk very interesting conversation and seeing two two men younger than myself fully inhabit a religious universe where comic book superheroes are demigods of sorts and we're going to get into that a little bit later in this conversation too when we get into soccer so so what Peterson says is that over the last 3.5 million years through the process of watching who survives through the process of watching who sacrifices and how they flourish through the process of watching how what each other does we have developed and and in fact we have developed structures within us that are far greater than each of us individually and and these structures bring values to facts and in other words if you were to take a human being see you can't there is no clean room human being there is no clean room in the world every no clean room is epistemologically metaphorically or metaphysically clean it's all constructed okay and so we've got all these structures and in a sense Sam Harris wants to wave his hand and say we're just gonna get rid of religion and Peterson is saying you're not gonna get into religion all of life is religious it's built into ourselves it's been built into our values it's built into all of this stuff it is not going away you're being simple-minded Sam and so Jordan what is looking for a play partner to help him build these blocks and Sam Harris keeps saying nah it's a stupid project because he's angry about religion it'd be like I remember my kids were playing Monopoly once with a neighborhood kid and the kid the kid who did it is a great guy but yeah remember when you were a kid and you're playing a game and the game isn't going well and there's that one kid in the neighborhood maybe you were that kid who gets frustrated with the game takes the board and flips it in the air so the game is over I remember watching one of the neighborhood kids do that and so Sam Harris is is like playing this game and every time the shoe lands on boardwalk Sam Harris says I hate shoes I don't like shoes I can't stand shoes and he flips the board over and Peterson puts the board straight and sets it all up like a good psychologist and he's gonna be patient with Sam and say okay Sam let's go back and work on this some more Sam will flip the board again at some point Peterson's gonna get tired of Sam flipping the board and this is what mr. Reagan is tired of he's tired of Sam flipping the board because I don't think Sam is I don't think Sam is engaging in the game to try to construct new knowledge Sam's mind is set and as my friend from the meetup says this is Sam's job he's not gonna change so Peterson says the Bible and other myths are are the record of that process and we dismiss them at our peril but now how do we inhabit and appropriate and and actually work on this story and see my argument has been that what actually happens in religious communities are that we work on this now if we say the terms we're using now tend to be secular terms but if you listen to again the Akira the Don and the Jordan Green Greenwald Green Hall I should see this is what happens when I get ideas and I haven't made a slide for it they're having a religious conversation religious communities have been working through these conversations but in terms that are religious and this is why Peterson at the Anne Rhine the whoever wrote the see this is what happens when I don't do a powerpoint slide for it but this is why Peterson says whenever whenever I'm dealing with patients who you know Sam Harris is socialized and maybe I've got Sam Harris all wrong maybe this is just his stick but when Jordan Peterson is dealing with patients who are traumatized and really struggling through stuff he finds he has to go to religious language it's the only language that will do and myself as a religious person I would say duh this is what we do all the time and I have many people who don't have the proper insurance who come to church why because they get help in religion and and secular people haven't denied this and it's Jesse Ventura's complaint that religion is a crutch for weak people you know what there's a lot of weak people out there and you're gonna have to turn in your humanist card if you're gonna say these weak people don't matter all right so well how do we appropriate this story now evangelicalism appropriates this story by forefronting verbal profession okay and and so when and I know Esther's gonna come back at me on this so maybe maybe we'll maybe she and I'll figure out how to have a how to have a conversation on the air there you go Esther will you talk to me on the air we'll see if we can figure it out evangelicalism appropriates this story for fronting verbal profession and but what happens with evangelicalism which anyone will know I mean so you go to the Billy Graham you go to the Billy Graham crusade and you know just as I am and you hear all I've got to do is give my life to Jesus and you and you drag your sorry self down the aisle and you throw yourself on the altar and you give yourself to Jesus you're like oh burdens are lifted at Calvary and then you start then they say okay well now you got to start going to church you say what I thought I just had to come down okay but now you got to start going to church now you got to give up the give up the tobacco you got to give up the cussing you got to stop sleeping with your girlfriend you got to give up the porn and you got to give up all these things you say wait wait wait wait wait I thought I'm saved by grace well yeah you are well well well now what see now as a reformed person I'd say well now we got to work on the gratitude part is it well they didn't cost me much so I'm not terribly grateful see this gets into the the complexity of Christianity but the evangelical pattern which there's a lot of history behind it but the evangelical pattern forefronts verbal profession if you believe in your heart and profess with your lips there's a favorite Bible passage that's how evangelicalism works but they sneak in behavior a bit after and and and now maybe I'm not being fair because I don't mean sneak but a lot of people feel manipulated by this and as people come to my meetup and they tell me their stories I hear that the the difficulties in in how Christianity puts together these pieces and it's by no means easy is at this moment with our current cultural configuration not helping a lot of people believe the integrity or the coherence of the story and and that's why we've got a lot of falling away out of churches this this belief system is losing some of its stuffing especially in certain communities it's losing some of its traction now I'm not saying it isn't true I'm just saying the reasons Augustine came to faith were different from the reasons that that Louie Zafferini in the book unbroken if you've never read unread unbroken that's it's Laura Laura Hildebrand is that who wrote it about great book forget the movie read the book amazing book but but he he goes down the aisle and you know get saved at a Billy Graham con to Billy Graham crusade and it absolutely changes his life well culture keeps moving on now does the gospel change no but our where the cult where our culture and the gospel meet that's almost always in motion and well why do I say that well I've been at the frontiers of worked in the African American community worked in the Dominican Republic now working on the West Coast with all the different cultures that we have here where the gospel and the culture meet it always comes together in in different ways and this is why Christianity keeps transcending cultural lines and keeps moving and moving and moving throughout history even as cultures change but again the cultural evangelical habit is to forefront verbal profession and they sneak in the behavior a bit after and they set up an interesting yet familiar dynamic and this is what a lot of people including Luke because I know Luke and Esther started getting into it that they're Luke is trying to work through this stuff and you can go if you're if find me on Twitter it's just my name but if you look at the tweets I'm connected with over the last couple days you'll find the conversation Jordan Peterson won't play this game he is not going to play this game but if you listen to Jordan Peterson and you do a little bit of translation you can begin to understand what he's saying he isn't avoiding he isn't being coy he's protesting the game he is saying as a pragmatist that what I see in terms of what people call belief and how that lines up with their behavior I am unimpressed by now I don't know how many Christians Jordan Peterson and I don't know how many and what kinds of Christians Jordan Peterson has close relationships with Canada is far more secular than the United States Jordan Peterson was raised in a nominal Christian home in a main in the main line Church of Canada okay so his understanding of Christianity from the outside and the inside there's always an outside and inside dynamic going on with these things so you got to give him some slack there but he is protesting the game when he talks the way he does I want to get to my friend's second point I'm thinking particular of the metaphor idea why does Harris call soccer games people running after a ball and Peterson sees them as soccer players acting out something deeply psychological even in your own view where is the soccer game located if human beings are stories where is this story how do you ground this in God somehow how about Peterson where does he ground it okay great great great questions listen to how Sam Harris I played a little this clip in my video two days ago listen to Sal Sam Harris talks about the game literally billions of people care care down to their toes what happens to this little ball as it traverses a lawn right okay beginning of maps of meaning Jordan Peterson says there are two ways to conceive of the world one is a space with objects and the other is a form for action listen to how Sam just described soccer he reduced it to a space of objects that's exactly what he did Sam's monarchical vision that he imagines as pure rationality reduces soccer to a bunch of grown men moving kicking a ball over a lawn trying to get it into a goal now listen to how Peterson responds if it goes into the net it really matters and if it fails to it really matters and always matters if we hit the target Sam Peterson's tired is Peterson frustrated what was Peterson what has Peterson been hoping for when he signed on to these four talks Sam doesn't understand goals then Sam doesn't understand tell us Sam doesn't on Sam sees the world as a space of objects Peterson sees form for action but this is this is something we have manufactured to care about right in this little interchange is the entire relationship between Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris see this is something we've manufactured no it's something that speaks to us unbelievably deeply this is this is this is this is these two it's right here in this tiny it's a fractal it's right here this is a game that people are playing but some people take it in taking it further than you then seems truly rational is part of the fun that's but but the people who can't it's part of the fun because Sam if you take a ball and you go in your backyard and you kick across the lawn is it much fun okay Sam pause why is it that much fun and what's your own criteria for well-being fun sorry Esther I'm I'm much less impressed with Sam Harris by listening to these things than I ever was before I really enjoy listening to a number of his podcasts I appreciate his demeanor I appreciate am I am I hope I'm not racially stereotyping him by telling him I he's articulate because he's very articulate just like mr. Reagan said but he says it and he doesn't get it it isn't fun no it's not fun when you reduce it to a ball and a lawn can't turn that on metaphor yeah but they're but they're soccer's a metaphor listen to note in the network I would just actually started rereading again because again what I find is that when I reread books I learned more so I'm rereading again Neil Postman's I'm using ourselves to death the first look up the first chapter in Postman's book look at look at Northrop Frye what is language how does it work Sam Harris is a great user of language but he doesn't understand what language is for people who either you know there people you know the fullback who kicks an own goal and then goes back to his you know South American Village and gets murdered right he's surrounded by people who are taking the game too seriously yeah okay I agree yeah and so right there again you can distill this whole thing down into a couple of minutes and it's right there via soccer that you can understand Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris now my friend asked even in your own view where's the soccer game located okay now my friend is a young man I'm an older individual I used to bring my bring my young sons to learn to play soccer about my daughter too but they didn't they didn't care as much as my son's why I'm not saying anything that goes can't play soccer to girls don't care about soccer my daughters just didn't care as much about soccer what is kindled in the minds of parents players and coaches when any kid shows any promise on the field or court see it all the time I asked my oldest son who it was a very good basketball player played varsity basketball in high school even after high school continued to play is a very good basketball player but about the age of 12 or 13 I sat him down and I said you're not going to the NBA it's like what kind of lousy father are you to tell your kid that well I'm six foot four my son is about six foot six foot one he's good basketball player you never go to the NBA it's just not gonna happen he's not that good what do we do with those people who are that good but the possibility of being that good it draws us it pulls us well is it is it just purely the love of basketball no it's everything Jordan Peterson's been talking about its hierarchies its access its opportunities its fame its money its power its glory it's all of this stuff it's the fun but it's way way way more than fun it's everything that makes life worth living much more than objects why do we structure the game irrationally okay so the USA Olympic basketball team dominates and and you will find that in various sports that different sports different nations dominate to one degree that there's no point in watching the finals well you would say well rationally we should restructure the game so that you could have a better mix of players why in the Olympics and the World Cup and all of these sports do we do we name the teams by their country of origin so you've got these tiny little countries with tiny little populations playing China and Russia's not a big population but we know what they and why did the communists make sports competition such a high value yeah these are metaphors they're metaphors for a lot they're metaphors for everything now is Sam Harris right that you shouldn't kill the player who screws up yes because but that is not a denial of the hierarchies that's an error of managing a hierarchy okay as is what you'll see on any little league football soccer baseball doesn't matter basketball you've got missteps in hierarchy but it doesn't deny the hierarchy the hierarchy is governing and we elevate athletes to the status of demigods if you go and you look at my Sunday school classes I'll often use the illustration what if what if LeBron James came to play with the Sacramento Kings sorry Freddie it'll never happen why won't it happen LeBron played in Cleveland why well he was from there he was boy big person in Cleveland now to LA and he went to Miami why is he going to those cities is it just money no it's not just money it's all of the hierarchies all of the hierarchies are interconnected we establish multiple hierarchies unlike the other animals but these hierarchies are connected and it's money and its looks and its fame and it's it's all of these things in ways that that we can't fully articulate but we know it when we see it and that's why Sam soccer is a big deal and that's why Sam it is fun and that's why Sam it matters and you don't get it and this is why Jordan Peterson is sitting there and he's telling Sam Harris Sam it's a metaphor Sam you don't get it it's not just a ball moving across the grass you don't understand where is the game located the game is located in the heavenlies what on earth do you mean by that read the Bible the game is located in the heavenlies this is this is the top of all the hierarchies and this is when we watch soccer or football football is about to start tonight when we watch football we begin to traverse into the hierarchies and why do people wear jerseys and sweatshirts now I don't really care that much about the Rivercats but I got the hat sheep maybe how money is higher on my hierarchy but why do we do this why do we associate them with places why do we invest our identity into them why do we play all of these games it's like Sam Harris have you met a human being do you know how we work it's in the heavenlies it's one hierarchy among many and the story is enriched because we know the hierarchies are linked OJ two letters a world of almost everything gets right there in it just there's a documentary on a couple of years ago well worth watching on OJ made in America you can understand so much of the American story if you look at OJ and his rise and his trial and his acquittal and then his jail sentence and now he's out OJ made in America watch it is it just was it just a strange shaped ball and grown men carrying it down the field and how much they risk in terms of head injuries and all kinds of other things is it just a game Sam come on give me a break you know better than that where's it located it's in the heavenlies now what about Jordan Peterson despite his open agnosticism his vision for where and how long this game is played is limited by the iron box of secularity you see all of these sports games are metaphors as are why do men get so involved in their career why do we become workaholics is it because putting on a suit going into an office you see I never put on a suit to go into my office because it's just me here unless something comes by but pastors are low status now we need to look like everyone else I could wear vestments or something like that but it all matters it's all connected this all makes sense it's all it's the whole point of Jordan Peterson that pay attention to all of the ways in which the world is interconnected and these things are all religious and they go down to religious roots despite his open agnosticism his vision for where and how this how long this game is played is limited by the iron box of secularity Sam Harris's is Sam Harris is usual social pressure to try to enforce this and keep people's minds and language within the box but they also have a larger box now this is where I begin to agree with Esther again on this stuff now now watch there's a there's an excellent video out there that someone sent to me the fourth frontier Brett Weinstein terrific video and where Brett has this take on human history but again Brett is saying well we need to we need to transcend our past our past programming well how do we understand this well there's another good video out there the Fermi effect well how do we understand this because well what is life well this is one way of looking at life let's play a little bit of this video I mean that we may be unique or at least one of the first if not the civilization in the entire universe two there are great filters and they are ahead of us this one would be really really bad listen to the rebel wisdom thing on nuclear war well now we've got this power maybe this is why there aren't any we haven't found any other life in the universe maybe nobody else got past the nuclear war filter maybe life on our level exists everywhere in the universe but it gets destroyed when it reaches a certain point a point that lies ahead of us there's a final filter and sam harris cannot deny this filter jordan peterson is an open agnostic about this filter christians say no christ transcends this filter someone wrote to me and asked me about the age of decay jesus overcomes the age of decay in his resurrection why do i believe in a physical resurrection because this filter gets transcended now agnostic might say this filter gets transcended in to a spiritual place of consciousness and i would have to ask why would a god go through all the trouble of creating physicality only to discard it as a transitional phase and that's why as a christian i believe the resurrection is physical because it is not simply trans is not simply transcended in terms of in terms of ideas what if we sat here it can be a lot of fun to sit down with two soccer fans and have them play out a game between their two favorite teams in their head often people will say well you know i'd like to have a baseball team with babe ruth and hank arron and um pick some great modern players you say well they could never play they play at different times oh yeah time well in your mind you can imagine how that would be and you can create a computer simulation but isn't it better if they could play with bodies see christianity has a bigger vision christianity in a way when you say we're going to transcend physicality i see that as a failure of imagination and i see that as a failure of asking for more and sam harris begins by saying we should have better things i say yeah we should dream better dreams sam we should dream better dreams of the resurrection and a new heaven and a new earth and part of the reason the bible has been so darwinianly successful in terms of cultures and religion in terms of the human story is that the bible gets this and just like mr plinkett you might not know it consciously but your brain knows it because to imagine a reunion with my departed father it would be lovely to sit across the way and and share ideas but that would kind of be like sending email what do i want to do when i see my father after the resurrection i want to feel him because i know how my father was never very good uh hugging my father was like hugging a flagpole he didn't bend much okay the man of his generation but all of that culture gets built into my father and so in the resurrection that moment in culture gets brought back in and perfected and this is christianity and it's so much better than imagine i'll have some mental conversation with my father no resurrection bodies physical new heavens and new earth the bible asks for nothing less the final filter which is death is transcended and that's the message of the bible and there is no better one it's archetypal and peterson knows this but does he have the courage to take the step now here's the thing for a lot of people they're low status sam harris won't give up his day job if he says i'm ready to go down and i'm gonna call up rick warren and tell him i love jesus okay uh probably not gonna happen maybe sam when he gets people when they get older they start thinking this way but but this is you know this is where this goes now then when again when i get to i should just pull up the video hang on okay it's greenhall it's greenhall so so so these guys talk about it and greenhall basically says as many others we've got so much power now maybe maybe we're not going to get beyond this filter and and this is a new thing and he mentions you know 19 1946 now again as with so many things cs louis got there first and if you look up life in an atomic age you'll find that on living in an atomic age by cs louis in one way we think a great deal too much of the atomic bomb how are we to live in an atomic age i am tempted to reply why as you would have lived in the 16th century when the plague visited london almost every year or as you would have lived in a viking age when raiders from scandinavia might land and cut your throat any night or indeed as you are already living in an age of cancer an age of syphilis an age of paralysis an age of air raids an age of railway accidents an age of motor accidents in other words do not let us begin by exaggerating the novelty of our situation believe me dear sir or madam you and all whom you love were already sentenced to death before the atomic bomb was invented and quite a high percentage of us were going to die in unpleasant ways we had indeed one very great advantage over our ancestors and aesthetics but we have that still it is perfectly ridiculous to go about whimpering and drawing long faces because the scientists have added one more chance of painful and premature death to a world which already bristled with such chances and in which death itself was not a chance at all but a certainty this is the first point to be made and the first action to be taken is to pull ourselves together if we are all going to be destroyed by an atomic bomb let that bomb when it comes find us doing sensible and human things praying working teaching reading listening to music bathing the children playing tennis chatting to our friends over a pint in the game of darts not huddled together like frightened sheep and thinking about bombs they may break our bodies a microbe can do that but they need not dominate our minds about you reply it is not death not even painful and premature death that we are bothering about it's interesting if you if you listen to the green hall akira thing you know they said well you know maybe death by nuclear annihilation isn't that bad okay what's the religion beneath that remark of course the chance of that is not new what is new is that the atomic bomb may finally and totally destroy civilization itself the lights may be put out forever this brings us much nearer to the real point but let me try to make clear exactly what i think that point is what were your views about the ultimate future of civilization before the atomic bomb appeared on the scene what did you think all this effort of humanity was to come to in the end the real answer is known to almost everyone who has even a smattering of science yet oddly enough it is hardly ever mentioned and the real answer almost beyond doubt is that with or without atomic bombs the whole story is going to end in nothing the astronomers hold out no hope that this planet is going to be permanently inhabitable the physicists hold out no hope that organic life is going to be a permanent possibility in any part of the material universe not only this earth but the whole show all the sons of space are to run down nature is a sinking ship bergson talks about the elan vital and mr schorr talks about the life force as if they could surge on forever and ever but that comes of concentrating on biology and ignoring the other sciences there is really no such hope nature does not in the long run favor life if nature is all that exists in other words if there is no god and no life of some quite different sort somewhere outside nature then all stories will end in the same way in a universe from which all life is banished without possibility of return it will have been an accidental flicker and there will be no one even to remember it no doubt atomic bombs may cut its duration on this present planet shorter than it might have been but the whole thing even if it lasted for billions of years must be so infinitesimally short in relation to the oceans of dead time which precede and follow it that i cannot feel excited about its curtailment what the wars and the weather are we in for another of those periodic ice ages and the atomic bomb have really done is to remind us forcibly of the sort of world we are living in and which during the prosperous period before 1914 we were beginning to forget watch the whole thing it's just great my question when you get down to peterson is this so these are some of my tweets back there's some deep inconsistencies with jordan peterson's teaching in life we need christianity but his version is more intellectual than sacramentally embodied which is a deep deep irony he can intellectually can't he he can intellectually transcend church and sacraments because he's smart but can a society this actually they begin to deal with in dublin jordan peterson likes to say milton's lucifer fell in love with the beauty of his thoughts can jordan peterson see this because there that this is where he treads if we intellectually say we bow um um i actually missed if we intellectually say we believe ought not our knees and feet correspond to the brain especially if you're acting out a belief and and so this is the irony about peterson so peterson when when he calls sam harris on the cathedrals and things well the cathedrals and things are not only expressions of belief but they are the acting out of belief and so if in your life you don't act it out is there any belief there this is peterson's criticism of the church but this criticism can be turned back to him because if you say well we've needed this because we've been working this out symbolically the wolf works this out when he bears his teeth at the other wolf the the ape works this out when he demonstrates something to the other ape that they can see and we work this out when we sit at the table of our lord and partake with the body and the bread where we stand up together and worship jonathan hate point height points this out when he says we circle around can you just transcend it mentally without actually acting it out peterson keeps saying no but well is it do you have to start your own church and if is it is it a church of one so these things stalk peterson's own acting out this to me is where we all um this with all this comes together the new testament says we are judged according to what we do jordan peterson says what you say you believe means little it's what you do okay how do christians express their beliefs how do they act them out jordan peterson is a seeker who has been seeking intellectually at some point seekers need to get out of their head and move their feet what this is what peterson says to people get out of the basement go get an education get a job get a life well jordan what does this mean for you see and this is where i think he's still an open agnostic what kind of a church might this generation create this is a question for me because again my point in this is not so much jordan peterson it's everyone else who's following him because a lot of the people following him their feet are bringing them and wandering them into churches we don't know yet but i think god is in this to me these are the interesting questions i also want to dig deeper into these expressions of faith and their foundation jordan peterson kicks out the slats under modernist arguments that have been effective in destroying faith he's been a most strange but effective apologist there is something new and and and i think he's been for many people way more effective than a lot of the traditional christian apologists he's been way more effective than christian preachers like me i don't have thousands of people coming to hear me what does that say it means i need to learn there is also something new in this in terms of technology and process jordan peterson himself is himself something of a reality show of a seeker he's truman this is from the truman show he's truman looking to leave what he suspects to be a bubble he wants a bigger world let's not be christoph trying to keep him inside have you never paid attention to the names in the movie the truman show peterson hasn't had i don't think i don't know what he hasn't left christoph's world but you see christoph i think the religion beneath it is not a christian movie because i think it's actually a criticism of christianity i also wonder if we won't see a new form of christian discipleship emerge from this will this be um will there be issues and esther would probably be right on me will there be issues yeah there'll be issues but don't forget i'm a missionary i'm into new i'm into trying to help new groups find faith and express it in different ways i've always gone to churches that are different from many of the other churches that's just how i've been there will be issues in these new forms of christian discipleship of course i am part of a tradition that has long critiqued evangelicalism from an older perspective none of this is new in terms of christian history there are always issues so i'm out of time i've got a whole bunch of conversations i need to do this afternoon but yeah this is there there's my mail bag and yeah we'll see what i title this it's been fun