https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=up_aY3WRHbY

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through my current version of my Sunday sermon. Chosen One's stories are pretty popular for American movies. They might be popular for other times and places too. One of the most prominent ones was The Matrix that came out in 1999 and even though now it's over 20 years since this movie came out, it's still pretty popular. It still speaks to a generation I think. Neo in The Matrix who is the hero of the story is a story of self-discovery where he just thinks he's a regular schmo working in a computer coding place and well, wouldn't you know it, he's the savior of the world right then and there. Now one of the most common questions that comes up in talking to people about Christianity, especially contemporary people who have been molded on these Chosen One self-discovery movies is when did Jesus awaken into his self-conscious divinity? This is a very, very common question and a lot of people and even authors have thought about this and written novels on it to try to get inside the head of Jesus and see what it's like to be him from the inside. And again in our very psychological age, it's a very understandable story to try to get our heads around. The Bible isn't particularly helpful in this. Before I get too far into that though, I always wonder why is this narrative attractive? What is it about us that we want to be the hero of the story, the center of the world? I think partly it's that we are weak and fragile and empty and we are hungering for meaning and self-importance and power, sort of like Incrediboy begins his journey in the Incredibles only to grow up into syndrome. And there's something in that story that is quite revealing about us, especially I think for men and young men. We want to wield the things of this world for our own power, comfort, security, and glory. Now the Bible doesn't give us really any insight or much insight into Christ in terms of how his humanity and his divinity sort of come together psychologically, but we do notice in the gospels that even at 12, he considered himself in his father's house and told his mother so, which is a pretty young age, quite precocious. But there are chosen one moments in the Bible and interestingly enough, probably the most important one does not involve a young man, but rather a young woman. In the six months of Elizabeth's pregnancy, God sent the angel Gabriel to Nazareth, the town in Galilee, to a virgin pledged to be married to a man named Joseph, a descendant of David. Now right away here, you can notice a few things in the text that this is God's initiative and he chooses a young woman. Now virgin can have sort of a dual meaning. Its common meaning is a young woman who is marryable. Also the question of whether or not she has slept with a man, that was a very important question for the culture at that point because so much rested on lineage and inheritance. And so this virgin, she was pledged to be married to Joseph. Now I'm not denying the virgin birth here because Joseph in the gospel of Matthew is going to, when she shows up pregnant and he hadn't been with her, he comes to the conclusion that probably anyone would come to the conclusion of. But that's not the story of this. But what is important to notice is that both she and he are descendants of David. Well why would that be important? Well right away there are overtones in this that are a little bit alien to our culture. The Bible is paying attention to some things that we generally don't pay as close attention to, but we're tracking it here. So the angel Gabriel comes to Nazareth, the town in Galilee, and right away that's a strange thing. Why Galilee? Why not in the center of Jerusalem? Why not a prominent Jewish family, one with power and wealth and access? The virgin's name is Mary. The angel went to her saying, greetings, you who are highly favored. The Lord is with you. Now again, if Mary were the daughter of a prominent family, she might receive that as, well this is because I'm the daughter of a prominent family, but she is not. The next verse is interesting. Mary was greatly troubled at his words. She wasn't impressed. She didn't feel validated. She was greatly troubled at his words and wondered what kind of greeting this might be. Now greetings were very important in that society. Greeting ceremonies, we Americans are so very informal, greeting ceremonies for Jews in the first century were very important. And this can be seen by Jesus that part of the status that the scribes loved were the greeting ceremonies. And they considered themselves to be of such high status that people of lower status should greet them in a particular way. And if people of lower status didn't greet them in this particular way, then well maybe they were in for some punishment to put them back in their place because they thought a lot about themselves. Now what you see here is quite obviously the reverse. She doesn't consider herself to be anyone or anything of very importance. And so she found this greeting deeply troubling. But the angel said to her, do not be afraid, Mary. You have found favor with God. You will conceive and give birth to a son, and you are to name him Jesus. He will be great and it will be called the son of the most high. The Lord God will give him the throne of his father David. Now you can see David coming into the story here. But he will be called the son of the most high. We're going to have to talk about that because that's very dangerous. In fact, everything about this greeting is dangerous. In fact, Mary's sense of trouble and disturbance at this manner of greeting was really quite well founded. And he will reign over Jacob's descendants forever. His kingdom will never end. Well there's something to say about any human being you would imagine. And then Mary asks, well how can this be? Mary asked that angel, since I'm a virgin, I'm not the wife of a king. I've never slept with a man. How on earth can this happen to me? In fact, there's such a divorce from her earthly status and the absolutely jaw dropping pronouncement that is made here. Usually when angels show up, people hit the floor and beg that they go away. Mary's actually showing something of her strength and she actually asks the angel. Now this story, we haven't read the previous story, the story of Zechariah and Elizabeth when the angel comes to visit Elizabeth. And the way these two stories are set up, they're basically parallel. And certain commentators have done this line for line for line for line. They're all run down. And so we're basically invited to compare Zechariah, who is a veteran priest in the temple who is supposed to be utterly familiar with God there at the center of Jerusalem, to Mary who lives in Nowheresville up in Galilee. And nobody knows who she is or cares who she is. And she's likely now betrothed to a good man, but likely an older man, probably a man in his second marriage. His first wife might have died and he's probably her senior by a good many years and she could be 13, 16, 17 years old, quite likely a teenager. And all of this is happening to her. And we call this God's favor. The angel answered, the Holy Spirit will come on you and the power of the most high will overshadow you. Now for us today, we're so used to this by 2000 years of storytelling, we hardly bat an eye. But if you were to read the Old Testament and come up with an idea like this, it's sort of coming out of the blue. God doesn't work this way, does he? So the Holy One to be born will be called the Son of God. Now here again, the Son of the Most High, the Son of God. What on earth are we to make of that? Now if she were a Greek or a Persian or a Roman, well the Son of God stuff, well the world was sort of, well they weren't common, but they weren't exactly unique out there. The pharaohs were sons of God and Alexander the Great was the Son of God and Roman empires were sons of God. And again, we're going to have to grapple with what that meant because, well, what on earth does it mean? And not son of a god, son of the Hebrew god. And the Hebrew god is a god very different from Zeus or Jupiter or any of these other gods that they imagine. This is a wholly different thing. Even Elizabeth, your relative, is going to have a child in her old age. Now notice the contrast here. Mary is young and a virgin. Elizabeth is old. Zechariah is old and a veteran priest. Mary is young. What does she know? And she, who was said to be unable to conceive, is in her sixth month, for no word from God will ever fail. I am the Lord's servant, Mary answered. May your word be fulfilled. Then the angel left her. Now we have put the story into the hands of children for many generations and the picture over on one side is a picture from my childhood. You notice that aluminum Christmas tree and someone had made sort of a mural, a classic mural of Mary and Joseph and hovering over the manger with a couple of sheep looking on and some nice hay. And here a woman is instructing children as they go through to one degree or not a Christmas store and the other picture of one a number of years ago at Living Stones with some children that you'll recognize here dressed up in robes and towels and staffs and all the various ways we do this. We put this in the hands of children, which in fact it does belong in their hands, but it is something beyond us all. From week one, we wondered, will you rend the heavens and make this world right? And last week we wondered how does this invasion differ from all the invasions we wonder about of superheroes, of space aliens, of all of these things. This is an aim, this is an invasion of sorts and it is a significant invasion. It's in fact a life changing invasion for one woman. God announces his intentions to Mary as contrasted with Zechariah in chapter one who barely doesn't believe it and so is struck dumb until the baby is born. His name will be John and then his lips are moved and he and Elizabeth will sing their songs. And she accepts it as best she can. God in fact doesn't rend the heavens, but rends the virgin's birth canal and the son of God comes into this world in pain just like the rest of us. What does it mean that God has a son? Now I have the privilege of being the father of three sons and here they are and my wife and you can catch glimpses of the daughters behind. What's it like to have a son? Well, this isn't like a son that I have and it is and analogies are like that. For Mary he will be her son, but the son of God. Now again the ancients understood what that meant or at least some of what that meant. Alexander the Great was a son of the gods, men of great importance in the world who usually wielded armies and commanded the life and death of people through their empires were imagined to be the sons of God. But in a Jewish context where God is not just a super thing flying up in the sky, but the author of heaven and earth, not subject to heaven and earth in the way that Zeus and the fates and other Greek gods were, well the analogy has to hold. It has to hold to a degree that well when the son of the king showed up he spoke with the authority of the king. He wielded the power of the king. He is the king's representative. But again he doesn't descend rending the clouds descending on a chariot of fire beaming like the sun. He comes into this world through a virgin's birth canal crying needing to be warmed by swaddling clothes and being very much dependent on his mother for love and for care. In fact the strangeness of this whole drama would have to be reinforced in the Roman world because the god that he was introducing was unlike their gods. The son is the image of the invisible god, the firstborn over all creation for in him all things were created, things in heaven and on earth visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities, all things have been created through him and for him. He is the prince indeed. He is before all things and in him all things hold together. And he is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead so that in everything he might the supremacy for God was pleased to have all of his fullness dwell in him and through him to reconcile to him all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven by making peace through his blood shed on the cross. Right there that last line seems so unkingly and even major world religions doubt the story because would the god of the universe allow his son to die on a cross? Never! But that's the Christian story and this is the story that Mary will play a key part in, that Mary will suffer from, she will suffer to give birth to this child and she will suffer as she watches him crucified. Now we have to come to terms with our hungry hearts. We are fragile, weak and empty, hungering for meaning, self-importance and power. We want to wield the things of this world for our own comfort, security, power and glory. Those God chooses, he asks them to suffer and they do. Mary will suffer. She will ponder those things in her heart and a sword will pierce her son. And her pain will be no less pain than every other good mother in the world that watches their children suffer. God's chosen people weren't put at the top of the heap. This undermines the karmic assumption that we can make snap judgments in history about God's favor. He uses the weak things of the world to shame the strong. But what is Mary's answer? I am the Lord's servant. May your word to me be fulfilled. She offers her consent and then the angel leaves her and you would think, with something like this doesn't she deserve a divine bodyguard? Doesn't she deserve an angel helping her through? I'm sure the terror of facing the angel was then accompanied by the cold quiet of the angel's departure. And the story that would play out, not one of privilege, not one of being at the top of the heap, not one of having power and securing everything she would ever want, it would be one of struggle watching her own son die at the hands of his enemies. I am the Lord's servant. May your word be fulfilled in me.