https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pt4DMn3TZMs

 Alright, yeah, press pause is cool. Try recording. How do I do that? That's the red button right there. Just record? Yeah just... Now, tell everyone to see when you're ready. Okay, I'm ready. On five. One, two, three, four, five. Alright, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. We're here at Golden Corral and we had a big birthday lunch. Now, how we do it? Freddie had his birthday. Fancy Nancy's still in there having dessert. So, we're just having a little show today. And Reggie's in and Philip the Bible, the Jesus man is in too. So, any special birthday greetings, Fred? Yeah, I put shots out to my homeboy CJ, my homeboy Gordon, my homeboy Reggie, my homeboy Bill, my homeboy Paul, because you know I'm the big daddy because I got the show. I'm the one and only Jesus man. If he can't do it, no one can. Alright, how's that look? So, when you're done just hit that red button again. Okay, I just moved... We're not done? No, we're still talking. I moved it around a little bit to get a little extra razzle dazzle. We're gonna talk about politics. I moved it around like a little extra razzle dazzle. So, 49ers are gonna win, right? Yes. No. No. Kansas City. No. Kansas City's gonna win. No. We got a little jester here. No. They need to win. They haven't done it for 50 years. And you know where? But the 49ers haven't done it since the 90s. No, what more? 50 years or not from the 90s. Alright, man. I like the 49ers. Okay. I do too. In all fairness, we'll let Kansas City win this year. Okay, okay. I'll let you say the 49ers are gonna win if you bust... I mean, the Kansas City... Chiefs. Chiefs are gonna win if you bust a rap. So, do a Jesus rap. Just try to do it. I'm the Jesus man. Yes, here I am. I do a lot of giving out, Jesus sign. Many more. I have gave over 5,000 of those things in my life. How many more? Oh, one. One. I have gave over 5,000 of them. Right on! All right! All right, I want you to do a run. All right, go ahead. Go ahead, Fred. Right me. All the time. Doing it in the SAC. You see, I got it going on like one, two, three. You know it's me, Freddy D from the 916, for shigadee. Jesus. Jesus. He's the man, if no one else can do it, he can. Who's that guy? He's Freddy. He loves Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Freddy. He loves Jesus Christ. One love. One love. One love. Really do it, do it, do it. One love. Amen. Amen. That's good. All right. Is it still? I'll see you soon, man. I don't know if it's turned off. Is it turned off? I think I pressed it more than one. All right, make sure you get our faces in. Okay, all right. So what do you want to talk about, Nance? Ah, I am blessed to have this kid. All right. For 47 years. And I'm blessed to have myself. 74 years. Backwards. 74, 44? Yeah, 74, 47. How about that? Birthday's just four days apart. That's really nice. And this is my good, good test. All right, thank you. Ready for the one love? Okay. One love. One love. All right. All right. Be careful, get your walker. Hi. I told him, I'm gonna put my wheelchair in the garage. Put this in the garage. But unfortunately, I still am off balance.