https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=jT2lpbO1zAY

 All right, we are indeed streaming. So this is another one of our little impromptu conversations. Usually trying to get some feedback and some videos that I've been doing. Nick had made a comment on the Verveki and Leitner video, and so I basically jumped into the Discord hoping Nick would be around because I wanted to hear his thoughts. And I'm in this new room that I've set up on the Discord. And so those of you who are, you're welcome to lurk in the room. If the green room starts to build up, you might swap out of here and go to the green room and let other people come in. Just kind of keep an eye on it. So all right, Nick, well, let's let's hear what you think. Yeah, well, you know, I guess most immediately I would just partially restate the comment I did leave, which is, you know, to me watching that conversation, it felt like, you know, that was almost the conversation that I had been hoping you guys would have as you guys have crossed paths all these times where it felt like finally there was enough trust built up through all the discussions you've had where it felt like it was able to kind of get a layer deeper. And you know, it was really a wonderful one. And honestly, I need to watch it again to be able to really pick up on the part that, you know, stood out to me. I guess also I thought Paul A did an absolutely wonderful job facilitating there. His patience is really pretty amazing. Yeah, he did. He did a terrific job. He knows he knew just where to come in to try and clarify or put a little pressure where I thought, you know, it was very needed. I guess the first comment I wrote when watching it was relating to when Vervecky brought up the tendency of the church to subsume the belief systems around it and how, as it makes that attempt, it has this effect of losing the differentiation between these various belief systems or right, just trying to kind of drink it in without perhaps having an interaction with it that produces something new. And it kind of got me thinking how interesting it is that it's often Vervecky in this corner of the Internet that I watch that makes me want to interact with the community again. It makes me want to go see what other people thought about it and digest it, break it down, see where I'm disagreeing and, you know, agreeing and all this type of stuff. And I thought that was interesting because, you know, I still pretty much, you know, religiously watch your videos, Paul. I watch most of what Pajot puts out, but it's pretty rare that they get me to that level of wanting to interact. And that brought to mind, I'm going to need help remembering the details of this, but I think it was C.S. Lewis was talking about the importance of finding a rival in his life. And I think it was in reference to Chesterton or maybe it was on it was on Barfield. Oh, it was Barfield called. That's his first friend is someone that he basically an ally. They agree on most everything. The second friend is a rival, but their rivalry is productive. And that led with he and Owen Barfield to what they called the Great War, which actually they wrote down. Right. OK. It got me thinking about that, how, you know, in some bizarre sense, I find myself often quite critical of what Vervecky brings up. And yet that level of wanting to interact and finding it creative, constructive, was is clearly very important to me. And there's probably a few layers to that. But I guess in reference to what he brought up, I was wondering how maybe the church could model that type of rivalry as I think it often does inside of itself in the sense of rivalries between denominations or, you know, these kind of internal arguments. If there is a way to model it where it can more directly interact with these different religions or pseudo religious movements, even that would enable a much more creative, you know, spirit to the conversation. And to that point, I think you and Vervecky model it very well, along with Pajot and the other people that Vervecky interacts with in this, you know, the Christian side of this corner of the Internet. That's keep going if you get more. But that's really good. That's really good. And I think you're right in that some of sometimes this gets because There's this unanimity assumption within the church that rivalry, difference, even dispute and conflict is unwelcome, unwarranted. But I think you're right in that you need these dynamics actually to continue to provoke reform, to counter corruption, to maintain interest and production. You need all of these things. And I think I haven't I don't know if anyone has accumulated Vervecky's conversations about scale. I've only watched the first one. But in that first one where he talks about scale and he talks about the church, the university and the monastery, in some ways, a lot of this has been created by, let's say, the continual back and forth of the church and the state in terms of, you know, visions for living. And so in that way, perhaps, you know, religion and politics are sort of these large rivals. But I think you're really on to something, Nick. And I think this is in some ways what we're also seeing in secularity is I think Tom Holland is right that there's a deep secularity is clearly the product of Christianity. And it then becomes sort of a rival to the church and the churches. And in many ways, where John left the conversation off wanting to talk about these four L's and the priority of them, that is really where this is going to go in terms of continuing to pursue this rivalry. But again, it's a productive rivalry because John and I maintain differences. Right. Well, and there's very distinctly the aspect of friendship within it as opposed to, you know, the more common idea of a rival doesn't often include that, perhaps. What just arrived to my mind as well when you were saying that was perhaps a slightly alternative vision of what an estuary is, which is to say it is often, you know, that kingdoms are built surrounded by water of one form or another, right, whether it's so that you can have delivery, a port of access that's close to the castle, if you will. Or for protection, right, insulation from people being able to easily traverse. And in that sense, I almost wonder, you know, almost going off of Pajos kind of layers as you come from the center out towards the periphery and how it's often that ability to move things in from the periphery that re-enlivens the kingdom or the center. And maybe that's, I don't know if that's, you've already spoken about the estuary in this way, but in some sense, one could view it as that kind of symbolic representation where those types of conversations could be had where they're not threatening the people around them. They're not threatening, you know, the castle, but become the source of food for it. And to pick up on the last thing that you said, it does seem like the mode of interaction, right, that it's not even the mode of interaction necessarily, but even just opening up the language, right? Verbecky made it very clear. It's way easier for him to talk about the four L's than to talk about the person of Christ. And it's not like these things are divorced from each other in a Christian's mind, right? But it does, if we're going to enter an estuary-like space with people this far on the periphery, it seems like these types of things are easy things to do so long as you have the willingness to want to interact and to actually recognize that there's value to be had there. Right, right. I love how you connected it with estuary and you're right in terms of, I've always wanted, I've always emphasized that estuary is not church. It does not replace church. For some, it might function in a church-like way, but it is supposed to be alongside church. And I very much see the potential for rivalry. I also like how you said, you integrated friendship because in that way, there is, I mean, what friendship really is, when you think of Filet-O as opposed to Eros, friendship is sort of, Eros is sort of always face to face or devouring. Filet-O is always shoulder to shoulder. And there's always a third thing in that friendship, which is an object of mutual desire. And so in a friendly rivalry, which is the words that we use to talk about it, in a friendly rivalry, this is how it's supposed to function. And given that all of, in my conversation that I posted today with another Nick, when we talked about the Charismatics and Pentecostals, in a sense, Christianity posits, I do believe Christianity is a progressive religion and that we're always looking to make progress. We're trying to make progress towards the infinite. And well, how do you make progress towards the infinite? Because you'll never arrive there. And that's both on one hand, it can be seen as futile or even frustrating, but it's at the same time also enlivening because it undercuts the anxiety that you'll hear new atheists say, well, I can't believe in living forever because I would get bored. But you're not imagining you are going in fact to pursue the infinite. And you can obviously pursue the infinite for infinity. So this is sorry, I didn't mean to cut you off if you're no, no, no, I just, I was going to say that I moved my frame here. But for those of you, I know Luke wanted to get in. For those of you wanting to get in, I created a little bit of a space for you to get in. And I created something in here called the green room that if you want to get in, jump in the green room and maybe someone who is in this room who is would like to listen, but not necessarily participate can step out. So that's why I made the room. So anyway, go ahead, Nick. It's really funny actually that you brought that up because the video that I had just watched before I hopped in here and wrote long comment on was the Jordan Hall and for Vicky conversation. And one of the things that they focus on in that conversation is the difference between the infinite and the eternal. And I really actually I founded that distinction really helpful, partially because my initial deconversion, if you can even call it that, right, I grew up in a divorced household. So I had one very secular side of the family and one extremely nominally Christian side of the family. And I was about eight riding in a car, talking to the uncle that, you know, knew something about the religion, at least. And tried to go to sleep that night after his description of heaven and was stuck in terror. I couldn't fall asleep at this imagining of living forever. And in some sense, that reminds me of verveky's response to one of the questions when I had that discussion with him. Or, you know, for the discord. And there was a type of the the little no, there was a deep sense of horror at that point for me about the infinite. And I feel like it would have been so helpful to have this differentiation between the eternal and the infinite. You know, I almost think of it as the x and y axis on a grid, right? The eternal's that ontological, it has that ontological depth, it's going up and down. Whereas the infinite is that y axis, right? Spread across. And, you know, very likely, I think it's the word that we're really looking for is the whole grid. You know, I don't know if we actually want to split those axes apart from each other. But what was lacking in my imagination at that young age was definitely this sense of ontological dimension to it. Yeah, I don't know if that was relevant. I feel like I had another point, but I lost it in the description. I thought that was actually very helpful. Everything's relevant when you're talking about the infinite because it's all included. Did Luke manage to get himself in or was he just trolling us? I think he was just trolling. I see Lance on YouTube as well. Maybe Lance will hop in. Those are the people that I really want to, would love to have included in this conversation. They did a whole back and forth, I think it was this morning or maybe even started yesterday up in like Jen chat about the credo versus religio. And they'd be better at speaking to it than I am. But that's, they've been talking about this for a long time. And then verveki has been talking about it for a long time, obviously, as well. I guess that's what I'm interested in asking Nick more about is why the verveki, why he thinks the verveki conversations are what make him want to come back here. Because I've noticed in my experience on this server that when verveki comes out with a very, very good video that a lot of people want to watch, they all come back to the server. And then they have what's in my opinion, kind of shallow conversations about it with a lot of hyperlinking to other stuff. Where the story you just told about like, oh, when I was eight, my, you know, my uncle described the infinite to me and that blew my mind and caused a lot of distress. To me, that's a very interesting story. But the technical way that all these other folks are talking about verveki's work on the server is very uninteresting to me. And I want to know if that's more just my experience, or if this stuff is just that hard to talk about, that other people are finding it as hard to identify with as I am. I probably have two answers that hit kind of both ends of this. One is I am, I enjoy the technical aspect of these things. It's fun for me to do that. The other, so that might be part of the reason where I'm like, oh, let me go find some of the people that I can like dissect this with, you know. The other one is more personal. And I think it's, this is relating specifically as to why I find verveki triggers that reaction perhaps so much for me, which is that I spent a lot of time trying to make sense in, I think, a very similar space that he is. And so as I kind of find myself trying to have that conversation with his material, with where I find myself now, in some sense, I feel like I'm pulling my past self back into conversation with where I'm at now as well. So that might be part of the reason that I specifically find so much value with verveki's material. And then the other is, you know, just a more obvious, he's on the periphery and integrating things on the periphery, it takes more work and it usually opens us up to a lot of our biases. It's helpful to, you know, get a group around you to help you do it to see where you're at. Of course, if the group's too well defined, it can just reaffirm your own bias. But, you know, this specific area I find quite helpful for getting a wider view around a topic. – I also think, Joey, my conversation with the other Nick that I posted today, you know, he and Chad has made this point too. I mean, Nick was talking about, you know, I want to come away with something here that I can talk to my grandmother about. What this Nick just said about, he heard about heaven when he was eight and he couldn't sleep that night because he was terrorized and traumatized. Well, that's, you know, that's very existential. That's already packaged in narrative and it's very digestible for us. You know, the common, I mean, the common complaint, I had it again with a rando that I talked to, he's from India today, that'll come up in the channel later this week, you know, is a vervecki just goes right over my head. And it's interesting that we use over our head as the description of that because again, it's just sort of so abstract, it sort of floats up. And some find that useful for a whole variety of ways, but, and it isn't about intelligence, so much of it is about interest. And I deal with that all the time in church because so often what we do in church is where we're, I was just talking to a friend of mine, I was having lunch with him and he's of Dutch descent, but he's been pastoring in America for a long time. And he was reading through a bunch of Dutch history stuff and talked about the fact that you know, warring Dutch Calvinists came out of hiding, these were active members of the underground during the second world war, they came out of hiding to have a church fight about inference superlapsarianism. It meant that much to them that, you know, they risked going to concentration camps to fight about inference superlapsarianism. And- Ben Frick That's so human. John Greenewald And most of, I just said those words and most of us here have no idea what that fight is about, but for them it was an existential crisis to deal with that great, and when my father was in seminary, that was kind of a big debate in the Dutch reformed communities in the middle of the 20th century. So, but I also find, so Verveke, I think tends to trigger, he triggers, part of what made Peterson so powerful was he triggered along a huge variety of spectrums this way, but also this way. Peterson had the scale to talk to people who are not going to talk about abstract things. He made it very concrete. Peterson could also get abstract. Verveke tends to stay up there. Ben Frick He made it kind of relatable. John Greenewald Yeah. Ben Frick I think that's what I really love about, I don't know, like the more repetitions I get with listening to the Verveke stuff, and I'll make jokes about being annoyed with the, you know, all the esoteric language and stuff like that, but the more I get repetitions and I hang out on Voxer and talk to guys like Nate Heil and Luke and Sherry and get more repetitions with this stuff, the more I'm able to kind of pick up some tools. And for me, what I'm trying to do, yes, that conversation you had with Nick today was really great, but I love that. Like, I want to be able to take kind of what I'm learning, because the guys are going to be using these big words like Verveke and these other cats. Of course, they're deep thinkers, so they've spent a lot of time thinking deeply about this stuff. It just so happens they're using this other language that's kind of sometimes inaccessible to me. But once I get repetitions, I'm like, okay, I understand that idea. And I like that because now I want to start trying to lay my experience up against it, because I want to be able to take some of these tools and use them for helping others. Because to me, at the end of the day, that's all this is. This is just another tool that I can be able to be useful to others. And like you mentioned the story about these guys who are willing to destroy themselves over something that only makes sense to them. I mean, that's so human of us. And I just don't understand. And I have to remember that because to me, one of the fears I think that Verveke, that I'm perceiving Verveke had about his experience with Christianity, or some of the experiences that were keeping me away from Christianity, was I had ideas about what I would find when I got there. And it's interesting to be able to kind of see it more from the inside. And then, and then have my own experience with, with, with God or the inevitable or Christ or whatever that is, and then watch people who seem to be so afraid that they're going to lose their identity or their ideas about Christ. And so they're like, they go off on these crazy, these crazy, fearful tangents. And they, you know, I think they're doing it out of love, but like, it's, it's crazy. Why are we doing that? If, if he's infinite, and he's all loving, and he wins, then what's the big deal? Like, are we afraid that you're not going to like, are you, you know, are you not going to have enough sponsorship stickers from your, like, you know, like the NASCAR racers of all the souls I saved? Is that what you're afraid of? You're not, I don't know. It's just strange to me. I don't mean to be off topic, but I think it's, what I loved about the conversation with you and Verveke, the last couple, especially this one was, there's, there's a love emerging out of it. And it's like, I love to watch the transformations, and the transformation in you, Paul, and then the transformation that, that, that John's going through. And then like the, the modeling of how, how do we get together and talk about this stuff successfully? And one thing I noticed you both doing was you're sharing stories, you're sharing each other's stories. And there's, that's where the, that's where the gold is. And I've been ramping on this for like, on Boxer for like the last couple of weeks. It's like stories, it's all in the stories. We should learn how to tell our stories and we should do it more often, because there's a lot in there. So. We talked about rivalry earlier, and I would say that your rivalry, Chad, on the server is between introspection and interaction. And I think it's been super healthy for you. I see you trying to spread that to other people too. And so. Well, it's only because I've had experience in watching people have their own experience with God of their own understanding. And I, and me having the, like, I don't have a choice about it. Like if I want it to be useful in the, in the, in the 12 step realm that I'm trying to be useful in, I have to keep my hands off their God. I have to, no matter what I think. Right. And so like that's to be able to practice that over and over and over. That becomes a way of life for me. So I'm happy to keep my hands off your God, because it's not in my business. And it's like, we were saying, you can have a church full of 2000 people and how many guys do you think are going to be in there? Probably about four. Four. There you go. Because one day or the next, we're like that. We're just different. I mean, so to think I got to hold onto this thing or choke your God out of you. It's like, but yeah, that's all through experience. I hope to get better with that. I think part of what makes John compelling in this corner is, you know, when we, when I first started talking to him, you can find my, my first conversation with him on the channel, who is John Verveckian, what is the meaning crisis. And as the more he's been here, the more he's, I think, been able to develop trust. You know, we all come at this from our own stories and he's all of this. Let me say, let me try and say it this way. None of us, the, the, the member of our consciousness Congress that is moving our lips is only one member of this consciousness Congress. And Peterson gets into this quite a bit too. Other members of our consciousness Congress, know other things. That's really spooky for us to recognize and acknowledge that we know things that we don't consciously know and can't articulate. That of course is the whole idea behind, you know, depth psychology that in time you can sort of coax other members of your consciousness Congress out of the shadows and get them up to the microphone to say things. And once they get up to the microphone to say things, other members begin to hear them. And, you know, then suddenly you get stuff going on. And so this, this idea of rivalry is, is I think pretty helpful because this is happening within us and that's not in any way alien to Christianity. The, you know, the Bible conceptualizes it in varying ways, some places in the New Testament a little bit more explicitly than others. But I think that's part of the reason that rivalry interests us because I think you're right, Chad, in that when we see rivalry, when we see productive conflict, there is, we have a sense that there is an opportunity for transformation and we're hopeful that this transformation will be productive, not only for the individual, but for beyond that individual. And for ourselves as well as the, the, you know, object of the conversation. Right. I have to be willing to have my ideas die as well as be willing to lose as well. You know, and so like, I'm willing to wrestle, but I'm not willing to kill you. You know what I mean? Sorry, Nick, don't let me cut you off. No, not at all. Yeah. Well, and I, you know, I really appreciated Chad, you, you bringing up something I saw in the conversation as well, which was the, it had a more grounded feeling to it. Oftentimes with verveky, the conversations can get very abstract and it gets hard to root it back down. And I do the same thing, right? My tendency is probably an upward motion, right? I kind of want to float away from myself. It's a bit easier to deal with abstract thoughts than it is to deal with life. And having to actually change my actions in accordance with whatever I come up with up there. So it, yeah, I agree with you that grounding things in story and being able to meaningfully talk about those things with people that you probably do disagree with and have enough trust in the relationship that you sharing your, your personal story isn't so vulnerable as to close off the ability for transformation is huge. That's, you know, that's the type of modeling of conversation that I think is most important. The, you know, part of what we talk about often in verveky's dialogos is again, it's, it's Phyla, it's Phyla Sophia, not Phyla Nikia in that it's, we do, we are willing to let some of our members of our consciousness Congress die. And again, I can translate that into Christian nomenclature because in Christian, in Christian nomenclature, it's, there's always a process. Sanctification always involves mortification. Mortification is something dying and in Christian language that dying is sin. And so this, this, this rivalry, this sparring, again, John often uses, you know, martial arts type language, the sparring that we do is there to kill off something in us. Peterson basically says similar things when he talks about burning off dead wood and speaking the truth. It's, it's clear from our context that this, this, there's a lot that goes into this and it involves, we have lots of metaphorical language about this setting a table. It's an achievement that, that people, they develop capacity for this. And, you know, a lot of the issues that you were talking about Chad too. I mean, ego is involved. Anxiety is involved. What if, what if something valuable in me dies? What if I get lost? And that is a, that real terror is important because we can get lost in this kind of thing. And so. You can definitely burn too much. You can definitely cut too deep. Yes. Yes. Yeah. Well, that's what I loved about your talk with Nick today, where he's mentioned, like Peterson gave him like, basically gave him permission to, to, to kind of let go of his presuppositions about what the deconstruction would lead to. And then, so you're able to re-aimed, you reset your aim and now you have new eyes to see. And like, that's what this whole thing is, this whole thing, every conversation that we try to have here, we're really trying to be stretched and help others stretch and, and let some old ideas die and let some new parts of this, some bubbling up, conscious new guys are showing up, you know, like this is a big, big, big, big bubbling up, conscious new guys are showing up, you know, like this is about, it's a wonderful thing to watch it, to, to, to experience that and be a part of that. And I think like the more that we're doing this, the more that we're able to let other people see that your deconstruction is probably just a reconstruction. It's probably just a tool. It's okay. You know, we're going to catch you. It's all good. You know, like it'll hurt a little bit. Maybe it won't. If, if we can, if we're trustworthy, if we're right, I mean, as a pastor, I know there's a lot of scariness in this. Um, and you know, I, what I really loved about my conversation with Nick that I posted today, you're right. He, something had to die in him for something better to live. Now, many of us know people who have undergone transformations that weren't for the better. And, and, and again, sometimes some of those transformations that weren't for the better. I mean, you talked about this, Chad, you know, if, if you hadn't, if you hadn't become an alcoholic, that's a transformation for the worse. You couldn't have had these other transformations for the better. And, and so sometimes you go downhill before you can go uphill. So, I mean, this is all really live, scary stuff. Yeah. Well, yeah. I mean, but when I'm hearing us talk about this too, it's like, well, this guy re deconstructed and wow, he seems to be gone and that sucks. And it's like, well, where's he at in five years? Are we losing faith again? Because the guy's back. You know, I've seen guys unable to grasp the simple program about the wall and synonymous and literally drink themselves into, so they're yellow. And like, there's a guy, a friend of mine, he's like 31 and he drank himself to his liver was completely toast. And it was like, he left AA for three years and then he had to come back and now he's sober for three years now, sponsoring guys. His labor is totally damaged. He's got diabetes, but he's happy, joyous and free and serving God and helping others. Was that bad? I'm sure you wouldn't have really wanted it that way, but what the hell do we know? Yeah. You used the word faith, which is what kept coming up for me. And it seems like often we perhaps, you know, where's faith most useful? Right. Or even is it actually faith if it doesn't hold in the down cycle? And, you know, I guess one of the ideas that's popping up for me is this idea of an atheism, which Verbecky has brought up before and that I found a lot of value in just, again, from the own kind of trajectory, but it's the idea that one develops a different relationship to theism after having gone through a period of atheism. And, you know, I don't think it has to be that explicit of emotion. It probably can happen in much subtler ways where some of those voices are dying off and new ones are coming in. You know, it doesn't necessarily have to be the whole motion. But what it brings to mind is, I guess, how we could, if it's possible to create an idea of faith that includes a loss of faith. It's a bit, you know, it's butting heads with itself. And yet, you know, I, yeah, I don't have a better way to say it. Like the wrestling with God concept or different than that? I guess that would be one way. But even I suppose, how can one afford themselves the motion to move away from God in the faith that the motion to move away will result necessarily in a motion closer than where they were before? You're saying you're gonna, I'm gonna, I'm gonna step away because I'm kind of planning that I'll be able to come back anytime. I'm kind of planning that I'll be able to come back anytime I want. Is that kind of what you're saying? Like, because I don't want it to be casual, I guess I want it to be narratively meaningful. And so I think I think you're shooting yourself in the foot a little bit with that, at least with the analogy, I don't think that the idea is wrong. But like there's it's not possible to say I'm temporarily not going to believe in this thing. But I'll believe in it again in the future. Like that's not really a thing. Now you can definitely straighten strengthen yourself in a time of security, and then go on an adventure where you're challenging yourself to then return to the place of security. But I don't know if you can do that with belief. I don't I don't I, it sounds not plausible to me that you can do that with a fake. I've had experience with this, where it's like, I've had guys say this, who I've worked with in sponsorship, they're very, very Christian fundamentalist, kind of like some of the some of the guys that will meet on here. And they've kind of hidden hitting bottom with their alcoholism. And they'll say, Yeah, but, but Christ loves me. And there's all forgiveness. And I don't, you know, it's like, it's like, they'll say things like, but it's, you know, it's like, well, how is that working out for you, man? Are you willing to set aside your ideas of what you think you know about God? Just set them aside. I'm not telling you to throw them out right now. But set them aside and see what happens. Try this once, because clearly what you're what you are working with, it's not working. So it's not necessarily throw it out. But I'm willing to set aside what I think I know and seek. This is like, I think seeking is, it can never stop, it can never, it's always got to go. And part of seeking is losing, you know, because it's so I, I really want to continue on with this. But I got that thing I got to do with John Van Dong. See you guys. All right. See you, Chad. Thank you. Another one of our JVs. I mean, so Chad, you know, he talks a lot about AA, so it's not, I'm not, not bringing in anything new. But I mean, Alcoholics Anonymous is an excellent example of where I'm saying it's hard, because the whole point of Alcoholics Anonymous is that you go there when you say, I can't do the thing where I only drink a little bit. I have to do it 100%. Otherwise, I will fail. And I think that that continues with a lot. I mean, that continues with a lot of other things. But then, I guess, Chad brought in something interesting, too, where like he's retweet. Some people need to retweak how they're approaching their faith, but without losing it. If you're giving God too much power to say, Oh, he loves me no matter what I do. That's kind of an abusive relationship. If I went out and I said, Well, I cheat on my wife sometimes, but don't worry, I'll go back to her and then I'll be faithful until the next time you cheat. Like that's, that's breaking the contract that's breaking is faith a contract? I don't know. But I'm going to say that it kind of is. And so what, what do you like, how would you how would you imagine that? Or from what I've said is kind of what you were you thinking of something different than the way I'm describing? I suppose when I use the word faith, I am very likely referencing I'm probably referencing a whole bunch of stuff. But what immediately comes to mind is likely a phenomenological experience of security within within my life. Right? So in some deep sense, life person. Well, probably soul would probably be the Oh, no. Oh, no. We lost you. I was saying soul would likely be the better word there. Now it's tricky because you can see emotion like that when a person deconverts initially that was being brought up, which is to say, person deconverts initially that was being brought up, which is to say, you know, there's this initial burst of freedom and right like this, oh, I can finally, I've thrown off the shackles and now I'm my true self. And it's this. It's not really like, I don't know, I'm struggling. I'm in territory, I didn't expect to go and I haven't figured out the words for describing it. So I think, though, that faith is exactly the right word because it has within it. You know, the Book of Hebrews, for example, you are live on the internet. I'll just let you know that, Jacob. So, OK. Faith has within it in the Book of Hebrews contrast it with sight. And the idea is that there is a, you know, like in a gap of a spark plug. I mean, if you've ever gapped, you know, you know, this, Nick, you know, technical things, you know, if you don't have any gap in the spark plug, you get no spark. I think faith is like that and that there there's always a gap and that gap affords the potential for the spark. And like that, because if the gap's too big, it catches it burns it as well. That's right. That's right. And so I think I think that is that is why faith is the right word. And that's why faith is a very it's a very live. It's very much a living dynamic, dynamic element in our lives. And and people will talk about their faith with a lot of variability. The this is part of the reason I always try to keep the conversations coming out on time, because they inhabit me after I have them. So the the one gentleman from India, you know, he most of that video is just him telling kind of the stories about, you know, kind of kind of get used an hour to tell a story. He did most of the talking, but he did it well. And there were the ups and downs in his life. And and similar to Nick J, whose video I posted today, you know, so before his, if we call it a deconstruction before it, he sort of took apart his Pentecostalism that he was in terror of losing. You know, it was replaced by something that today he would say is more supple, more life giving, actually more durable, less rigid. So I think faith is the right word. And I think within Christianity and Jacob can, you know, add anything else he wants to bring in there. There's, you know, you have you've got saints with the Dark Night of the Soul, where God sort of turns his back. And and many have interpreted that as, you know, you've been a you've been a junkie for the feels. You're in the relationship with God, because it's basically Satan's critique of God's relationship with Job. Oh, sure. He's a faithful follower of yours. It's worked for him. You know, take, you know, kill his kids, take away his wealth, turn his wife against him, see what he does. And so if you're in a relationship with a living God, be prepared. So I'm going to add Psalm 92 to proclaiming your love in the morning and your faithfulness at night. So the word your love is has to have right, has said loving kindness in in the morning when there's light and I'm not high, your faithfulness, your emuna, right at night when it's dark. So, Hi. So I mean, that's when you need your faith is when things aren't bright and visible. And at night, and during the day, it's it's God's kindness that we can see. Just really like that addition. That was that was very well placed. Just a little shout out here to this. This couple that I heard about not too long ago. Great to see you both in the same screen on the same content. Thank you. I'm going to go ahead and turn it over to you, and then we'll go to the next question. So, I'm going to turn it over to you, and then we'll go to the next question. Great to see you both in the same screen on the same continent. Sorry, we jumped in not realizing there was a live stream going on and then we're like, oh, we should probably leave. And then she was like, your camera's not on. And we're like, well, Say hello to the DNC. This is our this is our big announcement of the new. Oh, good. Paul's in here of the new the new bridges of meaning discord as matchmaking platform. See, see ladies out there. I know there's only a couple of you watching my channel. If you need a man, come to the bridges of meaning discord. We've got lots of men. Look at this. Look at this fine man here. You know, look at this. Happy couple are going to be gone soon. So that's right. We need we always got space for more women. So that's what the discord does. Right. It makes it makes men men, you know, so that's right. You come in, they man up and then we marry them off. Hey, I was a boy before. Yeah. If you're if you're a single lady and you're looking for a Dutchman that's over six feet tall, you've come to the right server. We have plenty of them. We've already had we've already had a discord wedding. Yep. Yep. Yep. We're waiting for our well, we're waiting for our first discord baby. So that'll that'll come. Give it time. It'll come. I see Paul and lightener has dropped in. Paul, can you talk or you just listening in? Because we were talking about you and our conversation. Well, nothing out of him. Maybe maybe maybe he's driving or something. So anyway, I put the spotlight on YouTube. So maybe I'll maybe I'll have to clip this out and make a commercial for my channel. Do you need a man? Little did Joey know he was creating a dating app. Joey's waiting for it. Joe is waiting for it to work for him. Well, you know, if we go with the Kervin server statistics, there's a one in 2000 chance that it can actually happen to you. So to keep it still, but higher for women. So ladies, ladies fish in a barrel. Here it is. Oh, did you see the ad for essence of white in Bridges of Meaning? Yeah. Yeah. Oh, that was hilarious. It was it was funny. It was funny. All of the Calvin none of the Klein. Is this going live right now? Oh, yeah, you are in fact streaming on the internet. You are. It's the whole channel, Cassidy. Great. So now now this is better than just changing your status on Facebook or Instagram. This is. Yes, it's the status rocket of like, oh, I don't put it on Facebook anymore. I go on Paul's channel. That's right. That's right. That's that's how the world knows. That's how the world knows. Right. So I'm going to go ahead and put it on Facebook. That's how the world knows. Well, I'm I'm kind of I wish Paul Antleiter would tell me because I'm ready to land the plane here just because these are meant not to be. I get the sense that if I did this, we could do it all day and then I'd be an Adam friended land. I have a 12 hour live stream from the Bridges of Meaning discord and people can that actually would be totally fun. I would love to do that and people can jump in and out of the room and that would be totally fun. But I don't have that time today. So we actually could set that up. Yeah, we could for sure. Yeah. The comments on the other YouTube videos that you've done from this look most like overwhelmingly positive. So I guess if people want to see more of these, one of those standard YouTube things, but comment below. So there are 57 people watching right now. Are there really? Wow. Wow. That's surprising given these thief in the night just kind of OK, I've got 10 minutes. I'm going to go on the Discord server and maybe Nick will be around because I want to follow up on his comment on the video. So that's that's how this whole thing started. So people are commenting in the chat, Luke, Catherine, Lance. I hope. Mike Antlyer's Mike wasn't working. It looks like so. Oh, and you got a ten dollar super chat from M Dominus, a Christian that follows the truth, capital T, where it leads him with undoubtedly will with undoubtedly engage in a cycle of deconstruction and reconstruction. The Apostles experienced this with Christ. If if can I get you to read all the super chats, Jacob, that would be that would be there's an end ominous. That's my story. Five dollar super chat. Those are the only ones I see. So if you want to put words in Jacob's mouth, now's the time. Oh, that's a super chat. I love Paul of Tarsus. So did we land the plane was the initial question. Well, I think Paul's trying to get in. So I want to I want to give him a chance if he can. I don't know what's going on with his with his Mike. He's clearly trying to get in. Let's say all it's showing that your mic is not activated in the discord app. So you might that might be one thing to try. I don't know. If you go into setting you voice and you know, and then make sure you've got the correct mic selected. It looks like you either silenced yourself or you're on push to talk. So Luke says, I'm giving you a one thousand dollar spiritual super chat. Yeah, thanks Luke. Luke's own personal brand of Bitcoin. I have no idea who Travis will win is, but he's saying I'm giving a super chat in vendor crypto. So now you have your own crypto coin. Wow, there you go. Got my own crypto. Got my own crypto. I think Joey's trying to help Paul out there. No, we missed we missed Sherry coming in. That's a bummer. Is it only six? Yeah, I limit the room. So, okay. Well, we can jump out. So we just wanted to say hi. Okay, well say hi to the world. Great to see you both. Bye bye. See you later. Oh, Sherry is back. She might not be able to hop in. Okay. So, uh, Jeremy Asselin says, as long as the mic is better than Tom Holland's during the today's, the rest is history live stream. They did a live stream. Yeah, they did. They've they've now started a club. Uh, and they're going to be doing a live stream. So, uh, I'm going to be doing a live stream. I'm going to be doing a live stream. I'm going to be doing a live stream. They've now started a club, uh, pay to get in club and there's a discord and they have their first live stream today. So of course I, I got myself in because I'm a super fan and there's Sherry. So, hey Sherry, how are you? Oh, no, we can't hear you. Let's see. This is, this is part of the reason I don't do this too much because it's hard to, it's hard to manage. If we did do something longer and, uh, more prepared, what we could do is we could prep people in the green room room before moving them into here. Yeah. Yeah. Yep. That's true. We're all, we're all kind of new to discord still. Yeah. Did you have something you want to say Sherry? Just want to hang out because I was about to land the plane. I should, uh, I've got a men's Bible study tonight and, um, no, she's, she's not got her mic working either. So, Oh, here we go. Sorry. No, I was going to say land the plane. I just came in from chores and, and, uh, and Luke was like, you have to get in there. And I thought, well, they've been at it for long enough. Like they're probably ready to stop. So it's okay. No worries. All right. Well, Paul says he can't get in, so I will land the plane. So thank you all for this and, uh, thanks for showing up and thanks for coming in and, um, thank Ferdy and Cassidy for, you know, their appearance and you Sherry and everybody else who popped in. So I'm going to, I'm going to end the live stream.