https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=q3hJVvIewao

 recording. All right. This is the second Freddie and Paul show for today. Two times is better. Three times a charm. Don't be alarmed. Fred said we should do it before a church. And so we quick did it for church and made that fancy opening. And then we had a wrap and we had the sports report, but fancy Nancy, wasn't there to get the sermon report. So then when Nancy showed up, we got to do the show again. I feel a little suckered, you know? Okay. No, that's okay. It's okay. Don't worry about it. I'll get to it right away then. Okay. Okay. Sermon report. We're talking about acts 12 and basically when I got out of it, there was the end because that's what I need desperately. And I hope the rest of you need it for look, the God to lead us and guide us. Leave me, guide me, show me the way, because I'm going through some things where I really need his wisdom to help me. And I'm thinking maybe some of you out there are feeling the same way. And what do I do? What do I do? Where do I go? Well, right. Turn to God, Fred. Right. Yeah. That's more or less what I got out of it. It saves us a lot of time if I just said that, huh? So all that 30 minutes, it was a long one today. Yeah. He was going through all kinds of different history that I know nothing about that much, but then how it's important. Okay. All right. Good. There we have the sermon report in. We already covered local sports. We talked about the fact, we don't talk about tennis. We don't talk about golf. Ask the question about Tiger Woods, fantasy football. We said that when the fantasy football season comes up, maybe we'll have Reggie come in and give some waiver wire reports or something. Or Pele soccer. What about soccer? Pele. Pele. Yeah, he was good. He was good. Pele's a long time ago now. Yeah, I know. So anyways, I do know that the Suns and the Bucks were playing. It's 4-3. It's 4-3. 3-2. 3-2. 3-2. Who has them all? Bucks. Bucks has them. Oh dear. Now Tuesday nights. She said, oh dear. Tuesday nights are very important on that one. Because when it goes 3-3, you then guess what? Then the next person in place and then whoever wins. Well, then they're, yeah, they go again. That's the title. That's it. That's it. Yep. All right. Good. Well, there we go. The Suns, the reason I'm for the Suns is Kevin Johnson. Yeah, he was a good player. He was a good Suns player. And we knew him. Oh, yeah. Yeah, I knew him. I knew him quite well. And then when he became mayor and I'm on the College Greens Neighborhood Association, he would actually come to our meetings and find out how our neighborhood was. Well, you know, I got a bone to pick with him because when he was mayor, he came here for a campaign thing and he told me, I'll come some Sunday to your service. I said, OK. And he never did. Oh, yeah. Well, yeah. Wow. How about that? Huh? OK, Freddie. Aunt T. Grizzly. What about T. Grizzly? Yeah. What about T. Grizzly? Where's that comment, T. Grizzly? Oh, oh, oh. Someone made on I'm trying to think of the what was it again? Those people that made our wraps and stuff. Adam made the wrap. No, not him. The other guys would. Anyways, he made a wrap with me talking and then T. Grizzly with a bear or something. I don't know what it was. And then with the cats, remember them? I have no idea what you're talking about. No, there was cats and they showed me. Was this a dream that you had? No, it was me and you. It was me and you, Raph, singing. And you said, yeah, you made that kind of look. And I mean, I kind of look a lot in this show. I know. But what I'm saying is it was I can't think of the. All right. We got to learn to play, Fred. You didn't do it. You didn't do a song. And well, we're going to do one other thing. OK, he has a birthday. Who does? Paul. OK, you do, right? I do. I wasn't hatched. There we go. Saturday. Yes. All right. OK, so you and I are going and the rest of you out there. Are going to sing Happy Birthday to him. OK, wait next week. Now, right now. Happy birthday to you. Happy birthday to you. Happy birthday, dear Paul. Happy birthday to you. And many more. All right. I'll blow out the candles. Many more here. And it'd be like that. And it'd roar. Where am I going? Where else am I going to do the Freddie and Paul show? Huh? Huh? All right, Fred. Maybe mom's house. We can do that. No, no, no. I'm just playing. All right, let me do this. How does this come on? It says I see the Lord seated. You're going to wrap it? I see the Lord seated on the throne. Yeah, on the throne. Holy, holy, holy. You like that part? All these. Yeah, all those first. OK, OK. Oh, holy, holy first? No. That's first. I seek the Lord, seek not seated on the throne, exalted in the train, his robe fills the temple with glory and the whole earth is filled and worthy filled. And the whole earth is filled. His glory, holy, holy, holy, holy. I said, holy, holy, holy. Holy, holy, holy, holy. Holy is the Lord of Lords. I see him seated. I'm from the 916. Don't you see this? I'm not tricks for kids, but I'm rolling like this. Enough to the chat. Busting fat. Rolling the dice. I'm not vanilla ice, but when I come up, I like to eat beans and rice. Jesus is the man. So open up the book, read the Bible and take a second look. Look up Psalms 34 and rock it on the mic like a lion I roar. Wow, that was quite a wrap. All right. All right, guys. Well done. Yeah, we're good. All right. We're going to the day twice. One love. Keep your comments coming. Keep the comments coming. All right, Leakes for.