https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=n20Ruq4nVc4

 We are live. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Our first ever live stream. I stream with my buddy Charles J and Nancy. We got 12 people watching. We got a number of birthday well wishes here. Oh, cooperate for me. Here we go. Let's see. We got just a whole bunch of regulars from the channel. We got Eve saying happy birthday. We got Eve saying happy birthday, Freddie. Lance, happy birthday, Freddie. Welcome to the Five-O Club. Anybody wants to come into the chat at some point, I put the link there. Anselman, Meta Jester, Vixen Dixon, lots of regular fans for the Freddie and Paul show. Senor Sabour Boya. Where you at, Snoop Dogg? Where is Snoop Dogg? You think they show up for this? Too short. There you go. So lots and lots of new comments. Everybody's wishing Freddie a happy birthday. Happy birthday from Northern Ireland. Look at that. How many people? 19 people right now watching. That's nice. That's nice right on, man. I have some new chief rapper Freddie Anselman. Mark from Northern Ireland. Wow. This is my buddy CJ, man. We're the magic and we got it going like we're fantastic. Alright, so here we are in the Freddie and Paul show. We're real tired. What's going to go first? You know, Freddie, you've been doing this show for about almost seven years. Yeah. And for most of those years, you talk about the Kings. Oh yeah, they're doing good. And they're not very good. The Kings haven't been good for like 20 years. Rod says happy birthday, Freddie. So Rod Harris says happy birthday. What's up, Rod Harris? What's happening? That number right there. I chose you the number. Yeah. Charles will be putting out my music soon later on once my stimulus comes and I'm going to be putting out my music. Okay. Okay. No, you gotta do this. No, you know, sports. Yeah. Talk to the camera. Fox is doing good. Holmes is doing good. And so bonus and what's number seven? I don't know. Who else? Here? I don't know. Justin, who else on the Kings we like? So, I just want to say something. I want to say something about the Kings. Alright. Okay. Not the Kings. You gotta speak up because Nina's making a lot of noise in the kitchen. We gotta talk over her. Oh. And what Nina doesn't know is that her voice is being transmitted live onto the internet. Okay. So, one of our members of this church, Forest Barnes met fifty cents. Oh, yes, he sure did. I see that. At the Kings. He sure did. Where you at? I see it on Instagram. I'm with them on Instagram. Yeah. And that was quite something and guess what he did for us? Forest is a. Okay. We'll bring you up. Alright. Forest is a magician and guess what? He did magic for fifty cents. Oh, wow. That was quite something. My friend, Jacob, who's visited church. He says, happy birthday Freddy from Israel. He's he's chatting from Israel. Wow. He says happy birthday. He's been real. Happy birthday to the best dancer in town. Whoa. Okay. We got a couple of guys who want to come in and wish happy birthday live. We're going to bring you a chat first. Happy birthday to you. Happy birthday to you. Happy birthday dear Freddy. Happy birthday to you. Alright. Thanks for taking this all off and I'm so happy for you. I appreciate you. One love brother. Alright, now we're going to bring in Lance. There's Lance. What's up, Lance? Happy birthday Freddy. You got that Kansas City cheese. You know, that's right. Regulator. Regulator. Keeping it real. I got a question for you. Yeah. You're 50 years. Who's the best Cali rapper of all time and IQ Ice Cube Warren G Nate Dogg. Who is it? E40. E 40. You love E2. Alright. And two short Snoop Doggy Dogg. Doctor Dre and Eminem. That was the best. Those are all the good ones but the best one is I'd have to say E40 because I like the way he's lingo is. Yeah. He's from the Bay. He's from the Bay. He's game tight. E40. You game tight homie. That's a great. That's a great let's hey, welcome to the big five o club brother. Happy birthday. Hit me up. Hit me up on my email, man. Turn foot props out, man. I'm going to make it up in this. You know what I'm saying? Alright, peace out. Peace out, man. Alright. Thank you, Lance. Thank you. Alright, we got happy birthday from Australia. Wow. We got a happy birthday from the United States. We got a happy birthday from Scotland. Wow. Mark is in Ireland. Bryce and Cole Kiwi land. You know what that is? Where the where the Kiwis come from? New Zealand. New Zealand. Susan says happy 50th birthday, Freddy. Senior Suboya. Thank you. John Brown. All kinds of birthday messages. How about that? Wow. What's this guy's name? Oh, well, he recorded it and I because I'm on a different computer, I can't, I can't get it in but I can play it here for you. Okay. I just want to look for it. I will, I will show you what it looks like. Then, I'm going to do the ceremony. Yeah, we got plenty. We'll we'll take some extra time today because it's a very special occasion. I'll play it for you and then I'll play it for the camera. This this guy's name is Griswold Grim. He's a rapper and he is he is a friend of mine. Okay. And he did a rap for you even though he's not a rapper. Oh, okay. Alright, get the volume up. Here we go. First for you and I'll play it for the camera. This is not my specialty but um the Freddy and Paul show. The Freddy and Paul show. Freddy is why Paul keeps bringing the show. Jesus. Look in his eyes. So, the Freddy and Paul show. Freddy is why Paul keeps bringing the show. I'll play it for the camera so people can watch it and see how well this goes. I'm not going to play it but um the Freddy and Paul show. The Freddy and Paul show. Freddy is why Paul keeps bringing the all show. See him walk humble, touched by the lord's glow. Praising lord Jesus. He lifts up the down low. Look in his eyes and you'll see his soul shine though. It's ready and Paul show. The Freddy and Paul show. Freddy is why Paul keeps bringing the show. There it is. Oh, we've got Eve. Hi, Eve. Hi, Eve. How you doing there? Uh nice to see you. Here. Well, we'll bring her in. Nice to see your face. There you go. Oh, you little girl. I just want to thank you for all the joy you've brought me. All the joy that you've brought me that you brought me. All the joy that you brought me. All the joy that you brought me, because I'm so happy to be with you today. And it's great to have you with us. Thank you. Thank you so much. What a pleasure to be here together with Nancy. Nancy, how did you race this boy? Thank you. Yeah. Thank you very much. Both of you, pastor Paul, you have meant so much to me and I'm really tired. I have to get up early Spider Fab. expert. you know you know we love you all. How DM us here. We love you all. We love you all. We坏 you. We love you. We are those who I'm gold when I chose believe you because just to be a professions. disguise to be in quartz permanents work on Yeah. So I know all about Paul Van De Klay's background. He's very Friesian, by the way, Afia. But anyway, yeah, yeah, yeah. We did music together. You're Friesian. Don't lie to me. Yeah, she has some numbers. We have the best horses. Yeah, they do. Thank you. Thank you, my dear. So good to see you. Thank you so much for having me, even virtually part of your church. It's been amazing. It meant a lot to me. Okay. All right. Bye-bye. Happy birthday. You want me to rap for you real quick? Yes! Here we go. Let's go. Eve, Eve, keep it like this. I'm on the microphone and I got it like that. Enough chitter chat. Kicking it like that. Eve is a girl and she's good to go, like the microphone says. Really, though, Romeo won love. To the brothers you see, the homies on 3rd Street doing big tees, rocking the mic, recite to a true delight, good to go without a word to say. Drink that Sunday delight and keep it real, okay? One love, Freddie. One love. Thank you, Eve. Have a good day. Bye-bye. All right. That was awesome. Yeah, it's late in the Netherlands. She stayed up for this. I've seen her. Yeah, people from all over the world, Lee, Smatch. Freddie, what's your favorite taco? Beef. Beef taco. Answer to Freddie's favorite taco. Beef and cheese. If you've got questions, just put them in the chat and we'll try to answer the questions. Okay, what's next in the show? Mom has to do the sermon. The sermon report? All right, the sermon report. Okay, well, basically, Pastor Paul was in Matthew 5, 3 through 12. And he was in the church. Pete, our praise man, put this together and I thought it was really great because what it does is tell what it was the sermon on the mount and the Beatitudes. Now, I'm going to read what the sermon on the mount is. Okay. The earth. Wow. The glory of God is there. Blessed are you who suffer hate. All because of me. Rejoice and be glad. Yours is the kingdom shine for all to see. But basically in that last part is those of us that preach reason are ridiculed. And basically, they, you will still see the glory of God. All right. You got Carys says happy birthday from Poland, another country. Keep it real. Thank you, Nancy. Thank you. Well, that's the only way to say. Okay, now you got to talk about football. We're going to watch our 49ers today. Oh, the 49ers. Yeah, they beat Seattle last week. Now they're playing the Cowboys. Listen to me, they played last night and they won. Yeah, I know. 49ers beat the Cowboys, right? Right. The Cowboys. All those on the inside. Go Niners. Carys mom shares birthday with Freddie. Freddie's actually tomorrow. Keep going. The Niners are going to play the Cowboys. And the winner of that goes and faces the Chiefs. Yeah. All right. I got to go for the Niners, of course. Well, of course. They're home town. Where are you 40s from? The Bay Area. Freddie's a Niners fan. The Ninerators fan. The Beers. Kings Lakers. They're doing it real bad. Goin' arts, happy birthday from Michigan. Hey, happy birthday. Thank you. They keep coming. Thank you, Anselm. All right. So what's next on the show? You guys gonna rap or sing? Can we sing? Sing? Did we rehearse that? I can sing good with you. Let me start it. I'll go with the lyrics to that one. This little light of mine, I'm gonna let it shine. Let it shine, let it shine, let it shine. Won't let Satan poop it out. I'm gonna let it shine. Sing it. Won't let Satan poop it out. I'm gonna let it shine, let it shine, let it shine, let it shine. Chow Sacramento, I'm gonna let it shine, all over the USA. I'm gonna let it shine, let it shine, let it shine, let it shine. All over the world. There you go. I'm gonna let it shine, like the Freddie and Paul show. I'm gonna let it shine. All right. Now you gotta put the beat on. I gotta put the beat on, remember? Yeah, exactly. This isn't gonna get us taken out from YouTube, will it? No, no, I'm not gonna say nothing bad. No, I mean the beat. No, no, it's the beat. Happy birthday, North Dakota. North Dakota, you got it going on like a new world. Shining in London, Vixen Vixen from London. Shining in London, shining bright. Kara Singleton. Kara's a good singer. Go ahead, you got the beat? You gotta turn it up. It was up loud. Did I turn it down here? Turn your volume up on your phone. Oh, okay. I can see my switch open up. His phone is like... Oh, we always have technical difficulties on the Freddie... Hey, Nathan Franco from the Bay Area. Happy birthday. Try to... I had a period of a year. So my bad again. Keep talking. So Paul, what did they say about... Happy birthday from Sweden. What did they say about... Oh, did you see the tennis? Is Serena retired or is she still playing? Serena is... I have no idea. I don't follow tennis. You trying to pair it again? Yeah, that's probably why I don't. You might have to go without. No, it's connected. It always kicks it up. It's not gonna work? It should work. Still not. It's kicking it out again? It's kicking it out. I just paired it. Never mind. I want nobody to keep kicking it out. You got it? There we go. All right. Try it again. Just push the button. I can't just push play. Please don't stick it in. There we go. Turn that up now. Just all right. Here we go. Look at the camera. Wrap it on the mic like an MIC. I know it's just a button. From the SAC, I got Charles Jackson really tight in your seat. Bling, bling, bling. Money ain't a thing. Or you play a hitters, just sip on some scissors. Because you're jealous that you can't compete to my level. Now DJ, hit that treble. I love your tune. Oh, yeah. Good to go without a word to say. I drink Sunny Delight every day. Don't forget about eggs and bacon. Really, they're okay. Good to go without a word to say. I got my boy Charles J. And he does not play. He's got a curl that'll rock your world. Like on the Freddie and Paul show. Good to go. Don't you know? Like solid gold. Like shimmering tight. I come up bright like vanilla ice. Yo, that's right. Boy, Charles J. Bustin' something. Because you're always up to something. Once upon a time there was a man named CJ. He'd bust the first raps every day. As he cruised down the street, in his lexicon his name was known from college to Texas. All girls want to know his name. Like dice, he played them all the same. Dressed to impress, always was he. And girls mighted bite his hand to share the love. Follow him like a fan like Vegas. There's no luck twice to shine bright. Like double O-70, turn up all the lights. His curls shine for all the freaks. Drooping down past shoulders. Look at his chic, wearing a lace cologne. Smelling nice, wearing diamonds and chains. Shimmering tight. That's right. Tight, you see? Yo, E-40 is cool, you know? All the way to the top. Don't forget about two short keys. Good to go. Got to work the same. Ice cube nose. Then you got Snoop Dogg, you dog. He is trained and he ain't odd. Peace out to Snoop. Peace out to Dre. Don't forget about Eminem, really though, okay? Then you got, my boy, MC Hammer. Doing it right. Like he said, we got to pray just to make it today. That's right, we got to do it right. We got to keep it game tight every single, single day. Rocking on the microphone like I was to the place with the rhythm to the top. Rhythm to the bottom. Oh! I think that got him. Nice. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ, Gene. Who's that guy? He's Freddie. He loves Jesus Christ, Gene. You ended off, Charles J, with a rap. That is so funky and that's a fact. So let me hear you, Charles J, one more verse and don't you dare start to curse. When I drive down the street in my 65 all the ladies roll by and say hi. I get plenty of numbers, you know, the seven digits with the ladies I met and you might say I'm with Barbara, Diane, and girl named Susan. You know I'm the greatest cash-to-stuck lady cause my foot hits the pedal and she's in the gear, Veronica. Follow me from the rear, I pull over and start to curse. She comes to every work, my game is dead. She's staying behind in my time. Wherever in mine. Did you guys know? Ganton Morgan, who does that, Charles J's channel, on YouTube as well. Real tight. That was awesome. That was awesome. Alright, let's finish this show off talking what's going to happen for the rest of the week on sports. Okay, so today we got the 49ers and the Cowboys. Let's hope Prescott doesn't have a good game. And let's hope Holmes doesn't have a good game if it's the 49ers against the Chiefs. And we need the Kings to continue to do good and stay healthy and have their coaches come game tight and all that stuff. Peace out to Forrest, peace out to Gordon. We didn't see you today but that's okay. He must be busy, he's okay. And um, yeah, so let's just keep it real. Let's do this right. Just keep peace and harmony in the world because if we have more peace and harmony the world will be a better world. Because we got to pray just to make it today. That's why we pray. So anyways, I hope this is good for you and I'm having a good birthday and I feel right and I got it going on and that's tight. So, amen, hallelujah. Thank you Charles J. Thanks mom for coming on the show. And giving birth to you. I mean, you don't have a birthday without a mom. I've heard that too. So, okay, so what's going on? We'll talk about that later. Basically, so give me some ideas what I can do for the show in the future. Oh, we'll just keep making stuff up. We'll keep making stuff up. We can do this all the time now? I don't think we're... I don't think we're... Maybe once a month? We'll do this again sometime. We can't do it every time. I know, once a month. Because I remember it's 25 minutes. We never go 25 minutes. Can we do five more minutes? We said 30 minutes. I want to hear from you Paul. What do you want to hear from me? I just want to hear how I can tune in to your program. You can tune in to my program on YouTube. Paul VanderClay. No, I know that. But I wanted to thank you for putting out three things to tell people. Oh, you're welcome. I had to let the fans know to come in live today because we never do a live show. Look at the point. You got four or two people watching. How about that? Wow, we need more and more people. That's pretty cool. Any other questions for Freddie? If you got a question for Freddie, put it in there. We've got four more minutes. He did say 30 minutes. Three and a half minutes. If you have a question for Freddie, time to get it in fast. Otherwise, we've got to land the plane. Okay, Freddie, follow up on the taco question. Flour or corn tacos? Flour. Flour. You heard it here. Freddie prefers the flour for the tortilla for the tacos. Favorite shoes for dancing? Penny loafers. Oh, like mine? Penny loafers. Freddie's the Adam. Michael's the Adam. There you go. What's the meaning of life? That's a nice one. Transquility. Jesus. Alright. Does Purdy have it in him? Yes. The quarterback for 49ers. That's right. Purdy's got it going on. He's a rookie, but he's a tough cookie. He's got it going on like Mookie. They're believers in Purdy here. Any other questions? Two and a half minutes for questions. What do you think of the Warriors, Paul? What do I think of the Warriors? I don't think about them hardly at all. I'm really happy for the Kings, though. I'm really happy for the Kings. I think Sacramento. Sacramento is a very loyal town for its Kings, and they haven't gotten a lot of basketball excellence. I like this kind of stuff. I'm getting chemistry like we're all family here. I got my Charles J. from another mother, brother. I got my mom here from birth. You're like my uncle. You're not my grandpa. You're my uncle. That's right. Alright. Another question. Who is your favorite quarterback of all time? Joe Montana. Joe Montana. Favorite, favorite receiver? Jerry Rice. Montana to Rice. That was a combination. I'll tell you. One of the best. Any other questions for Freddie? Now's your chance. We're not going to haul this thing out every Sunday. Good answer. Mark from Ireland says, good answer to Joe Montana. I don't know how much happy birthday Jess says. I don't know how much football you watch in Ireland. I watch a lot of football in Ireland. Well, besides soccer. So, alright. Are we ready to land the plan? Any plans for Freddie's merchandise? Any plans for Freddie? Are you going to sell merch, Freddie? Yeah, I'll be getting some shirts out. Yeah, Ronzo. I think the Charles is going to have to work on the formula because he's the producer over here. He's the man in command and got it going on like the man with the plan. I know this guy. I've known this guy since 93. We've been really tight. We had our own program. I hope you're doing alright, Chris. Chris, you did us wrong. You didn't show us the Philadelphia Stadium. You didn't show us the Sixers. He's the kid Chris. But it's okay, Chris. It's okay. You're still a good guy. What size shirt do you wear, Freddie? 280. What size shirt do you wear, Freddie? 2X. 2X shirt. You can send it to Paul. How does it feel to be awesome, Fred? Awesome is awesome like Tossin'. I don't know. Kind of like applesauce. People have been bothering me to do merch. I don't like doing merch just about a week, but we can do merch about the Freddie and Paul show. If there's anybody out there who can do a Pepsi for us. What do we want to advertise Pepsi for? They're not paying us. If Pepsi, if you want us to do a Pepsi commercial, Freddie and I will do a commercial for Pepsi. So we've got to get paid. Okay, we're done. We've got one more. What's one more? One watched American football. Oh, he watched American football in the 80s when Joe Montana, Dan Marial, and Bo Jackson were in action. All right. We have reached the 30 minute mark. I have fulfilled all righteousness. I had a good B day. We've got to pray just to make it today. Okay. Ready? Bye everybody. One love. Amen. Hallelujah. Thank you very much everybody. All right. I was arrived.