https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=XKgUqdw-ybA

 Let's see, I'm gonna need a Discord link here. Oh boy. Yeah, people are gonna have to. You're just letting the dregs in today then. Well, the Discord, having the Discord be an estuary, be sort of a buffer from the open internet, I think is part of why this thing works. Because it's, I mean, one of the things that I don't like is necessarily having a financial barrier between people. So you don't have to send Paul VanderKlay $5 a month to have a part of this. There's no financial barrier, but there is a commitment barrier. And in a lot of ways, that's sort of like church. So all the- Unless you're a Jehovah's Witness. Look, all the usual suspects have showed up. Up, up, up, up, here's another one. We always happen to do these at a similar time. It's just whoever's off work. Well, it's so much fun for me to do so that basically I use it as a carrot. It's like, I got all these tasks I have to get done today in terms of my job. And so it's a reward. If I work real hard and get all my little tasks done, then I'll allow myself to do this. So that's how it works. I see Mark is back at home. I am. Back in lovely South Carolina. Not all set up yet. Not all set up. Microphone's not plugged in. The new camera's not on. But I'm getting there. I've been, it's been a rough day. Wasn't it you that was juggling the microphone one of these days? Yeah, no, it's on the stand now. Okay, well that's good. That's where it belongs. It's not oriented properly, but- I've prepped the arm. But I need to make another cut to put the arm back in. And I may or may not use the arm. We'll see. And how are you doing, Eric? Good, good. I'm hanging in there. Good, good. Cars are great places to make videos in. They really are. They are. Unfortunately, just stopped this right as I got to pick up my daughter. So I'm probably gonna have to pick her up. But I was listening to your commentary on the Babylon V and Elon Musk. And I was appreciating how you're picking out the lack of reverence that people, the modern Protestant church, even though I hate the whole division of Protestant and Catholic and whatever else. I still think one of the biggest issues of Christianity is that we have basically gathered ourselves into our little clubhouses and foregone the universality of the very creation that is existence that is all within the world. Like we're trying to work within it, but it's not ours. And we keep on making our little clubhouses and making it ours as opposed to the earth is the Lord and everything in it. And that whole reverence thing was just, I felt that even being in like Muslim countries and stuff like that, on one hand that have this deep respect for going to places that are not particularly friendly, but at the same time, we're also doing things to not be outwardly bold and put ourselves, and there's reasons for that. So you can still do work, I guess, but at the same time, there's like Elon Musk is picking apart, like how serious is the church about what we're doing? And you see that with the high profile worship leaders and stuff like that. It seems like, and there's even the admonition about letting people that are new to the faith into high positions and stuff. And I've seen that firsthand too. And there's just so many little things where we wanna be accessible, but like you're talking about the quivering masses of availability. I feel like all these things, there is a point, there is a place for that, but we have lost the ability to understand the holinesses, the set apart. And it's not that everything isn't the Lord's, but there's some things that are specific and special, and that's the extra holiness, but anyway, I don't know. I did, so this morning, I did a five-way conversation with the esoteric randos, and that's Nate and Sherry and Michael and Karen. And we talked about this, we talked about, well, there's a few things going on, but one of the things is how we respond to pain and suffering when we see it. Culturally, we sort of become very apologetic or avoidant. And one of the things that we noted about Peterson was that he got that balance better than many, partly probably because of his background in as a clinical psychologist, how he could both be, he could both hold people accountable and also connect them to the fact that part of what they needed to do, part of what they needed to address their suffering is agency. And so he would give them practical ways to develop and grow their agency, and then they could use that to address suffering, but it's very different from the way agency's being used. So I think that's a great point, Eric. The other point that what you said reminded me of was when we first started doing our meetups here at the church, and I said, because I talked to John Van Dock, and John Van Dock is like, well, people would be scared to come into a church to do meetups, and so I talked to the atheists in our group, and they were quite adamant that the church was a good place to do this, because they said, well, atheists will probably take it a little bit more seriously if it's in a church. And I think that's exactly some of the dynamic we saw with Elon Musk. He took that conversation more seriously than the Babylon Bee guys, and there is, especially with clergy, a real occupational hazard that we get overly familiar with the sacred and lose our reverence for it. So. And there's this set of something that once you've seen the administrative side, you understand that's the church. It's like, hmm. No, you see people, you see how this one individual circumstance is, and then as soon as you think you've gained mastery over something and people puff you up enough, you've gained mastery. You're the boss, you're the head, allegedly, although hold on, Christ is the head. That's right. And he is the husband. And be careful how you relate to his bride. Yeah. So, Al, is that, I don't think I've ever seen you here on the Discord before. You might be here, but I haven't seen at least you in video, so welcome. Thank you. I've been watching for a long time, I had joined Discord not too long ago, a few weeks ago, from Seattle, Washington, so, I saw you had this live stream up, so I thought I'd jump in and see what it was all about. Well, thanks. Well, just fair warning, this is being live streamed out to the internet. So if you don't wanna be out in the open internet, don't be in this room, because that's part of what happens here. So. Yeah, yeah. Just as long as everybody understands that. And it's good to see my friend, Luke, who I troll and give a hard time, but Luke, you know I only give you a hard time because I love you, don't you? I do. Sam just texted me and said, wait, aren't you an esoteric rando? And I said, I would have thought that I kind of founded the organization, but. It's a categorization problem. I mean, I can't have you in all my videos. That's true. We can't tell. We can't tell. Cause we have no idea what you're saying, Luke. Maybe, who knows? We can't deny it. And you should make that statement. I forget, I forget, last time you were in here, you said something and someone in the comment section, it might've been Chad the alcoholic was like, I understand nothing that comes out of that man's mouth. But yet you and Luke don't say the same things. So it's very interesting. Not even close. No, not even close. Luke is concerned with things inside the church and I'm not concerned with anything inside the church. I don't think there is anything else. No, we have a poll. Yeah. There's nothing outside religion. We'll say that, but yeah. There's certainly. There's the Cosmos, there's Christ, there's the bride of Christ. That's it. Well, that, so that makes sense. I mean, this is my bugaboo, Paul. I don't know if you read my comment on the last live stream cause I got to catch up on it. Cause I had, I didn't hear it live. I jumped in at the end, right? And then there was this whole section where everyone's like, what, Peterson, he can't critique the church and he has critiqued to the church are wrong. And I'm like, no, the church receded. And maybe if you think everything's the church, you wouldn't have noticed that it receded, but it did from the people outside the church. And I would have- The church manifesting outside. Melchizedek. No, no, but it's receded. So for example, you know, and I put this in my comment, but I'll say it here, right? I just learned recently, because I'm a recent resident of South Carolina, that all of the hospitals in South Carolina were religious order run, all of them. Now, none of them are, I believe, or at least, you know, all the ones I know of have been bought up. That's a recession of the church from the perspective of somebody who isn't attending one. And I, you know, like St. Mary's, I'm pretty sure was Catholic, which is interesting cause the Catholics are late comers to the South and probably not welcome cause they could be Yankees. And like, fair enough. Like I'm with the Baptists and the Presbyterians on that. Catholicism, man, those guys, and their Jesuits in particular, yeah. So- We'll be there soon enough. We're sending them to shot troops. The number of Jesuit paratroopers are coming. Probably. Like the number of schools that are religious, right? They're all shrinking, right? So you see this recession of at least the support structures that the church used to provide. And so when Peterson's talking, I'm going, yeah, of course. Duh. And I'm always going back to how long did he spend in Harvard Square? Like how long did he spend in Cambridge? Because how much of this is stuff I grew up with that he grabbed when he moved here and how much of this stuff is obvious in Canada? I don't know. I'd love to kind of figure that out. I don't know that you could figure it out, but I would love to figure that out. Cause I'm just like, you know, right down to the devil take the hindmost. I'm like, that's one of my favorite sayings. Where did this crazy guy get it? He's not French Canadian. So that doesn't fit. And despite that, he seems to be okay. Even being from Canada and not being French Canadian. I don't know. It's weird. Well, that's really an excellent point, Mark, about the, I mean, cause I've been talking about the recession of modernity, but to talk about the recession of the church, which obviously has been, that's in a sense been the march of modernity. And- Where's your hole? Like, you know, in some sense, people were saying, Peterson has no right to talk about the hole that the church left. And I'm like, wait a minute. What? Of course he does. He's not wrong. He sees it clearly. He's not wrong. And yeah, Luke, I mean, to some extent you're right. Like you can't escape religion. Something like it is going to pop back up and it's going to look a lot like church. But I think that's different from saying that, that church is going to, you know, is everywhere or something. Cause I don't think it's church. I think it's religion. And there's bad religion, like the safety religion or the race religion or the climate religion. Those are bad religions. See my YouTube channel, navigating patterns to learn more. Hey, I got four subs last time, damn it. If I can get four each time, I'm at 194. I'm trying to get over 200. Come on. Oh, come on. Help Mark get over 200. It works, Paul. You just don't like it. I sent John Vendong to you. Did you notice that? Did he contact you? No, no, I haven't heard from him. I told John, you made an impression on John Vendong. And I said, you should talk to, you should talk to Mark. Tell Mark to have you on his channel. So, yeah, I would love that. Sure. So I guess we're done. So I should disconnect. Is that, is that everything we have to say? Did we? No, I thought- Cause I cannot imagine a group in which Mark and Luke are present that we would ever finish. Yeah, no, no, no. There's no, there's no finishing here. But I think you can connect the whole in the church to the recession of the church concept. Right? And that should help you like frame this in a way that Peterson makes more sense for everybody. And there is, there is a tension in there. I mean, did I leave the church or did the church leave me? I mean, you always have that with, you know, with people who are slamming the door on their way out. But yet I still think that the opposite, the opposite critique is fair that people and people who have only had childhood experience in the church, only have childhood experience in and with the church. And- And the childhood understanding of- Better. And that's actually, that's the whole problem. Yes. Right? The Heideggerian critique is a 12 year old critique of the church. It's the same critique that a 12 year old would have after getting out of Sunday school. It's the same literal critique. It's the same critique that that Vervecky had. And then went, oh, the early church fathers were non-theists too. It's like, didn't that tell you something about the mistake you made in your assumptions? And apparently it didn't by the way, but you would think it would click for people. No, your understanding was just not there yet. But the church was in front of you the whole time. Like you'll catch up eventually. Well, there are a few, there's a lot of good stuff in the conversation. The esoterics minus Luke conversation that we recorded today. And I'll post it tomorrow morning on the channel. And it's an outstanding conversation. It was really good. But one of the things that we did talk about was, some of Michael in fact had, one of the things that Michael noted was how, basically part of what we're discovering with, in terms of our relating with John Vervecky is just how much Christianity is still in him. And this is something that we're finding out all over the place with the recession of the church, how much Christianity is in a whole bunch of people. And in some ways that's Tom Holland's major thesis of dominion. Well, and that's a lot of that is my point, is that the church, I mean, if you're talking about, if you're equating the church to people's self identity and institutions, well, sure, that's receded. But that's because that's what the church is trying to figure out right now, is the, it's the evolution of the individual and the person. And trying to figure out how those two things interrelate. And so like, I mean, you can't say that Christianity has somewhat conquered the world, which I would say that it has, because the Christian morality, and to some degree, the view of the Christian God has become universal. But then people stop going to church. So then, I mean, those are, they stopped going to this, to this thing that claimed to be church. But that's, I think a lot of that is because, I mean, I think that's because the church had just tried to bottle the spirit in confessionalism. And people are like, well, that doesn't work. Okay, Luke, so tell us what is church and what isn't. You'll know it by its fruit. No, that's not what I asked. I didn't say how to tell what it is. I said, where are the boundaries? Because if everything is church, then nothing is church. Because- Well, yeah, I mean, I get that somewhat, but it's also like a, it also gets into an idea of everything that is, I mean, this has been stuff that's come up lately. So like Father Stephen de Young said this, Peugeot in his recent Q&A, from about 25 minutes to 28 minutes said this. Everything exists in love. It's the only place anything can exist. That's basic ontology, which is essentially Trinitarian theology. And so the cosmos is the church. It's just becoming. Our prison's church? What do you mean? Well, this is my- They can be, sure. Well, the, I mean, part of, there is always antithesis and the non antithetical live in the same universe, which is a very hard thing to continue to conceptualize. And it's even harder for us to live. And- Yeah, this is Ian McGilchrist. I just made a video about this. This is the psychoanalyzing Batman thing. What I'm not promoting, don't subscribe to my channel, but watch my recent video. But this is, Peter Rollins makes some really, really good points in that is that, and this is a lot of Ian McGilchrist points that he's been hammering on at the upcoming of his new book. At the basis of reality, it's the integration of opposites. And he said, Peter Rollins makes this point. That's what myth is. The reason myth is transcendent is because it integrates opposites. You say myth and not math, right? Yeah, myth. Just wanna be sure. Okay. Myth. Physics integrates opposites in quantum theory, math, you have Godel's completeness theorem. It's in everything. Consciousness is the integration of opposites. That's what consciousness is. It's at the bottom of all being. So like, I mean, I think one of the biggest problems people who have these intellectual discussions need to get beyond is binary dualisms. You love intellectual discussions more than anyone, Luke. Yeah, but I'm a non-dualist. You just described everything as a binary dualism. And I totally disagree. I think that's both nonsense. There are almost no opposites. Have you watched much McGilchrist? He says the duality that's beyond the duality of duality and non-duality. Self-referencing is garbage. People do, it's like meta-religion. Ah, I just said a thing. I didn't say anything at all. It's the same thing. When you start using referencing, referencing the thing using the word, you're not saying anything anymore. Well, you may think you are, but you're actually not. And that's reliable. And it's self-parasitic. And that's fine, but it's not a thing. And I can't engage with talking about things that are self-referential because there's no point. So yeah, there are very few opposites. I have a video on binaries. They don't exist by and large. There might be one or two out there. But most of the things we think of are binaries are not binaries. It's sort of like the opposite of good is not bad. There are way more bad in the world than there is good. There's only one good. I would say that's right in line with Christian theology. There's a good and there's lots of not good. And so it doesn't have a binary opposite. There's no dualism there at all. One of the fun things is how close Sam and Anselman have become in the comments section. Because of course, Sam was, still is one of our resident heretics. But Sam points out in the comments section, church is ecclesia, which is a called out. Anselman points out that church is elect. And all of that is biblical language. And so there's always this distinction in scripture between church and non-church. And so I think it's a helpful functional distinction. And these kinds of distinctions actually give us boundary and form so that we can operate in the world. Because we need distinction in order to choose and one has to choose. Right, I'm not saying get rid of distinction. But like even for bad to exist, it's operating at some degree in the good. Yeah, bad requires good. I mean, the worst genocidal dictator in the world demands fidelity from that person's followers. I mean, it's always the way it goes. The unique contrast to see. And so you can't talk about bad without talking about good and vice versa. The problem is not that there's two things or that there's boundaries. The problem is in the equating the two and saying, oh, there's an equal amount of good and bad. Like physics ran into this problem. Mathematically, there's no reason for there to be more matter than antimatter in the universe. They've stated this over and over. This is written all over the place. You can read about it in whole books. Multiple people point this out. But obviously, there is more matter than antimatter. And you go into reasons all day long, but you can't obviously figure out what they are. It's impossible. They'll come up with more theories, but there isn't an equivalency there. It's not equivalent. And that's the binaryism, right? That's where the problem comes in, is we keep doing the equate trick, and it's not equatable. And the funny part is this is just visible in the world. If you don't need to do math or calculations or come up with complex philosophical theories, you can just look and see. Evan Elwood says, what's Mark's channel's name? I need to know it so I can avoid it. So make sure you say it loud and clear, Mark, so he can avoid it. Don't go to navigating patterns. If you type navigating patterns into the search bar, you'll find it, and that would be just terrible for you. So certainly, avoid subscribing to navigating patterns because that would just destroy your life. Truth is a dangerous thing, and I got lots of it. I'm gonna go, but this is the thing I'll promote. I've just been reading Wendell Berry, his book, Hannah Coulter, for my book club. And this is the first novel of his I've actually ever read. And I am blown away at how many, I mean, I could go, I feel like I could go paragraph by paragraph, and he's saying, I think, in simple, common storytelling, that would be universal to everyone, the most profoundly theological and philosophical truths that scale at every level in that book. Wendell Berry is an amazing writer, he really is. So people should read that. Don't buy that book. Don't subscribe to Luke's channel. We're not even gonna tell you the title. I couldn't even remember it. But read that book, Wendell Berry. Wendell Berry's a good author to promote. Good, good. You're gonna duck out, so to make this channel work, I mean, it's good if people duck in and duck out. I don't know, I didn't look and see if we had anybody in the green room. Otofer's in the green room, and James B. is in the green room, so we'll see if anybody pops in from there. So. I just read Mere Christianity today. Like, I listened to the whole thing at work today. He said something about dualism in there, and I can't remember exactly what it was, and that it always ends up, like, evil ends up, like, that dualistic system ends up obliterating itself, because it's not, it can't be real. Yeah. There's lots of dualisms. He was sort of talking sort of a Manichean good evil, and it bumps into a lot of the dynamics that Mark and Luke were talking about, that somehow evil needs good. And McGillchrist, so I started listening to, oh, CW jumped in before the guys in the green room. That was pretty savvy. And Ian McGillchrist, so I started listening to that, that lecture that's on the Ralston College website. It's amazing. Every time I go to YouTube on an Android device, that is the first recommendation for me, and it's been the first recommendation for me for about a month. And so it's like, the algorithm really wants me to watch this video. So, and I started it, and I was really enjoying it. So the algorithm isn't dumb, but. Hey, Zay, ACW, how are you doing? Hey, Paul, I'm doing all right, man. I just got back from snow blowing. I live in the frozen tundra of Minneapolis here, so. I was like, Paul's doing his thing, and I just, like, I did not be disheveled, you know? And then suddenly everything's like totally locked up, and I was like, oh my God. Yeah, I limited to just, I limited to six slots. Although admins, one of the things we've discovered, Catherine popped in here once. If you've got admin privileges, you can come in, you can get beyond the limit, so. But I've liked, I've been, I've been amazed at what these ad hoc thief in the night conversations have developed. I mean, again, who would have thought just grabbing six randos and on just about any given not set topic would yield, you know, what some of the really remarkable things that I've gleaned from them, so. Paul, would I want to just- Some of us have agendas. Go ahead, CW. Everybody's got an agenda, only some people know what it is. I was gonna say, Paul, when you talk about the protest has to end, what do you envision as the protest? Or do you not know yet? Is that part of- I certainly don't know yet. But if Christ's prayer for his church is to be fulfilled, that we be one, something about the protest has to end. And I'm not talking about, I'm not stating that Protestants need to abandon and abdicate, if that was my agenda, I should do it. But I would immediately have the dilemma, where would I go? Should I go to Rome or should I go to the Orthodox? Because the Orthodox, you know, and one of the things that we've learned in evangelicalism is that, okay, what do we mean by that the church would be one, one structure? So, you know, today I got an email from Brett Sockel, who wrote Transubstantiation, and he asked me for a favor. He said, would you, he's doing a thing for the San Francisco Archdiocese, he's giving a series of lectures on his book, and he asked me to post it on my social media. And I said, sure, I'd be happy to. And then I thought, boy, 50, 75 years ago, for a Christian foreign minister, well, they didn't have social media then, but for a Christian foreign minister to, in a sense, promote a theologian from an archdiocese and lectures about the Lord's Supper. So, well, what has changed? Am I being unfaithful to my tradition? You know, in Whiten'sville, Massachusetts, the Christian Reformed Church now at Thanksgiving holds, participates in services with the Roman Catholics and the Baptists, and, you know, and they're doing it together. I mean, when I was a young boy, that would not be on the table. I mean, my aunts were very excited for the new teachers from the Christian school to come to town so that they could avoid having their sons marry a Roman Catholic. So I think our, I think our conversations across the lines made by the Protestant Reformation have improved. And now when I imagine at some point the protest ends, I'm thinking in very long-term terms. So I'm not even thinking, I'm thinking centuries more than decades. That's the theology then, Paul, that the protest ends when the kingdom comes? Well, it will end then. We know that. Yeah. But the question is, do we wish to be found at that point still divided? Yeah, I guess my issue with that is, like, I think it could be forgiven because, you know, when I read, especially Catholic thinkers, I want to pick on them, but when I read Catholic or encounter Orthodox thinkers, there's almost always embedded some kind of pernicious counter-Reformational apologetic. So I can only imagine what it's like for you because you're talking with these people actively in real time and in a personal face-to-face way. Like, I find it very obnoxious and odious just reading the literature. So I can only imagine how much it wears you down. But from my perspective as a hyper-Protestant, the protest can't end if we mean the philosophical impetus that led to the Reformation. There's many ways to think about the Reformation. There's sociocultural ways, political ways, and yes, theological ways, but I think there's also an important philosophical way to think about the Reformation. And it's basically this. It's a total rejection of any attempt to usurp divine authority. And in that sense, the Reformation can't end. The protest can't end. We have to become Reformational, not merely Reformed, because there's always attempts in the corporate body of God's people and in our individual hearts to usurp divine authority. And so this is something like I think of Paul Tillich when he talks about the Protestant principle. And of course, Tillich literally wrote the book on post-Protestantism. But the Protestant principle can't end. It has to continue because it's integral to the health of the church. That's a good point. And when I say the protest has to end, again, I don't mean that the Protestants didn't and continue to contribute to the Reformation of the church, of the small c Catholic church, the one that we speak about in the Apostles' Creed. And I see that partly as, I mean, it's an astounding thing that Luther did force Reformation upon the Roman Catholic Church. And even though much of the Counter-Reformation was intended to push back the Protestantization of areas of Northern Europe, the only way they could do so was in fact to address many of the things that Luther was pointing to. And I- They had to internalize that critical ethos themselves. That's right. And I see, and it's in, so when we speak with Orthodox, Orthodox clergy in America, in some ways, and I still haven't figured out the language for it yet, but some things happen that there's no going back from them. And you see that with post-modernity, you see that with the Protestant Reformation. And I think it's in that way that now, let's say with the recession of modernity, I get in trouble when I start trying to, I think we're trying to correct the overreach of the propositional that happened in modernity. And there are always in all of our measures overreaches. And usually decades or centuries later, we address the overreach because we find that we've gone too far. And so I- Do you ever wonder if the overreach sometimes can start with an overstatement? Oh, absolutely. Like the protest has to end. I mean, I guess what I'm trying to say is, end theological hegemony, end institutional hegemony, unite the church, yes. I can't imagine a Protestant reformer using hyperbolic language to make a point. Can we find any Protestant reformer who used the most audacious hyperbole against his adversaries? I hardly- How about a savior that did it? That's right. How about a master? That's fair. I retract my criticism. It's okay. I love the pushback because this is how we address overreach and then also under, also cowardice. So we won't make progress just being afraid to say difficult things. So no, I appreciate it. How much of this could be pride, right? How much of this is we're just holding on to what we think is so dear and so deep, but we can't see the other person in front of us and realize that we have to treat them with love. And maybe that requires breaking some part of us that we think is so dear, right? Just to get to that point where we can love. Maybe we're just so dug in deep in our trenches, we can't even figure out a way out of it. If you think- Individualistic. Yeah, if you think about an interpersonal fight, maybe with a spouse, maybe with a neighbor, maybe with a coworker, biologically, we have language for the biological systems that rev themselves up. And one of the things that you very quickly learn is that when you get angry with someone, you just need time biologically, physiologically for your system to come back, but there's gonna be remnants. And it's amazing that this actually scales up into these bodies of church. And it could be that it's taken centuries for us to sort of cool down. And that's not even because I spent a significant amount of time in Latin America. So I'll go to one of the synods of the Christian Deformed Church and we were adjusting some of the language and in the Heidelberg Catechism, which can be pretty stark. You've got some language in the Belgian Confession about the detestable Anabaptists too, and I have yet to detest Julian. And so here in North America, predominantly, people are much more readily ready to reconcile with the Roman Catholics, but then we've got Latin America, we've got immigrants from Latin America and the church are like, hey, wait a minute, because of course their experience of the Roman church in Latin America is very different from the experience of the Roman church in the United States, and especially the Northeast. But again, read literature from, at the beginning of the, in the 1830s, rioting conflict between Protestants and Catholics in American streets were to the degree that, police and army units had to be called out because both groups were acting as militias looking to burn down each other's respective sanctuaries. I mean, that's not that long ago. So I think we're doing better. Do you think there's any possibility that that kind of acrimony with people who share a robust faith in terms of at least the creedal tradition and probably most, if not all of historical orthodoxy, I mean, I know that Eastern Orthodox are like the minority report in historical orthodoxy, right? But nevertheless, like the vast, the vast witness of the church is a profound continuity. So do you think that that acrimony between brothers and sisters has anything to do with an institutional ecclesiology? And I'm not saying that you can't have your institution, but that conflates the people of God and all the biblical language you were talking about earlier with their institutional activity. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's certainly an issue. Absolutely. Well, I think you pointed to something earlier, CW, that's interesting, right? When you talk philosophy, what you're actually talking about, in my opinion, is this personal approach to a philosophy, right, if we wanna use modern philosophical language, which I detest generally, but we'll go with it, right? It's not wrong, it's just difficult framing, right? That is against all church, like all structure. Like, I think that's the issue. Like all structure, like that whole attitude. So yeah, personally, you need to keep that attitude. Can you scale that attitude to churches basically fighting over doctrine? Because that's what Protestantism is. Like every, right, it's like, oh, we're gonna fight over doctrine with the Catholic Church, and then, oh no, we're gonna fight over doctrine with each other too, and oh, we're gonna rebel against this, and we'll find something else to rebel against tomorrow, I'm sure, and right, and that's the splitting apart, right, that everybody talks about. So I think it's keeping it at the scale of your personal involvement, and having a personal connection with the large Jesus container is a good thing, and you can do that and still unite the church. As long as you don't try to put that into the church, then you're fine, but it's the minute that it's a church-level scale issue, where you're, no, no, no, because rebellion, and philosophy, and no, your philosophy should be personal, and your engagement, because your engagement with the group is always a negotiation, a cooperation with all the people that, to Peugeot's point, you don't like, you're there in brotherhood with them anyway in the church, and that's part of navigating conflict, is figuring out how to do that, how to get together in the house of God with your neighbor who shot your dog, and maybe you had good reason, but you don't think so, because yeah, why would you, right? And those are different scale things, and you can't apply the personal scale up to the church scale, or you end up with endless splinter groups of Protestantism. Well, what you're saying is so fascinating, Mark, but I wonder what you think about this idea. I personally, and I know you're not a fan of philosophy, but I personally feel that the most significant insight in the entirety of the Western philosophical tradition is a basic distinction between everyday life experience and theoretical thought that is a concerted effort to reflect on that experience. And frankly, when I listen to you, that's what's so compelling in your message, is that you, more than most people, intuit that distinction, but then I worry, I worry that your rhetoric is moving towards an anti-intellectualism that doesn't just relativize thought, but makes it wholly irrelevant. Wow. When I look at the church, I do see an existential community of people. Of course I do, and that's the first thing I see. But I also see that people divided over theological and theoretical overstatements, like Paul was talking about. And if you can't even talk about those, they're never gonna be resolved. Yeah, but what if you don't need to resolve them? I mean, your critique is dead on, you just don't know why. And I'm like, oh yeah, of course you see it that way. You would have to. It's not even the right way to see it. In the Frank Tritian sense. No, look, if you have a problem that isn't actually a problem, but you state as a problem, let's say anything postmodern, like postmodernism is just the creation of problems to solve, that if you don't create them, they never need to be solved. And that's most of intellectualism. This is the whole argument. I had a wonderful chat on Clubhouse a few nights ago with Jack, I can't pronounce his last name, it's crazy, but he runs the Ancient Greece Declassified podcast. And he's got a PhD in what he's calling ancient philology because he hates philosophy. He thinks modern philosophy is BS, and the way he came to that conclusion is he traveled. And the people he talked to, they're all names you would recognize, even if you don't follow, we'll say modern philosophy. And he would ask them very simple questions, and at least this is the story he tells, and they could never answer the questions. So he said, this idea that there's a philosophy of science or a philosophy of mathematics is garbage. It's a made up way of creating a problem to solve so that you feel important that you solve the problem. And Jack and I couldn't be in more agreement about anything. Right? And he has a great example. He says, there's no such thing as a philosopher of mathematics. In the Ancient Greek sense, a mathematician had the possibility of being a philosopher of mathematics because philosophy is practiced. And he says, suppose you're a Euler, and I think I'm getting this example, right? I hope so, right? And you say, well, I wonder what it would be like to be able to take the square root of a negative number. And he comes up with I. And then that's, he's doing philosophy of mathematics, what we would call philosophy of mathematics, but he's a mathematician. The only people that can do that are in that vein already. So it doesn't make any sense to say philosophy of mathematics because mathematics contains its own philosophy. And you're just mislabeling things when you do that. And that, because when you do that though, hold on CW, because this is the important point. When you reverse it, everything expands out infinitely. And then you end up creating problems that don't need to be solved and worrying about things that if you didn't worry about them would never affect you. And that's over intellectualism. And yes, that's what I'm fighting against. And that's why your characterization is dead on. Yeah, and in that effort, I am completely with you. However, let me gently suggest that when it comes to philosophy, your container may not be of sufficient size, because in my view, philosophy is the discipline of the disciplines. So yes, I agree that we can't simply have a philosophy of mathematics, a philosophy of sociology, a philosophy of biology, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Philosophy, if it is going to play a meaningful role, it has to take the totality view as the discipline of the disciplines. Right. I'm going to call time on you two now. And you two, what I'd like us to do is we got a whole bunch of people in the room. So what I'd like you guys to do is to drop out of this room. If you want to go to the green room and continue your fight, you certainly can. But I'd like to, I've got, I'll be here for another 35 minutes until the top of the hour. So why don't we let some other folks in the room and see where the conversation goes. So. Mark, Paul, thank you. All right. Thanks, guys, for dropping in. Now we'll see who makes their way in, who is still paying attention. It's kind of a little lottery. You're not going to drop out, Eric? I thought I did. No, you're still in. My bad. All right. Well, have a good one. All right. Take care, Eric. All right. Chad made his way in. Oh, Chad left. See if we've we've never really I've never really tried a suggested enforced rotation. Maybe they're all just chatting in the green room and they don't want to talk to me. That would be fine, too. Maybe they're not following the live stream and. They're all they're all cowards, Paul. They won't come in. They're all cowards. They won't come in. Don't they understand what the green room is for? They're just sitting in the green room. Oh, that's hilarious. Well, now now I don't know. You know, they should meet in another room because I look in that room and I think, well, that's that's for people who want to get into the channel. That's that's that they're all itching to get in here. So they don't even want to come in. Well, so, you know, whoever wants to join at me. No, they all just assume we all just assumed you were ending it. No, Lance told me to come back. So I came back. I just I just I'll add that. Look, look, I'll add that philosophy is just a handle for a bunch of buckets and it has no tools. Oh, well, I should get a grip on things then is what you're saying. It's it's the ontology. It's the it's the empty container that has no tools that stores all of the things that are of a subtype. And that's what Jack said. I was like, oh, Jack, that's really smart. Jack's a really smart guy. He's got a PhD. I don't. Well, what are we talking about? Let's not keep talking about what CW and that that that's a conversation that these two should go into a room and and pursue, because that's that's just going to go. And we've had that conversation before. Yeah, we've had that conversation many times. I figured I figured that I figured that. So he doesn't disagree, you'll notice. He just doesn't like it, which is a different problem. Yeah. But that's and that's what I see with a lot of the Protestant arguments. Right. They don't actually disagree. They just don't like each other for whatever reason. Yeah. Is that Yvonne? What's that, Chad? Dude, it's Yvonne. Yeah. Yeah, that guy's awesome. He is. I agree. Yeah, man. How are you doing? Good, man. I finally get to talk with you. Yeah, it's awesome. He was in the channel last time I did this. Yeah, but I wasn't on. I wasn't in there. But I know him from Chris's channel. Oh, OK. They got some really good conversation. If you ever want to check out some of those, some of the best stuff, I think, on the YouTube is between Chris Pecku and Yvonne here. All right. And Caleb, they got just. Yeah, I agree. Chris asked to do. Were you in that group, Yvonne, that Chris wants to do? Well, we should set that up. I never really got back to Chris. And so I mentioned today. Today, we recorded a conversation with what I called and Luke didn't like it so much. The esoteric randos, we had Karen and and Nate and Michael and Sherry. And I am going to want it. I want I I hear a lot of really good things bubbling up out of the art group that Sherry started. And so, you know, I think we should probably give you guys some more visibility. So which would Sherry Sherry Harkin. OK, so she was on my channel and she said, you know, I really want to start another group. And I said, well, the easiest way to do it is why you've got everybody here. Let's give them an email address. And and then Sherry was on Karen's channel and they had a really good conversation about it. So and like I said in the conversation that I'll release tomorrow morning, you know, one of the things that I'm I'm most pleased about seeing the development of are all these different groups. I mean, I'm not managing them at all. I'm not even participating, but they're small groups change the world because, you know, they overcome our individual blind spots and everything. And I'm super excited about that. I got one tonight. I'm going to do in the estuary sport group with Von Dodd. I really like that. Yeah, I make I make space and time for that one. Like I do my meetings. Oh, really good meeting. Good. Yeah. Yeah. I did a random conversation with a guy named Roger, who's in the Barcelona area, and he might be joining. He started a Delta group. That conversation will come out on my channel, too. He just gave me the green light. So. Yeah, there's there's lots of good stuff happening. Hey, Paul, yeah, have you ever I just I heard people talk about this book called Willett. Yeah, by this dude, George McDonald. Yeah. And so usually when people talk about stuff, I'm like, God, it's got to be dumb. So but but then I there was some like really good quotes or whatever. Yeah. Have you ever read any George McDonald stuff? I have. Some of his children's work is really good. Some of his adult work isn't easy to penetrate. Sure. Yeah, I started listening to the what they call that the voiceless sermon or the unspoken sermon. Yeah, yeah. Today, and I'm like, wow, Sherry S. Sherry S and a bunch of those esoteric randos are big, big fans of his. Yeah, I wouldn't say I would consider Sherry the esoteric. She's just really grounded a lot better than a lot of us. No, she is. She's very grounded. I mean, you can't be a farmer and not be grounded. Right. Another another little promotion, James and I, I don't know if I'm going to betray anything. We did a conversation on on on on his thing, and he's got this whole setup with like hammer and sword and pen and crown. That was really cool. So we went through that and that'll be out in a while. So. Yeah, I appreciate that. Paul was really fun and I had to afterwards. I went down and I was talking to my wife and because I told her that we were having the conversation and he's like, so you like fangirling out right now? I'm like, no, I'm not fangirling out. I respect him and now I respect him even more from our from our conversation. I really enjoyed it. And so I hope it I can't really can't wait to share it. I mean, I was really the little sneak peek. The discards cup of soup is his one item that he once found two thousand years from now. And that took me for a ride. So. Definitely something to be looking forward to. It'll make sense when the video comes out. It'll make sense when the video comes out. So. Yeah. But my wife totally picked on me for fangirling out. I love her for it. Well, you know, it's it's I'm sure your wives feel good if you're fangirling after someone like me instead of, I don't know, some supermodel or actress. So I think they're totally happy for that. Well, my wife is now just getting around to Jordan Peterson, because apparently now Jordan Peterson, because I think I fangirl over him all the time. Right. And she stumbled across a quote from him. It was essentially one of his rules. I think it was like rule number 11 or something like that from the from the first book. Don't mess with children who are skateboarding, essentially. It's like dangerous play helps. Yep. Children grow and we have a new kid. And so there's those things that we have to wrestle with. And so it spoke to her now. She's kind of hopping on the Peterson train a little bit. Good, good. Yeah, I remember when I took my wife to the first time he came to Sacramento, and I was kind of wondering how she was going to take it. But she really liked it. She doesn't like it enough to listen to any videos or read a book or anything. But she went to the thing with me and said, oh, this was this was good. So. I had the same thing with my wife. Why? I essentially proposed to my wife based on what Peterson talked about. Contender that changed me for whatever reason. And so my best man got me into Peterson and he did whatever. He and I are going to go see Peterson at park. We went stupid. We got the VIP package and everything. My wife was like, honey, you just go. You know, I'm not going to go. You just go. And so we went all out. So now I'm trying to figure out just what the hell I'm going to say to her. Well, let me tell you something. And I've spoken about this before. So myself and and and James Frazi, who's in our local meetup. James, when we went, he said I was he was about done with Peterson. But he had the ticket and he and his wife went. But it was I don't know if he could still do this, given all his health stuff. I don't know how he's going to do this, given his health stuff, quite frankly. But so with the VIP thing, it's like you get like 30 to 45 seconds to shake your hand with the guy and get a picture. But he you get the sense when you're meeting with him that he gives you his undivided attention. And I it's a. So I as a pastor, so I'm used to dealing with, let's say, after church, sometimes people go out and shake the pastor's hand. Doing that for an hour and a half is an astounding thing. And so be ready for that, because you will have the sense that, oh, boy, here he is. You will have the sense that he you have his undivided attention for 35 or 40 seconds. And it's it's quite profound. So I'm glad you bought the VIP ticket and I hope you really enjoy it. Papa Peterson, Paul Graham Grizz. Have you given any thoughts of the missionary classes we discussed in your Q&A? No, I haven't. In fact, I forgot all about them. Well, paintball for Jesus, my friend. That I know that that you've that you've drummed into my head. I know paintball for Jesus. Everything you were saying about spirit in two days ago, I timestamped this great commercial for paintball for Jesus. We just we just have to get this. We just have to get this thing big enough so that you can quit your day job. You can run paintball for Jesus full time. You can be that missionary work. I'm going to drive across the country in a truck with this dog that just showed up and tell the different like sell them the virtues. Get your young man out of the VR and in the paintball for Christ. For Christ's sake, guys, let's play some paintball. I loved your conversation with Sevilla. That was a great conversation. Speaking of which, that's why I wanted to pop in. I I've landed one. Remember when you and that other fellow double sweated for Vicky? Yeah, I got that guy on the 19th. So wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. And now I don't know. See, sometimes when you talk, I think I know, but then I don't know. You've got OK, you and some other Paul tag team, John Vervecky. Oh, Paul, I'm wearing you're both wearing matching white sweaters. Oh, that's right. I'm going to talk to that guy. Oh, that'll be fun, too. So promo promo and any any heads up on that? It's it's like talking to Jesus. Oh, good. CW is back in the room. But but don't square off too fiercely with with Mark, because I know the way you two are, it's like this death match and it's going to go forever. So I know I know I promise. You guys you guys just talk about Jesus every two minutes. No, it's like he looks like. So no, no, no, I'm talking about this Mark and CW fight. Everybody's having a lot. No, that's way more. Just sprinkle some more Jesus and it'll be more palatable for everybody else. I love you all. Thanks, Paul. Bye, Graham. Good to see you. I just thought I looked more like Mephistopheles personally. How is how is that light? No, like like talking to Jesus. No, he looks like Jesus. He does. That's true. He does. He looks like he's any other way. Any other way? He looks like Jesus in all of these. Oh, he's a great guy. I've got I've got a world of respect for Paul. But he, you know, he's just so he looks like Jesus from all the Hollywood movies. I mean, he's just got the look. That's true. Yeah. And as a worship leader, as someone of someone who's a worship leader, I mean, that's what churches that's what churches long for, because the pastors will the honest pastors will tell you that people tolerate the sermons and maybe like them, but they come for the they come for the hot worship. It's like I like the I like the St. Nicholas look personally, Paul, so I'm all in on your church just because you got the thing going on. It works for the you know, men like men like beards, women like clean shaving, except Anselman Anselman is in there recruiting for me to shave. So I guess last for me, Heresy. Don't tell me. I mean, it's true. I tried so hard when I got out to grow my beard and I just couldn't do it. I had just significant emotional trauma, emotional damage, and I just couldn't do it. I tried and then I grew out and I was like, no, too much emotional damage. Well, I would exchange growing hair on the bottom of my head for once again, having hair on the top of my head because it's a pain in the neck. Well, that's why you have your crown around your chin instead of on your head. Just like all of us with these masks and people, you know, sit their mask down around their chin. It's like, you know, you need to you need to let the wisdom in from above. That's why it's that way. That's why everybody knows that bald people are more wise than people with hair. Socrates. Or maybe just radiates better or reflects other ideas. Who knows? It reflects all the bad ideas and only lets the good ones in. Can't confirm. I don't know. I think it only reflect. Am I saying good things? Oh, you're breaking up. Oh, am I here? I was going to ask if I am allowed to say good things about Mark. Oh, yeah, absolutely. Oh, OK. What I really love about you is you are you are the Socratic person. You're the gadfly. And I try. I think you do that better than I do. And I try. I think you do that better than than most in this little corner of the internet, so to speak. Thank you. Yeah, I'm an idiot. And that helps because I can't follow some of this complicated stuff. So I just come up with really simple ways of saying very complicated things. Try to say, no, no, no, it's really. You, of course, know the story of the Delphic oracle, which proclaimed that Socrates was the wisest man in Athens. And then Socrates is like, well, what the hell? And then, you know, we went about to prove that that was not the case. Yeah, you can always change. That's what I love about you is you really seem committed to that kind of indirect communication and the Meyutic principle of allowing someone to give birth to the idea within themselves. You have to. You can't convince people. People have to convince themselves. And so if you don't set them up for thought, which is conflict, internal conflict, then they won't they won't be able to change. They'll just double down and they'll get worse and they'll keep going and drilling in. And there is there is an art form to it. And I've practiced it for many, many years. And it's important because you need to make people think because people can't change. They can't have that personal enlightenment without. And there's no other, you know, to some extent, there's no other form. Like if if it lets let's suppose that you're a Christian and God comes to you and you reject it because you can. Right. So there's no other form. It has to it has to come from a willingness at a minimum within yourself. And that has to come from the conflict and from the engagement and actual thought. Right. Otherwise, there's no transformation. I just want to set the record straight that I have. I have a lot of respect for Mark and what he does. Thank you. I appreciate your clarification. When you guys when you guys talk about that, because one of the things I'm struggling with and I'm messing around with is. So in some of our writings, I think Mark, you were there. I kind of I kind of told a little bit about what I wrote, which was I titled it now, Remembering the Foolish. And with that, just to set the scene real quick, it's two people in a dungeon and they're surrounded by other people. They have a conversation, they're digging into a heated argument. And lo and behold, a figure that comes out of the dark. Who's who's there? That Socrates. We have they have they he starts to literally remember who he is. As like I'm writing this. And when he remembers who he is, just like that. That's when Jesus Christ is coming back down. And he goes and he sees his friend, his old friend, and they both leave together and ascend out of the dungeon. And leaving the. The the gate cracked, essentially, and that when I wrote that, I didn't quite realize what I wrote. And I'm still wrestling with that because there's an idea of self-examination, there's an idea of grace. And and then the other idea that I don't quite know where I'm like, like it's in my other writing, is dealing with the Homeric heroes, because in some ways, Homer and Plato were were they were enemies. Maybe not enemies, but there was like a critique with Plato in his writings. And so I'm trying to rectify all three figures in a way. And I'm struggling with that. It may be impossible because Plato was against artists like Plato hated the way like artists drew from the spiritual realm to to like channel forces that were like so far above them. And that's why Plato was against artists. And maybe that's why he hated Homer. And Homer was fundamentally an artist. I don't necessarily think that was entirely the case. And again, I'm no expert. If I remember correctly, Plato was critiquing him because because of the Homeric heroes. And of course, I think Mark is probably going to jump in here and like, cut me like just anyway. But the Homeric heroes were they all have like a like significant flaws. And it was something different about about them. And it wasn't just it was because I think you're referencing the protagonist's conversation or something to that effect. And that is. It was a critique like Plato critiqued Homer because those heroes, there are something lacking there, like those those major issues. And again, I'm trying to rectify all that because we still need heroes to go off into the darkness and fight and fight the darkness, even though they are flawed. So there's two fronts you fight on. So let's talk about here a little bit, because I started and I'm by no means done with it, the critical drinker, the hero's journey. Let's I want to hear some of your feedback on that. I've got some excellent comments in the comments section about that. So I'm just kind of curious what your thoughts are and hero's journey. Heroes. What do you think? So so I haven't seen this video. I'm going to be honest with you, Paul. You got you put them out and I know one else. And I've you did that. You put them out and I know one else. And I do not have to apologize for not having seen all my videos. Trust me, I understand that. So so the hero's journey, I think it's I think it's important, right? Because in another one I write, I write around an idea that I struggle with. And I call it the red badge of courage. Right. And in that, what that is, is you earn your red badge of courage by fighting off the monsters before they grow bigger, because as I write, I'm writing like, hey, here are the first signs that we take as natural incidents. Right. But these are really monsters like because starting off and then eventually they become bigger and bigger to I start referencing the devil essentially. And we need those those heroes or we need heroic action in order to keep them back at the earliest stages. And the idea that I guess I struggle with is is one, because I'm reflecting on my own self is how do I become a hero? But also, how do I not rely on waiting on a hero? Because I also critique that like you like those people who wait on a hero are just as bad, if not worse, as those people who are I mean, I don't know. Not that they're just bad. They're worse than the demons, I think. There we go. What do you think is the relationship between the hero's journey and transformation? There's a physical aspect to the hero's journey, if that makes any sense. That's that's where I that's where I take it. It's a physical it's a physical going out. Now, you can have the going out journey and doing that type of journey. But then you still have to have the self reflection or the self examination part of that. And this is where I think I'm starting to build a triangle, right? Like another like a like a trinity of ideas. Then you still need grace to come in and save that or that there. I don't know if it's safe or something like that, because grace is like the ultimate. Psycho technology, maybe right that undermines like your your your failures or something like that. It gives you. I'm rambling. No, I actually I think you're right on it. Right. So when you. A hero's journey is a participation. Yes, participation for transformation. You're also open. Right. You have to be open. Like heroes don't go in and go, I'm going to slay that dragon for sure. They may say that. That's not that's not a hero. Like if you think you're going to slay the dragon, you're not a hero. Absolutely. You're going to fail. You're the one. Exactly. So it's the possibility of failure. So if you're open up to the possibility of failure, now there's also the potential for transformation at the same time. Right. They go together. So it's the not just the participation, because again, it's participation in something where you can't lose. And maybe that there's no such thing, but close to the close enough analog. Right. Then you can't transform. So it's knowing that that potential for transformation is there that is part of the hero's journey. That's what makes it a hero's journey, because you can't become the hero if you're already the hero and you can't become the hero if you can't become something bigger than you were. Right. So I think you're right on it when you're talking about that. And then, you know, what what is that that relationship? And I think, you know, some of the stuff you were first talking about is interesting because you're really laying out. Look, the monsters get bigger. So you can hang out and wait for somebody else to do the work or you can get out there and do it yourself, realizing that you may die. It may kill you. But also, when you're the hero, you lose the eye. You get the scar. You lose a leg, whatever it is. You can't be willing to sacrifice your mind, body and to a degree, your spirit. That's how much you can transform, how much you're willing to sacrifice. Right. But but you need the grace because no matter what you do, it won't be perfect. So how do you redeem the imperfect act? That's what grace is. Exactly what grace is. You have to redeem the imperfect act because the act is imperfect. And that's tied up with original sin, obviously. But I could go on forever about that. But I don't think I need to. The way I see it is completely different. I think that what makes a hero a hero is his likeness to Christ. And that means a self-sacrifice that is, in essence, for us, repentance. So repentance is the way in which you open up yourself to grace. So in that way, you're not sacrificing the spirit. Like you may be putting your spirit on the line because there is no way to not be engaged spiritually. So that is always on the table. But it's not that you're willing to betray God, like to have your way. Like if you're talking about the ultimate hero, at least the way I frame it is Jesus never sacrifices his father. His father is telling him, you will sacrifice and I will sacrifice through you. So in that sense, that's how the infinite joins with the finite. I don't know if this helps or... Yeah, that was really good. That was really interesting. Yeah, I like that. I like that view. That's great. Yeah, it's good to get three different views with three different pieces of language about exactly the same thing. And that's really the strength of the live streams. And I think when Peterson and Vervicki talked initially and they started talking about Phileas Sophia, the hunger for Phileas Sophia to the extent that it exists, which I think they overstate massively, but different problem, is the hunger to see people with different perspectives talking about the same thing so that you re-enchant these ideas, so that they become bigger again, because you realize, oh, there's an elephant there and I can only see one part of the elephant. And that puts the potential, the magic, the enchantment back in the world. See my video on enchantment with Manuel because he's awesome. Maybe Paul will do a critique of one of our three thus far conversations on his channel and boost my channel. Who knows what possibilities there are once I mention them and put them on the spot on YouTube. Yeah. You know, I try to watch a lot of videos, but I only succeed at some. And I'm not saying that against you and Manuel because I love you guys. It's just some videos are easier to watch than others. No, Paul, I'm just I'm just it's it's hard. I mean, because a lot of what I'm doing is is trying to fix the cultural cognitive grammar problem that Vervicki talks about. And that's difficult language. It's basically sense making like better models and and and word definitions for understanding how people are using language and what that what what impact that should or shouldn't have on you and others. And it helps you to see things more clearly. And that is cultural cognitive grammar. Right. If your cultural cognitive grammar is not in line with with with your language, then you have a then you have a problem. And that's the world we're living in where our language is moving too fast for our culture. And so, yeah, you know, what do these things mean anymore? I don't know. That's true. That's true. I was thinking if I expanded this room from six to nine, what would that do? Do I get in some live streams with like with 10 people or so, like around nine or and I'm going to tell you my recommendation is this is pushing it. Six is six pushes it. That's just my take. I feel like you could do it if you introduced more structure to the conversation. Yeah. Yeah. And really intense moderation and sitting there and going you have like two minutes like then you get this everyone has to have discipline to stay on topic. It's a mix, really, because what you see happen, even especially with Bridges of Meaning, which is an excellent community, someone like Chad will come in with two lines and that's all he needs to say. And that's 20 minutes for someone like me who's very wordy to say the same thing. And that's beautiful in and of itself. But when you start getting in numbers past, we'll say really what you have is a room of five. Right. Because it's you and five other people. But what what happens is if you get the wrong mix, all of a sudden, I can't make my point because there's not enough time for me to make my point clearly to the people who would find. And it's gems, right, because everything I say doesn't make any sense at all. Right. And then but but people hopefully pick up little pieces, maybe subconsciously, like maybe I'm better than you think. Who knows. Right. And but but then, you know, Ivan will come in with his view and that'll reach his audience right. Or the people that resonate with pieces of that, et cetera. And it's always hard to know what that mix is. And some people are better at talking than others. And some people are inarticulate or just want to explore ideas. Right. And we all switch between those modes. Like I like I said, I have agendas. Like, I know exactly what I want to say to Paul VanderKlay and the audience. Probably each one of you independent of everything else going on. And maybe I even have a list of things like, oh, we're going to get down the checklist and maybe it's ordered. Right. And and. And I've I've got a plan and an articulation in mind most of the time. My enchantment conversation with Manuel is an exception. We deliberately exploring something we didn't we didn't know what we were talking about. Right. That's a beautiful way to do it, too. But if you have too many exploratory people in the room, you won't be able to get to points. You'll you'll keep fracturing off. So it's more about mix than numbers. But I yeah, I have to agree with James. I think I think this is pretty close to the perfect mix. Let's see W. And numbers. Is it weird that I'd really like to see Rick fill in for Paul one day? Rick writes, as an introvert, I I suggest a room size of two max. And that would be Rick. Rick, that would be Rick. Rick at our local meetups says almost nothing. And now if you get Rick alone, just one on one, you know, I love I love my Rick time, but you get him in a group and he'd prefer to listen. I talk to Rick. It was like a four hour conversation. Yeah. Yeah. If you get him one on one, you'll be there a while. But, you know, in a room with a bunch of people, that's not his bag, not his bag. It's hard to navigate. It's hard to navigate and people get confused. And the patterns, Mark, it's hard to navigate the patterns. Now, Rick's brother. Rick's brother. When I first met Mark, Mark, you remind me a lot of Rick's brother. Rick's brother will talk in a room full of people. All night long. So as a moderator, Rick's brother is pretty tough to handle, but Joey does a good job. Joey is kind of our moderator at the local meetups, too. And he'll shut people down. That's that's what Joey does. So. All right. I've I'm about out of time here, but I thank you all for joining me and those of you online, too. And this is a crazy experiment for me. I love just hopping in and see, you know, Casey just gets off of work all the time. So he's always here. And Mark, you know, Mark is often here, but I really. Not here. What's that? What is Mark? Not here is the question. Yeah, he and Iron Root, they're just kind of I mean, when we first started the Discord server, I thought Iron Root didn't sleep. The dude was on 24 seven. So. But but I want to try to mix up times of day, too, because then you'll get different mixes of people. And that's that's what's fun with this. It's kind of like it's kind of like Grim Grizz rolling his his 20 sided die to see what comes up and different different things. So all right. Thank you all. And thank you on the live stream for for joining us. And yeah, I'll see you guys whenever I come back. Well.