https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IVg9tXdkV-s

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hey Paul. How you doing Fred? Pretty good. Good, good. We're doing a little early today. We have a congregational meeting. So we haven't done one for a few weeks. How you been Fred? I've been okay. I've just been busy doing things, keeping busy. Working on all my music. I'll be working on some music pretty soon. Oh Paul, I started to get that disc from you. Oh okay, yeah I gotta make a disc. And then we'll put it on the YouTube channel so people can hear it. You got something to play it on? Yeah. Okay. Anyways, back to what I was saying is, so the 49ers have done good. The Raiders have done alright. The Patriots are all pretty good. Oh, how did you do in football last night? I am heading to the toilet bowl. Me and my sons. Reggie thinks there'll be a draft party at my house next year. Me, Phillip, or Jared, one of the three of us are going to lose. Uh oh. But mom's doing good. Yeah, your mom's doing very well. And Leon's doing pretty good. Leon's doing well. Hi Leon. Hi Leon. Hi Leon. Anyways, oh, I was watching basketball and I had a question. Do you know somebody that coaches that one guy that I was telling you about? He looked just like him and he coached a team. I can't remember what team it was. But he looked like the guy that used to live over in the South area. But I can't remember who it is. It's pretty vague. Anyways, when is the Super Bowl? The Super Bowl should be after the New Year. Okay. It's usually sort of beginning of February. Oh, okay. And baseball don't start until like after basketball. Well, basketball's winding up when baseball gets going. So it'll be a little while before baseball. Well, not too much else going on. Just keeping busy. Okay. Alright. It's before church so no rap, no song, unless you got a rap for us. I can do a rap. You can do a rap? Alright. Holiday time, ready to rhyme, coming up like this like a nursery rhyme. Got the rhythm and the stuff that I got enough. Because when I'm rocking on the mic I'm so dang tough. Rolling deep in my partner six foe. Got to do it right because you know it's not a vo vo. Coming up, one, two, three. Yeah, it's me, Freddie D. From the 916 for Shiggy D. That's it. Have a good day. And when I'm on the mic it's like kid and play. Alright. Alright. Good job, Fred. Well, Paul, I guess that's it for today because we have to, you have to prepare. And you still have your lesson you got to go through, right? Yep, I got my lesson, got the service, and we got a current patient meeting. Okay. So I guess that's it. Alright. One, love. Alright. That's cool. Paul.