https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=g1XAV4PpgcI

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. What's up Paul? How's it going Fred? I'm doing good man. The Kings won yesterday. Everything is tight. Anyway, what have you been up to? I've just been living my COVID pastor life. How is your YouTube program doing? YouTube program is doing good. I check it out man. That stuff is tight man. This guy knows what he's talking about. He's one of the best pastors in the world. What do you listen to? Oh, no at least half. At least half. I always come up with a good record. Because you come up with some awesome ideas. And the things you talk about make me say, hmm. Anyway, it's just totally awesome. I just wanted to tell you that. And I'm glad you're my pastor. And I'm glad I'm here on earth. And I'm tired of all these haters talking about me behind my back. And if you do that, God don't like the ugly. So he'll... What haters are talking about you behind your back? Tell me. Okay, I'll be walking around the street and somebody will talk behind my back. And like now I'm living on my own so they're jealous. And somebody took my bus pass to be a jerk. I won't say they were. And I have needs and I have theories. And when something like that happens it hurts my feelings. Because it was my thing and I'm a perfectionist. So if anybody has my bus card give it back to me in Sacramento, California. Otherwise we're going to have to get God on you. And you don't want God on you because Paul knows God is all that. Amen! Hallelujah! Freddie's preaching today. And God don't like ugly. And the truth is the truth. And no I'm not Dr. Ruth. Anyway... You missed the sermon today. We can't talk about the sermon. I'm sorry. You know why? Why? Because we went up and out. We went an hour up and I forgot. I forgot we were an hour up so I looked on my clock. And I thought I'd be here on time. Yeah, that's not like me. No, you're usually early. Yeah, Freddie D is in the mic man. We've got it going on. What's up Ice Cube? What's up... Still waiting on that comment from T. Grizzly. T. Grizzly, yeah. Put the comment down in the comment section T. Grizzly. Shizzle my Dizzle, Wizzle, Kizzle. Let's keep this a family show. We've been doing this stuff. No, Wizzle, Kizzle. That's how he talks. That's his vocabulary. It's not bad vocabulary. Alright. Anyways. You got a wrap? Yeah. I'm going to do one. Hold on. Uh, sack count on the map. Got it like that. That's a fact. Got Paul with his beard. With no fear. Gordon on the mic and you know he's not weird. Funky fresh. Good to go. He's eating a biscuit. Really though. Coming up is a must where I come from. I come up and I ain't no bum. I don't drink rum, but I get down. And I might even frown. But I'm going to wear my crown to the top. Because Jesus brought me here. In no fear. Because if he ain't got it, no one does. You see? Me, Freddy D, the KMC. Who's that guy? He's Freddy. He loves Jesus Christ. Who's that guy? He's Freddy. He loves Jesus Christ. Perfect timing in my ride. One. One. Love. Amen.