https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=oynO9BBji8M

 This is the third episode of the Freddie and Paul show and we're here at Living Stones in front of a live studio audience. And what are we going to talk about today Fred? We're going to talk about basketball coming up. We're going to talk about what are we going to talk about basketball coming up? What do you have to say about basketball coming up? Well they got cousins that player. Who's they? The Kings. Oh the Kings. Yes they got a cousin. You got to understand Fred that we have a nationwide show here. Not DeMarcus, it's another guy and he's a rookie and he's gonna be good. He's gonna be lighting J's in the house man. But nobody else in the country cares about the Kings because they're not. No they do. They do. No they haven't been good since the late 90s Fred in the early 2000s. So Freddie believes that the Kings are gonna do well. What about the total velocity of the secondhand motion? I have no idea what that means. Okay. Okay so you're gonna do a rap. Are you gonna have a rap about the sermon at all? Yes. What do you remember about the sermon? Treat others the way you want to be treated and don't be greedy. Treat us the way you want don't want to be graded don't be Okay you got a rap about that? Okay. Okay. Treat others the way you want to be otherwise gonna be like one two three. You gotta be together. Joined it as one. My mom sitting down and she ain't no bum. Stepping on the mic like a one two three. We got forest riding down in a Maserati. Stepping with my homeboy Paul you see and we got all the contisterry. Oh yeah. That's a good one. I like that one Fred. All right how do we how do we? Your mother's in shock over there Fred. Okay how do we close the show? We'll catch you on the flip side one love. There's one in the middle catch on the flip side. Total velocity of the second hand. No that wasn't it. Catch on the flip side. No but you gotta talk you weren't talking much. Keep talking. I talked already a lot this morning so. I know but just talk. You're the star of the show Fred I'm just the one who just. I know but you got it going on. Alright catch on the flip side one love. Thank you.