https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DuHJQJ6qfIk

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Wow man that was something else man you know I'm saying that was cool man thanks for letting me do that audition for the Freddie and Paul show it's what's happening. I thought it went well and we'll post that. Right. CJ went down to LA and he auditioned. Yeah what's happening CJ good luck to you brother because you've got it going on like Donkey Kong and anyway. And you're wearing this nice suit today. Yeah you know I'm coming real coming with it the hip you know be hip to be like Skippy not Mickey not Mickey Mouse we got the douse coming up like a new girl with their blouse but you couldn't even fade me the boy they call Freddie D from the 916G for shiggy D my diggity what you got I don't think you got the brothers with the 49ers but yo my boy Philip wants to Kansas City because he's from Kansas City but I guess that's okay then. That's okay that's right that's good well we got the rapid early this week so what do you think about the Super Bowl Fred? Well I'm going for the Niners, Joropolo, we're talking Kittle, we're talking who's the other guy Sosa? Come on Reggie. Reggie that's why you're supposed to help me Reggie. I forgot all these people are. I forgot some of them. Sitting out there Nina's afraid to come on the show. It's fine Nina does the choir she does her thing she gets she gets the job done. Yeah she gets a job done Freddie D says. So what do you think the score is gonna be today Fred? It's gonna be 42 49ers and 31 Kansas City. So it's 12 39 on Sunday so we're three hours ahead of the game so there's the prediction. Let's wish that I have good luck on this because and when they call me and tell me if I'm gonna be in it or not America's got talent tell them that I am optimistic I'll do whatever it says to do I'll stay wherever I have to stay and I will follow instruction and be decent in order and keep it real like a Vanderhoof field and everything like that enough chitter shab my stuff is fat okay yeah you come up I'm the Jesus man and I am for the city and 49ers I was born in Kansas and lives in California so I wish you luck this team right here is gonna win but I think kind of needs it better yeah I kind of like the dome look SF San Francisco yeah be nice to be nice to Phil he treats you well I'm just kidding yeah Kansas City my way and you're right all right all right anything else for today's show let's see any comments any views Freddie likes Freddie likes the comments oh I was wondering if one day I could do a DVD would that be from David or who was that guy's name there's an Adam Adam could I do a video here well I'm sure we can get that done we got that one on the hard drive all right so can you put that one on YouTube I'm gonna put this one on YouTube today because you're gonna link into it with your application for America's we'll figure that out so all right come on let's do the one love we gotta go all right one love number one America's Got Talent keep it real there you go