https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=lokTsmmpAWM

 Hi, this is Paul. Last week in Rolling Stone was a fairly major article by Alex Morris, false idol, why the Christian right worships Donald Trump. I think it's probably not quite fair to say that the Christian right worships Donald Trump. That might be something like saying that Roman Catholics worship the Virgin Mary. Donald Trump is not a virgin. That's not news to any of you. This article I think was very well written. A woman who grew up in Alabama but a family that read C.S. Lewis, was kind to her gay uncle, so on and so forth. But in many ways this piece was what I call the subtraction story for who I call progressive evangelicals. Progressive evangelicals generally have grown up with a high view of Scripture. The world, their worldview and the value of historical time is sort of what I call a narrative of sorting. This is especially true let's say in an Armenian framework, not Armenia, Armenian framework of you know people are here in this world to choose the right way or the wrong way and they go to heaven if they make the right choice and they go to hell if they make the bad choice. And it's important for people to you know get a confession in and that's where you get all kinds of doctrines like as the Baptist call it once saved always saved. I remember listening to one woman think about her, a nephew of hers who had become a minister and become a Christian and then had an affair and betrayed his wife and the marriage broke up and I remember her pondering you know he's he had he had made that confession so I know he saved but then he was you know living you know out with a backsliding life and so these are the sorts of things that there are no easier answers to and really cause people a lot of turmoil. Now we'll get into a little bit what I call the expansion of God number two at the expense of God number one and perhaps I'll say more about that later because I think that actually has a great deal to do with this social phenomenon but this has been a major cause of what we've seen in the rise of the nuns, N-O-N-E-S, people leaving the Christian faith, many who are staying in church having nagging doubts and not quite knowing what to do. Now this gets manifested in Rolling Stones as what I would call the evangelical Trump crisis. Some people call it Trump derangement syndrome. I have friends of mine and people I respect for whom you can't go anywhere near politics because once Trump comes up it's it's all that will be talked about and I've got people on the other side that abortion is the only thing we'll talk about and back and forth and so people can't talk politics because one side can't get past Trump and the other side can't get past abortion and and there we have it and the comments will come up in my comment section about my own voting record to the degree that I've spoken about it in the past and so one side says you know it's Donald Trump I just can't you know he's unfit for office and all the all think about is Donald Trump and the other side will say well it's all about the Supreme Court justices. How can people who have made a name out of family values that's where this article goes back a man who cheats on his who cheated on his multiple lives it would be nice to say he was a serial polygamist but he was also a serial philanderer and Donald Trump for the most part until his rise to the presidency didn't make a lot of you know didn't keep this stuff hidden everybody knew who Donald Trump was and that's who Donald Trump is. I'll often on Sunday afternoons catch up on ABC News this week and I enjoy listening to listening to the former governor of New Jersey debate the former mayor of Chicago Rahm Emanuel and and Chris Christie and you know Chris Christie I appreciate his candor when he says why do you keep expressing surprise about Donald Trump he's been doing this is who the guy is and so of course Rolling Stone says how could Christians vote for this man and they have a point because I'm old enough to remember the 90s and William Jefferson Clinton and the Monica Lewinsky scandal this is the last time we had a major impeachment thing go through Washington DC and Bill Clinton was impeached but not convicted over perjury over the Monica Lewinsky scandal and during that time people on the right kept talking about abuse of office and he defiled the White House and so on and so forth and now we have the thing happening but just the other side and you have people voting down party lines and this just increases the amount of cynicism in the country that that politics are just strictly doing politics and there is no rule of law because you know there's no one no one can critique the other side now of course Bill Clinton was replaced by George W Bush and George W Bush I remember many evangelicals when George W. Bush was elected they were very overjoyed someone who's going to bring basically honor and dignity back to the White House George W Bush had a conversion story that involved Billy Graham the great saint of American evangelicalism and but then of course the 9-11 attacks happened the war in Afghanistan began and then much more disastrously the war in Iraq which sort of spoiled George W Bush's relationships with what were called the neocons this set into motion a number of people Rod Dreher I'm gonna reference a couple of his articles a good number of people basically had their divorce with establishment republicanism under George W Bush over the Iraq War others not so much George W Bush looks very different today than he looked back in the two the early 2000s and people all around the world he was the the great Girardian scapegoat that that was to blame and of course but George W Bush you know to the best of our knowledge was was a good family man and he was faithful to his wife and he was good to his daughters and that's George W Bush he of course was replaced by Barack Obama and so then we had the great inversion where you know everybody hated Bush now the other side hates Obama and won't work with them and on and on and Obama was going to bring peace and he was going to reach across the aisle and that never happened and but Barack Obama in many ways compared to Bill Clinton or or or Donald Trump Barack Obama lives a very Puritan life he's to the best of all of our knowledge he's very faithful to his wife let a quite a scandal free administration for the most part and again people will differ with that go ahead and make your comments but you know the comparison between Barack Obama and Donald Trump is interesting as is the comparison between everyone on this page between Donald Trump and Bill Clinton and so you had from 2001 to 2016 you had two men in the White House who were you know faithful to their wives and good fathers from from what we can see and you know and Bill Clinton before then and now we have Donald Trump and so when an article from Rolling Stone comes out and just continues to express miss be mystified at at how conservative voters who you know back in the 2000 election kept talking about restoring honor and dignity to the White House because of Bill Clinton's sexual scandal puts Donald Trump into the White House when this meme came across Twitter one day and I love Donald Trump because he pisses off all the people I can't stand and I thought that's a good number of people who basically believe this these two tribes are at war all's fair and love and war and politics and so a lot of people like Donald Trump because he makes the other side not just angry but crazy angry sometimes to the point of derangement let's call it when it comes to politics people get very pragmatic we encountered the same thing during the Reagan years Reagan was a divorced man he was a he was on one hand passed into passed into law one of the most liberal abortion laws in California history up until that time and then went to the White House and reversed course this is what happens in politics all the time it's what people both demand and what people hate about it and we see a fair amount of Renee Gerard romantic mimetic rivalry desire going back and forth the world would be better without Barack Obama the world would be better without Donald Trump round and round we go but in the election of Donald Trump in many ways our civil religion the last video that I just posted the last monologue video I just posted really came to the fore and I remember after the Trump election many people were in shock I really enjoyed Dave Chappelle's Saturday Night Live skit and I thought no that's exactly right and and Alan Sorkin's letter to his daughters just you know while the world changed last night in a way I couldn't protect you from and I thought wow there are little girls in Nigeria who are kidnapped you know over in the war between Christianity and Islam in Nigeria and there are people going to bed hungry and and this guy writes this to his daughters that's a terrible feeling as a father I won't sugarcoat it this is truly horrible it's hardly the first time my candidate didn't win in fact it's the sixth time but this is the first time that a thoroughly incompetent pig with dangerous ideas a serious psychotic disorder and no knowledge of the world and no curiosity to learn has don't hold back your punches out it wasn't just Donald Trump who won last night it was his supporters to the Klan won last night and was it really the Klan that pushed him over the edge in Michigan Pennsylvania Ohio and Wisconsin and Minnesota? White nationalists, sexist racist buffoons well takes two to polarize doesn't it? Angry young white men who rap who think rap music and Cinco de Mayo are threats to their way of life or the reason for their way of life have been given cause to celebrate men who have no right to call themselves that and who think that women who aspire to more than looking hot are shrill ugly and otherwise worthy of our scorn rather than our admiration struck a blow for misogynist shitheads everywhere. Hate was given hope. Well there's a lot of hate in these words and you know have you ever listened to rap music? This is civil religion you know basically pure and simple here his his his idea of salvation is what happens every four years in a presidential election. Now if you want to see how this works see Miroslav Volf because in many ways the secular frame heightens political moments into and into existential heights and the pieces that I've read in the past from Miroslav Volf from exclusion and embrace on what happened during the Yugoslav Civil War once there's in a sense there's no afterlife all of the if you try to again I've said this before if you try to create heaven on earth you'll usually bring up hell with it because these polarities and these dynamics have their way. Now what's important to remember is that new atheism was riding a far bigger wave than itself. New atheists imagined that you could change people's politics by changing their religion and I think Dave Rubin in many ways again was sort of the he should be an atheist but now he's you know talking to talking to John Lennox on stage talking about his his religious sentiments and his religious curiosity. It would be the dissonance between naive moralism and the churches that flipped way way more people and in a sense made the warm water from which new atheism really developed. Religion is climate and politics is weather. One of the stars of progressive evangelicalism was Rachel Held Evans and in many ways she was a leader for a generation. She was raised in Dayton Tennessee she was the daughter which was the place where the Scopes trial happened in the early part of the 20th century. She was the daughter of a Bible college professor there, smart, good writer, compelling blog, good storyteller. In many ways her blogging was was the flagship for for this movement that was that was brewing in the early aughts and really came to full flourish in her movement. Eventually she she migrated over to the Episcopalian Church. She moved over to the main line. Before she really grew up big or blew up large I I got to know her a little bit just via the internet. We shared emails back and forth. We I was active in her comment section and when her first book came out she and her publisher sent me a I just with my tiny little blog they that's how small they were they actually cared about this tiny little blog and I wrote a piece for it on Think Christian which was a piece that my denomination through through back to God Ministries was was publishing and these are the last two paragraphs of the book review that I wrote for her. How will this book be used? I think it will I think it will bring comfort to a lot of young women who are haunted by what Rachel brings forward and won't feel as frightened or alone because of her book. Most of what I hear her pushing against I've heard in voices of many others like her. Anxious church leaders that simply can't see why their formulas for the next generation compliance are falling short might want to listen carefully to her story and in many ways she was doubting and asking questions in her first book. Her first book got republished under a different title and I don't remember what the title was. This was again the first book that she wrote and I continued to write our projects and programs for inviting next generations into the faith should never replace our faith in the one who calls them. Vital to this transference is the full and free appropriation of the faith which is always a scary process. 20 years from now Rachel may be writing another book about her daughter's doubts about Rachel's questions and answers. Central is our Lord's generational missionary enterprise is the kind of too central is our Lord's generational missionary enterprise should be central too is the kind of anxious questioning known to every praying Christian. Now of course Rachel would die of an infection just a year or so ago and you know tragic tragic loss but again in many ways she was a standard bearer for a generation that had doubts and questions over moral issues over the way the Bible was taught to them. She eventually would join the main line. Rod Dreher of course takes up a different position Rod Dreher whose own story passes through the George W Bush administration in the Iraq war and the sense of betrayal that that war led to. But Rachel went over to the main line and the main line have been keeping up with the Moral Joneses for a very long time and it's done nothing for their institutional future. Mainline numbers have been dropping like rocks for for quite a while now and their churches today are just shadows of their the enormous power influence and size that they wielded during the 1960s. Now this is constant motivation that you hear in more conservative churches that you know we don't want to be like the main line but what do you do about the youth who don't have the same attitudes towards towards their gay friends or towards the LGBT issues or towards Genesis and the Bible or on down the list goes and just you can read them in Rachel Held Evans blog and Rachel Held Evans books. But at the same time as many church people like Lyle Schaller there's a there's a name from the past like Lyle Schaller noted he was a one of the early church growth gurus who studied churches sociologically. Churches thrive as as persuasive countercultures. If your church is very much in in sync with the broader society it probably won't grow because people won't need it. If your church is outside of the counterculture it's countercultural churches that that tend to thrive and grow. But but this is not a new dynamic and I raise the I raise Charles Colson often and I recommend his book Born Again if you read his book written in the in the mid 70s about Charles Colson's transformation from Richard Nixon Hatchet man to to Christian evangelist and prison ministry. He writes in his book my parents had taken me to Episcopal Sunday School and church as a boy but it never made much impression on me. Sounds like Jordan Peterson. Well actually church probably made more impression on Jordan Peterson. That night I suddenly became I suddenly became as certain as I had ever been about anything in my life that out there in the great starlet beyond was God. Keep those words in mind when I show a video from a meaning crisis video. I was convinced that he should rule over the universe that to him there were no mysteries that he somehow kept it all miraculously in order. In my own fumbling way I prayed knowing that he was there questioning only whether he had time to hear me. This is part of Charles Colson's conversion from Episcopalian to Born Again Christian. Jimmy Carter again would grace the the cover of of Time magazine as Born Again in the 1970s and this was part of this grand movement out of the mainline church was into the evangelical church. Church attendance reached its height in the mid 1960s evangelical church numbers were strong often at the mainline the mainline's expense through the 70s 80s 90s and aughts really up until the end of the Cold War which could perhaps be point would be placed at 9-11. Church churches now I you've heard me say this before churches split right because countercultural dynamics help people cohere in churches and they leak left. In other words people leaking out of the out of evangelical churches some will go to the mainline most will not. Many you know a few might go to a few progressive evangelicals might think about sacramental churches like the Roman Catholics and the Orthodox but they don't have women priests and nobody's expecting them to anytime soon and so left leaking won't save the mainline and that's why Rod Dreher had this piece in October 2014 you know has the last Episcopalian been born because he basically looks at the numbers looks at the rate of decline and says that you can spot you can spot the decline where it's going to end. Evangelicalism is an individualistic religious marketplace and so as as as people have their doubts as they migrate as as they go different ways sort of what happened after the the the big box explosion in the seeker church was that the emergent church took over and in many ways Rob Bell and Mark Driscoll were sort of the the the Bobbsie twins of the emergent movement they both were born I think born in the same year and they both went out to establish Mars Hill churches but very different churches in many ways. Mark Driscoll you're not going to have women in ministry but you know there he is with his his jeans with tears in it and he's preaching his sermons and he'll be a little bit sexually explicit too sexually explicit to make John Piper feel comfortable and and Rob Bell on the other side Rob Bell establishes Mars Hill Church in the old Grand Village Mall in Granville Michigan which was very near to the place where my wife grew up in Wyoming Michigan and that church grew large very much at the expense of many Christian Reformed churches in Grand Rapids Michigan but Rob Bell just kept moving and all the way to Oprah's Super Soul Sunday and you know he wrote you know he's been off in very much a different direction in terms of Christianity and so we've seen sort of this this breakup people progressive evangelicals not Mark Driscoll I won't call him a progressive evangelical but in many ways this is when the seeker movement ended and the emergent movement started the two poles of the emergent movement tended to be Rob Bell really three in some ways Rob Bell Mark Driscoll and Rachel Held Evans all three sort of camping out in different ways Rachel Held Evans and Rob Bell sort of on the same page sort of on the same side but but also slightly different Rob Bell would would be a little bit more spiritual Rachel Held Evans would be much more secular Mark Driscoll doubled down on Reformed Calvinism and a whole young restless and reformed movement would move out of there but the individualism that you saw in Chuck Colson where I was just reviewing some things in the books in preparation for this video I'd remembered some of the details wrong Chuck Colson's was then married to his second wife and she was a committed Catholic and so she was a little concerned about this new change in her husband's life he had probably obligingly gone to a Catholic church down then but hadn't thought anything of it but would he what what would this mean and very evangelical and that well I'll be born again and I'll find a church that works and you can stay Catholic and we'll just figure this out because what's important is the individual and the individual relationship with with Jesus Christ or the individual relationship with justice or the individual relationship with spirituality now of course more of a federal vision under a conservative Calvinist moniker like Mark Driscoll or John Piper that would be much less individual but that is in many ways kind of a movement back to more conservative positions but as is always the case new conservatism is never exactly quite like the old conservatism the the preachers and the preachers that preached in the churches at the beginning of the 20th century when my grandmother wore flesh-colored stockings to the church for the first time and and one of the old men commented that a young woman ought to wear stockings to church and she bragged as a probably little snot your nose 10 year old I'm wearing flesh-colored stockings I'm living by the letter of the law even if if my legs don't look like they're covered with stockings like they were before you would never have seen in in in Oakdale Park Christian Reformed Church in southeast Grand Rapids the minister wore tails to preach and whereas Mark Driscoll sermons might have been an hour his sermons were probably an hour but the old pastor of Oakdale Park CRC and Grand Rapids Michigan would never have treated the same subjects as as Mark Driscoll treated evangelicalism is an individual individualistic religious marketplace and so what we really have in in Alex Morris's piece is what I call the evangelical subtraction story this is the Rachel Held Evan story where she grew up in a church and in a conservative place and they were good parents and everything was fine until she met that gay friend or until she realized that she as a woman couldn't be a minister or until all of these things that seemed so woefully out of step with what was just so so self-evidently moral in the world we were told that if you were good and compliant and followed the program of the evangelical church you'd have a happy life or you'd have or be a happy wife and have a great sex life and everything would be okay suffering happens to other people because with Jesus in your corner everything's gonna be dandy and then it isn't and so suddenly you don't trust your church leaders you've been lied to I picked this piece up on Twitter from from Mike Phillips he goes by sack writer on Twitter and he wrote a again a fairly typical piece for this type of shot of genre my struggles to believe in a Bible without errors wrestling with the doctrine of of inerrancy he became a he became a minister and was was part of an evangelical church and you know for a variety of reasons fell away from fell away from the evangelical church that that he was raised and even became a minister and you can find plenty of ministers with story like this stories like this Brian McLaren is out there and It's an entire community of of what I would call progressive evangelicals this morning I texted my wife and asked if she would read numbers 31 again I suggested she read it as if she were not a follower of Christ and not someone with a high opinion of the Bible as he digested its as we digested its contents together we realized that it was saying that God had ordered the Israelites to kill all the Midianite boys make all the virgin girls their sex slaves kill all the women who had who had sex before kill all the men set fire to all their towns reward the most violent soldiers with more spoils from the massacre get your head around these these stated facts God commanded sex slavery God commanded slaughter of children and he goes on to make his case throughout and again for many this is what I call the evangelical subtraction story the the world and the Bible they just can't fit together like they were raised to and so my response tweet to him was he also drowned the world except for one family I'd suggest this whole way of arguing over God and morality has a significant frame problem but he's not about to watch my videos and I don't know that he's about to come to a Jordan Peterson meetup you might be surprised that there's a whole lot of people at the meetup who have similar questions to him and maybe he's put off by the Jordan Peterson name but you know these are the kinds of issues that people are working through people started people started paying attention to their Bibles they were told to read their Bibles and some actually did and they read things like numbers 31 and they said what does this mean how can God be moral and you can see this is very much setting up the new atheist argument this is the backdrop for the new atheist and their calls to reason and so we can add him to the marketplace so some go sort of the progressive evangelical secularist way and some go more the spiritual way like Rob Bell and and some double down on on conservatism with with with Mark Driscoll and his new way of being conservative in church and some go full Sam Harris but then of course we have the rise of Jordan Peterson and and if you've never watched mouthy Buddha's video on on his Sam Harris losing his audience to Jordan Peterson it's it's well worthwhile the deterioration of the embedded story brings a crisis of meaning and thanks to John Verbeke we have the meaning crisis language many experience it as depression and one of things I noted in my YouTube channel is how many people had had been suffering from depression and gave testimony that that listening to Jordan Peterson made their lives better that doing meaningful things doing what is meaningful and not what's expedient cleaning their room getting their life in order getting a job making a commitment all of these old-fashioned values gave people a sense of meaning and and we wonder about that and of course Peterson that is biblical lecture we'll talk about that a little bit later so many experienced that this sort of atheism nihilism based depression people didn't stop being spiritual and it just usually meant that if they became spiritual their their spirituality was less coherent or organized as an embedded story and it looked much more like superstition and so Jordan Peterson is a big part in terms of this whole narrative in my opinion now those of you who watched my my conversation yesterday with with Robert VA noticed that he got his MA in philosophy and in Canada and he mentioned Julian Young and and my knowledge of Kierkegaard and and especially Nietzsche is woefully deficient and so I'm always looking for ways to improve that but everybody's you know read more Jung read more Nietzsche read more there's a lot of more I need to read but he mentioned Julian Young and I thought I looked at his books and they're kind of academic books and so they're kind of pricey and so the Dutchman in me was a little leery to to spend $30 on a Kindle book and so that you know I've got lots of books that are piled up and if you want to see the unread books in my Kindle library they're even worse so I thought well maybe he's done some YouTube videos maybe because that's sometimes a way to get a quick lesson on someone I only founded one I only found one and only had about a thousand a thousand views since it was posted in 2013 but I started to watch it and I thought this here thing this is meaning crisis gold let's listen to some of this and that's where I'm going to say I'm going to say it all depends on what you mean by metaphysics the origin of the word metaphysics Jonathan probably discussed this song just repeating and probably but the word originates with Aristotle Aristotle wrote a book called the physics and then he thought when he decided to write his next book he thought well what shall I call it he said well I'm writing it after the physics so I'll call it the metaphysics what he meant was simply because meta means after what he meant was this book's going to be called after the physics the next book after the physics but meta in Greek also means above and very quickly particularly in the Middle Ages metaphysics came to be understood as that as the study the about that which is above the physics above the physical and of course in the Middle Ages it didn't it wasn't advisable to disagree with the church because if you did you you will have to get burnt at the stake there was only one story about what was above the physical the everyday world and that was of course God and the angels and heaven and all that stuff so indeed through through the Middle Ages and indeed up until the 19th century metaphysics was understood as that which is above the physical that which is and and again if you listen to Jonathan Peugeot want to talk to Brett Weinstein you'd better pay attention when you use that word above and that's you know the axial age mythology would talk about what's what's above and actually Julian Young now he last I checked his Wikipedia page he's teaching or he's retired now but he last taught in the United States at the point that he did this video he was teaching in New Zealand he was I think born in born in America but raised in the UK so he's had an interesting story he's a philosopher and and again he's he's majored in it seems like mostly 19th century philosophers but you know okay so above physics what does above physics mean immaterial that which is real but inaccessible to the human eye because the the medieval medieval way of thinking was that what we see is just mere appearance and the really real is underneath that it's not it's not immediately visible and so they had sort of to I actually think that's more a 19th century reinterpretation I mean in the Middle Ages they had a rather literalist now almost all of these keywords that they're using material real literalistic the real underneath all of this working through this language is is these are these are all the things that we've been working on with Jordan Peterson videos and John Verveke conversations because we we don't know how to talk about the world we don't know what's real we don't know what would we say when it matters or its material or you know that this conversation here hasn't really been updated by all of the work that we've been doing on these terms and so what you hear them dealing with here is is struggling with some of this stuff and these are the the professor's about to make an error here which is a point by CS Lewis which I'll make when we get to but but but this is this is what we're dealing with so so again I'll go back and and listen you know we're trying to figure out well what did the the ancients the classical period in the medieval period what did they think about it well we struggle to know what they thought about it because we have to use words to to figure that's the only way we can talk about it but what do these words mean what we see is just mere appearance and the really real is underneath that it's not it's not immediately visible and so they had sort of I actually think that's more a 19th century reinterpretation I mean in the Middle Ages they had a rather literalist geography in Chaucer for example you read that you know the center of the universe is the earth and then there but this goes back to placer really there were seven spheres and the planets the different planets move around in circular motions around the earth at the center now read CS Lewis's discarded image or read Michael Ward I think that's his name planet Narnia they go into all of this stuff because of course this was this was Lewis's area in these seven spheres and on the outermost fear kind of sitting there is heaven and actually it's perfectly straightforward you can see that heaven is there because when you look up into the the bell of the night sky you see those little holes through them with the light of heaven I mean we call them stars these days but in the Middle Ages you saw the light of heaven shining through these through the holes in the dome of the heavens so that you knew that I mean how far away is the dome of heaven it's only about you know three four kilometers and now CS Lewis corrects this and you can read again that and the discarded image where no the ancients knew that the heavens were were a great great distance but the idea that no they were fully embedded here in the world and the world when we say the world was the center of the universe it wasn't a good center because only under the moon that was sort of the next layer do you have decay and once you get beyond that you don't have decay you have air down here you have ether up there and again read CS Lewis's discarded image so you knew that the souls of the departed I mean provided they were lucky we're up there just three or four kilometers above him I mean they had a map of the universe right just like we have a map of the earth and heaven had the very definite location on this map certain distance from the earth just as you know Australia has a certain location map certain distance from from us now now what's what's interesting about this is how quickly we have all lost this now this guy he's talking to I don't know who this guy is he's the guy that's responsible for this video series he has a lot of videos here I'm kind of excited to check out because seeing the quality of this video hardly anybody's watched these videos I'm kind of curious about curious about the quality of a bunch of the other videos that many of these other videos are along the topic of the meaning crisis in this little series not that I need more videos to watch mind you but but here they all are and and so you know the fact that CS Lewis's last book the discarded image when I talked to burn power burn says all this discarded image is my favorite CS Lewis book and I thought I've never read that book and there's a few CS Lewis books I haven't read whereas some CS books I've read a lot well some CS looks books have been favorites for people who were raised in the kind of way that I was raised but but others not so much and I until I well the stuff I was wrestling with before I found Jordan Peterson and continued to wrestle with through this whole YouTube thing then I finally read the disarticulated image I thought wow this is a vitally important book and I've never read it and I've never thought about I was thinking a lot about cosmology but I hadn't really thought about classical and medieval cosmology the psychological implications of that cosmology and what that cosmology meant in terms of the meaning crisis so I mean what you said about the reality appearance dichotomy that's really that's a different account of the relation between heaven and earth in the Middle Ages both heaven and earth are entirely and completely real just as New Zealand and Australia are entirely and completely real but then basically Kant in the end of the 18th century now this is going to take 25 John Vervecky videos and put them into a few minutes more or less perceiving impressed in particular by Newton by Newtonian science and the tremendous scientific advances that we've been made in explaining the known universe what cancel was that in Newton's universe there actually wasn't any room for miracles there wasn't any room for free will and if there wasn't any room because everything's just atoms being governed by mechanical laws and if there's no room for free will there's no room for morality no one can be blamed for what they do or praised what they do if it's just all a bunch of atoms making another bunch of atoms doing things so can't who was also a religious person of sorts he was brought up in the German quietest tradition he invented this appearance reality idea that the everyday world he said he said right that's absolutely Newton's domain it is completely governed by laws but he said that world is only an appearance it is merely a construction by the human mind to put it crudely it's a kind of dream a kind of waking dream that we all have dramatically can't didn't say the reality behind the dream the reality would we would see if only we would all wake up he didn't say we know for a fact that that's God and the angels because he saw that you know we can never step out of our own minds if if if our minds construct this the world of appearance and if the world of appearance is reflects the structure of the human mind well that's the only world we can know about so he said we can't know anything about reality reality is unknowable but it can be an object of faith which Christianity has always been so we can still have our Christian faith that out there in reality is God and the angels and believe in Newtonian science as explaining everything there is to explain about the world of appearance so it's it's cancer the appearance can famously said I have found it necessary to beat back knowledge in order to make room for faith we know about Newton knows about the everyday world but that's the world of appearance that still allows us to have faith that the real world is the world as described by traditional Christianity now now he's jumping over lots and lots and lots and lots of things there but he's trying to remember that the first person had said but there's a reality under the appearances and and he says now wait a minute that's that's much more 19th century talk and so there's no there's no day car there's no Aristotle and Aquinas there's all these other things there's none of that he's just basically jumping to Kant and then jumping to jumping to us and now and this individual this guy's no slouch either I don't know who he is that that's good for philosophers and for Kant especially I dare say he's a human being like all of us he has his own being a very intelligent human being a very introspective human being that he was he had to deal with the issue of the time in his own time and he did it and he came up with a way out of the Newtonian problem which was that the universe is mechanical and if you know the rules of that machine then you can predict the future and create the future and there's no room for freedom for the individual will and this was a genuine crisis a huge crisis for the individual and Kent was very much an individual in fact philosophy if anything is the religion of the individual in my interpretation that's how the individual copes the the person who's happy in the group in the tribe in the community in the huge community of the church will find you know their solace there perhaps and they they don't identify so much existentially with the individual human atom but more with the group now he starts making a very interesting argument and that brings this conversation in a very interesting direction he's essentially saying that you know this philosophy this is consolation of the individuals and philosophy is often something that I will read by myself or you might have a class in philosophy but unlike religion that is that very much has something around which people move as Jonathan Haidt would notice religious philosophy tends to be these things just individuals in their minds and what they're doing to find their solace and and the whole point behind this thing is meaning how have we lost meaning and this guy makes the point that we've lost meaning because we've lost community and it's it's feelings and beliefs but me I'm an indefinitely an individual type I'd say you are hagel was can't was showpin how was nature were none of them were all group people you wouldn't find a group philosopher they're all individuals and I think you know I've got to be realistic I don't believe that even what we're discussing here would be of interest to someone who is happy in their community whatever the community might only be a rugby club I still think if they're very happy in that community and they find meaning within the community's ethos might be a gang actually they wouldn't really they'd probably have turned off by now on this program but for those people who for some reason or another were alienated or cut off or have adopted the prevailing philosophy of our age which is that the individual is the unit of every society just as the atom was meant to be the unit of the whole universe now the individual is the unit of all sociological formations all economics and some people have taken that on completely but find a cry a deep crisis within it as hagel as some as can't did and that is well yes if I follow this individualism through right through the science of the unit I end up with the mechanical universe which rules out strangely enough my free will and I'm just part of a machine and I that leads to a crisis of meaning well what's the point what's the use of all this I'm just going to I come into this machine it grinds away in a way that I had practically no control over and then at the end worst of all I'm spent I'm wiped out as an individual completely at least the the group person feels that they live on within the group even if they die well when they die they live on within the group even if that group is their kids or their family or their rugby club or their church or if they take it up further God is eternal in that sense but the individual doesn't have that solar so it's a double whammy for them and I'm trying to be practical here this isn't just an academic exercise this philosophy this metaphysics this is survival this is life and death for an individual who's confronting the death of God and worse than the death of God they could handle it it's their own death that upsets them and and I you know this this guy just did these this this little segment just basically here's the meaning crisis it's right here and of course this was I don't know when this was taken this was posted in 2013 might have been recorded before then but he just lays it all out right there and in fact anticipates some of what Nathan Jacobs will notice about his his movement with the with the nuns that they they left evangelical Christianity and and now suddenly they feel alienated from their community they feel isolated they feel alone but the one thing that they can't seem to shake they feel might they be better about their morality because they're not worried about people living together before marriage or they're not worried about gay couples or they're not worried about all kinds of things that they were worried about in their old religious context but death looms and and they don't know what to do about death and what he just articulated that we're a machine and we're just grinding away and it's meaningless and if there is no God to live on in then their own death appears to be total annihilation now I don't think you know I can't really address that issue people don't appeal to Kant for soulless and in your book you appeal to Heidegger in the end there now I'd like you to perhaps leap forward into that into that as to how you think of all the philosophers Heidegger managed to come up with something that a 20 or 21st century introspective intelligent person who lives the life of the individual can find a way out of the machine that society is surrounds them with you raise so many points there I'm not quite sure where to start but just I thought your initial point about groups was interesting and I just like a little bit about that I mean you're quite right that I mean Nietzsche talked about herd types and exceptional individuals and of course human beings do have a deep need to belong to a herd at least to some degree you suggested that as long as you belong some group then your life had a meaning I'd like to say well sometimes and sort of but not guaranteed now I mean okay you're in a gang of course your life has got a certain kind of meaning you know loyalty brother-brother bashing the guys in the other group but isn't there going to be a little bit of you somewhere that says hey well this is a sort of meaning but it's not kind of a really good meaning to my life only to the extent that you're not totally a group person will you have those thoughts but many right only to the extent that you're not totally a group person will you have those thoughts in other words individualism and the breakdown of community are going to break down the moral matrix by which you evaluate the morality of the group's actions and and I've made this point before that you know when it comes to violence it's people say well the Bible should actually make this point in the video that I haven't posted so maybe I will post it you know people say well you know the Bible the Bible should have different rules about it and it's like well people don't just follow rules the Bible has rules about murder that doesn't stop well I shouldn't say that doesn't stop people from murdering but it doesn't it doesn't eliminate murder from the world okay and and because it's not so much the question of well does God say we shouldn't do it but what are the exceptions and this gets into John Verveckis argumentation about you know rules you can't have a list of rules you need relevance realization because in any specific setting you have to figure out what is in line with well what is in line with what what is in line with this thing that we sort of sense underneath it all that there's a there's a reason to when killing when violence is justifiable and when it's not and and because we can't just put all of those words around it we we wrestle with it and we act it out this gets into the Jordan Peterson stuff we act it out when we watch each other act things out and we read literature and we read stories because we're always trying to figure out that which we can't articulate underneath to figure out how we should act when we should do when we shouldn't do and so his point about the gang violence is actually a shrewdly important point because to the gang the violence is is exactly is the right thing to do so I'll back it up a little bit. Meaning but it's not kind of a really good meaning to my life. Only to the extent that you're not totally a group person will you have those thoughts but many people are very much focused on the group and to the extent that they have a thought like that they will dismiss the thought or repress it because there is no answer within the group to that thought. Now this is exactly what we see happening in the migration of the progressive individualism or progressive evangelical progressivism and and that it's not simply oh see the subtraction story says imagines all these rational individuals making decisions about the world as they come and say oh I was blinded by these rules it's the Bible's fault now no longer blinded by those rules or I no longer believe there's very much other factors involved here in terms of this passage from a deep thick community to individuals and individualism and they're not prepared at that time or have the energy or do you think any group belongs to gives a meaning to life I mean a group of bridge players do you think bridge playing can count as a life meaning for my auntie it definitely did and she had a real crisis when she can no longer play bridge and that she went downhill much faster after that. You watch people happen when they are severed from their community you will watch them die you will watch their life fall apart you will watch the watch them not know what to do and the again the fact that we are blind to this tells us a lot about our situation I'm gonna get into this in a couple minutes but this video this whole video I'm gonna put the link below this whole video is outstanding and and certainly I think you won't find someone who lives into their 90s or or hundreds who hasn't sold you know hasn't had a group with which has given them a lot of meaning unless they're a very good philosopher you know sure sure and and what's interesting is again that point and you look at all of these surveys about you know religious people religious people live longer why because they're living nested within a community and and part of the meaning crisis is this pulling out of communities and becoming individuals and becoming isolated not only theoretically in that in the vervecchian term the rest of the world is dead space and and me and other human beings are the only agents around and this again gets into some of the the excellent conversation between Benjamin Boyce and and Jonathan Peugeot because part of Peugeot's point is that well part of what the meaning crisis says is there's just only human beings are the individuals around I mean all the spiritual beings they go all the immaterial beings whatever that word means they go there is no God it's just human beings that to the best that we know are isolated lost in space. Schopenhauer one of my very favorite most okay Schopenhauer and I learned a lot about Schopenhauer in this video and makes me think I gotta learn more about Schopenhauer too and I guess I get so much to learn which has given them a lot of meaning unless they're a very good philosopher you know Schopenhauer one of my very favorite most favorite philosophers he's the only philosophers really attended to boredom is a wonderful discussion of boredom and Schopenhauer hates above all cigar smoking and he's writing the early 19th century hates cigar smoking and card playing and what's so interesting is that's just the opposite of CS Lewis because what did CS Lewis love he loved long walks with his friends he loved going to the pub he loved community now this again as a boy who lost his mother at a very young age and he and his brother Warney were very much left alone by a father who was in pain raised by nannies sent off to boarding school there's a lot going on here that's a lot more than simply theoretical Schopenhauer thinks that wait he's a pessimist right he thinks life is either stress or boredom you know if you want something and you haven't got it you're stressed I you suffer if you got it you're bored which is another kind of pain so life is suffering unavoidable but he thinks it's socialist divided out the stress he's talking about the 19th century workers you know industrial slaves stress is the condition of of the working classes and boredom is the condition of of the of high society the middle classes so he says that what do you find the board the middle classes doing you find them doing anything to kill time sort of smoking cigars playing cards drumming on the table with their thumbs they're bored out their minds he says they're also alone they're also isolated and they are in fact Jonathan Peugeot makes this comment in the conversation with Benjamin Boyce where and and when Jonathan said this I completely agreed with him Jonathan said you know my my my community and my communion with working-class people are for me the homeless you'll have homeless people sometimes say the most racist things you could imagine and discover that their best friends in the world are the same racial group they have just simply despised well I could probably pull those clips from the the Benjamin Boyce Jonathan Peugeot video but that's you know there's something going on in terms of the classes in terms of the wealth in isolation isolated by their wealth and affluence and the other people who do not have such isolation they don't have option to it but what they have is each other and and again you know that's something that I saw firsthand in my missionary work with the with the Haitians he's right and well look let me that makes kind of makes my point even though even though your point is in a way right for any kind of group membership gives you a kind of meaning of life but that even even for you know most people quite ordinary people not given to thinking a lot about abstract things certainly not in possession of PhDs even a lot of ordinary people from time to time may have the thought hey you know things could be better my life could have more meaning than it than it does but that's only kind of in a way on the side I mean your main point I think is absolutely right that thinking really of any sort but in particular philosophical thinking only happens if there is a problem Heidegger makes the interesting point I often have because I've you know written a few books on Heidegger I often have artists Heidegger is very popular with artists I often have artists coming and sort of showing me their painting or sculpture and they say oh you know I'm very keen on Heidegger and I just want you to tell me if I'm doing it right you know have I got the basic idea and and I always quote to them Heidegger's remark that philosophy of art theorizing about art only started when art began to decline that is the first philosopher of art was Plato in fourth century BC Athens the great period of Greek art the period of Sophocles and Aeschylus was fifth century BC Athens I mean that this is the way certainly German philosophers taught you know that art has never reached the heights it reached with Greek tragedy in the fifth century before Christ so that and you can see the point you don't go to the doctor unless there's something wrong with you so you don't go to the philosophical doctor unless there's something wrong with you don't go to the art doctor the art theorist unless there's something wrong with the art so people only start thinking about art or the meaning of life or their physical health or whatever if something is beginning if there's a problem if something's going wrong and I mean I'm just agreeing with you it's only people who sense that there's something missing from their life spiritually who are really going to start thinking about philosophy well this age though since the Enlightenment as the thought that as we said that science had just found the mechanism of the universe it really believed in you they thought Newton was a god-like status and that he had found the mysterious mechanism that ran this universe and people believed that then and they still believe it that has carried on in many ways quantum physics which questions deeply questions Newton's mechanical view and and injects mystery back into science that's ignored you know no one talks about quantum science in the philosophical sense only use it to make lasers and things and super small chips but for computing but nobody talks about its implications for philosophical scenes and you know where there's a there's ever since the Enlightenment there's been a problem with the machine you know the machine atomic machine like view has dominated and dominates economics you know which is the prevailing science of our age it certainly dominates in the physical sciences and even in biology and everything like that and this has plummeted ordinary people into a crisis too because when they do have their moment of problem with the group so whenever they get the sack from their group as the at work or they get too old to play their sport or they or their card game or whatever or they have a death in the family or some other crisis in the family which somehow alienates them a bit from their family situation or anything that you know or their church you know treats them badly whenever they have something with whatever group it was that they were part of if they you know most people were part of a group then they are plummeted into the situation of thinking along the lines that we thought what about you know me as an individual and it's at that point that they cannot find any answers it's at that point that they have a philosophical and existential problem and that's why your book brings us right up to that and says that we won't find any answers with Schopenhauer with Kant you know with Nietzsche, Sartre, Camus, I mean all of these people are basically not really providing a convincing answer even if people read them which they don't and Nietzsche does come up with something now Heidegger, sorry, Heidegger comes up with something what does he come up with that for you having thought about this more than just about anybody you've arrived at that conclusion I'm very interested and in it in the conclusion that Heidegger you know what did he really mean towards the end there I've actually changed my mind in some ways since writing that book I would speak much more positively about Nietzsche now than I did then but you want me to about Heidegger and I will no no I want you to tell me what you think I'm not here to find out you know any particular academic thing this is for me as I said this is very practical very real this is a problem that we face or that lots of people face as when they have to confront their lives as an individual outside the group and more and more people are having to do that that's the nature of our society that everyone is told you know it's your life it's up to you you live it your way if you think and and and you can make it happen and and this is told to kids at the age of five you know that they can make their own decisions in fact they have to make their own decisions it's their life etc so this problem of the individual is to you know meaning and okay I've got to make my own decisions but on what basis you tell me what after all the reading yeah that's the problem but that's the problem with existential that's the problem problem with Jean-Paul Sartre that for Sartre you know the essence of life is freedom and so everyone needs a life project or meaning the emphasis of life is freedom from okay now again follow the tracks it's the individual and when he's talking about well this is exactly the story of a lot of progressive progressive evangelicals they well I I disagree with the church on genesis and science I disagree with the church on the nature of scripture I disagree with the church on on gays I disagree with the church on women and well churches are are here and now you're on the outside and now you well you've got and so at one moment they're they're exhilarated they've got the they've got the freedom to choose they can they can decide whatever they want to and and so they they go and do but then they discover that they're well they might find a few other people who who can find whatever they want to but then in what story are you embedded it's it's the same story of okay I've I've I've I've taken off I've taken away this traditional religious covering that that kept me in us in this community and now I'm an individual and I'm free and I'm out there and now they have to make up everything as they go and according to Sartre you just choose it you just go right that's it but the point is if you choose your life meaning like that sort of out of a hat it doesn't really commit you because okay you've made that your life choice and and then someone comes along so you know you decide to be a communist and you know you're fighting this French Civil War against the fascists and and that guy's a fascist now why should I fight why should I sacrifice my life for my meaning why why should I think my meaning's better than his meaning and I can't give any answer because it's just you know I've just chosen it at random exactly and so it seems to me a crucial point is that you know to say to someone you've got to choose a meaning is useless because a chosen meaning isn't a meaning somehow the meaning of life has got to be discovered rather than chosen and and again you look at the the celebrity atheist and they will they will make the point that well you you can find meaning and you just go and you can make meaning but his point is compelling you don't just make it because that's and and it's and it's critically important about the group and one of the things that we've seen is that you know these these these these people who are religious can can they have deep thick embedded community and they find meaning in community now it comes at cost but but they they they have buffer and they live in a world of meaning you're out there in the individual you're choosing your own meanings you're alone in the cosmos absolutely now um where did you discover it or where did you think nature or hiding okay so this this goes on we're only 30 minutes in it goes on for another hour and a quarter and i'm not going to play that whole thing here but there we have it and you know i was watching this video and i was like wow look at this this is this is what we've been talking about let me get my well meaning and community so then we did a we just had a little experiment on the discord where about the day before i said okay i'm going to have my channel open and anybody who wants to pop in can pop in and here at this point we had had 12 people in the conversation and we're trying to figure out if that works but one of the people on the discord that i haven't had i haven't posted a conversation with on my main channel is shelly shelly is a missionary in south africa she grew up in the united states and she's actually one of a one of a twin um she has a identical twin sister and she's in she's in west africa and she's doing bible translation and i know something about that life and what's interesting is that she is in many ways isolated there are a couple other missionaries around she has a degree of community but going to church is complicated but she's living in the undeveloped world where there's tremendous embeddment and there's tremendous community and now that community is is not easy or simple or always joyful people often want out of their communities but what but embedded within the community they have meaning and and what sort of comes out in this conversation and it's about a two hour two hour and 10 minute conversation and it's very uneven because people are coming and people are going and so i didn't decide to post it to the main channel but i'll put a link in the notes below if you want to take a look at it it's a fairly long video i've been thinking if i could find the time i could edit it up and maybe um maybe add some things you know take some of those strings of conversation out of it but how in the west we've so we what was what became very clear to me in talking to shelly because i remembered it from my own missionary experience is sort of the the the difference between what happened in the developed world to make us all individuals and and and why in the undeveloped world or in segments of the developed world still there are deep thick communities and and those are often ethnic communities or religious communities or communities that are socio-economical like a homeless community or i mean they're deep rich communities in which they're not having the meaning crisis like these affluent individuals that are up above it all and again see benjamin voice and jonathan peugeot's conversation where jonathan talks about um you know talks about how so many people that are living in the lower regions of the socio-economic ladder so often understand people so much more because they're constantly living in close contact with people and as in my conversation with vowsh um i should probably just post that whole conversation on my channel he was talking about well we really need community and i said well take away everybody's money and and you'll find people with community because the more affluent people get the the smaller their household side get size gets why well read c.s lewis's the great divorce we can't get along with each other when we don't have to when you're forced to get along with each other you find ways to create community even if there's strife and everybody wants community and everybody wants to escape it and this is a big piece of the meaning crisis that we probably haven't talked enough about now if you go back to some of my conversations with nathan jacobs and and his story his own story and the movie that he made becoming becoming truly human you know individualists break away from community community biases and community stigma and community control and one of the things that that uval harari mentioned in his book sapiens is in many ways state institutions replace individual and familial institutions traditional institutions you if you grew old you might have been taken care of by your family or by your church or by your neighborhood and and what happens is now the state kind of wades in and fulfill those fulfills those functions and and there are pros and cons to this but we we look at these things and and we don't recognize the other implications for these trade-offs that we've made and and so the state steps in to fill the gaps and we have paid caregivers not family caregivers and sometimes that's a good thing sometimes it isn't and and the the question of when it is good and when it is not good these are tremendously difficult and in fact the difference between these things is often is often the the grist for political disagreements and we and then as nathan jacobs explored with all of these nuns there's all of this anxiety over afterlife which still lingers because we're lost in the cosmos as individuals now when we wonder when we die do we just poof and our place remembers us no more and so we're complaining about the failures of of institutional religions but we're suffering from the meaning crisis of of being of not being within our communities now now back to the nuns and i use these slides in a video that was a while ago and and so nathan jacobson has talked to the orthodox church in america to a to a group of to a group of leaders in that church he said you know one of the commonalities that he finds in in progressive evangelicals that leave the church and get out of the faith is there's this this common belief in karma or fate things happen for a reason but again what what the the real different difference here is the lack of personal okay not only do we lose community amongst other human beings we lose communion with our god and so what tends to happen when people sort of drift out of church for all of these moral reasons or or scientific reasons or they just can't stand the they feel smothered by that community is that either god becomes god number two grows even larger and it's just their personal god all by themselves and so it's much more disorganized chaotic and and superstitious or they go the secular route and and god just recedes further away god is god is not personal god is karmic and and part of this is has very much to do with the narrative like the numbers 31 narrative god ordered the israelites to do what if you read history every bronze age person did and we think well well couldn't god have chosen differently shouldn't god have chosen differently shouldn't god have been more moral than the standard of behavior in the bronze or iron age and and of course what you'll find in in pretty common and you'll find this in my videos as well as people arguing yes god's god's morality was an improvement but pay attention and this is what i get into that bible video i'm really thinking i should post it is that is that the morality mirrors our morality but as as the individual said as the guy in the red shirt said in that in that video he said now wait a minute we're seeing this from where we're standing we're not seeing it from within the group the irony of probably the numbers 31 story is that no one in that time or place would have had any moral problem with the command that god made but yet we say well our our morality is clearly superior why you know someone might argue that perhaps if you're going to kill someone perhaps it's more moral to actually face the consequences of the killing yourself than to drop a bomb from them or press a button and cause the death of an entire city across the world with one press of a button which is what we can do today which is what we do with maybe not a whole city but with a drone strike blow up a building and all the people in it from from the bunker and you know from the from the container unit in in kansas so one of the things that we see with the nuns is that well everything happens for a reason but there's no god who we can have personal we can have complex personal relationships within a community because we have fled community because of just those kinds of complex often insoluble questions that that we can't resolve between individuals the best we can do is agree to disagree and and another point that that nathan jacobs make is is that you know evil in duty no person should let evil go unchallenged this is the call out culture if they can stop it and so therefore god in the old testament well god failed to call out culture test because god allows all kinds of bad things to happen and and when i think about this you know i've been thinking a lot about god number one and god number two and and what it seems to have happened is god number two expands and eclipses god number one until in a sense god number two goes so large and then sort of pops and i can no longer believe in a god and then all we get down to is karma but you know what karma is going to beget pantheism and pantheism at some point is going to emerge into some personalism and perhaps what we're seeing is a sort of a cycle that c.s lewis was not pessimistic because of what he saw in england as the re-emergence of paganism but optimistic because maybe we don't actually arrive at what we see in isaiah 6 holy holy holy is the lord god almighty that's god number two the whole earth is full of his glory that's god number one maybe you need a certain amount of and this is exactly what a certain amount of understanding that god is is all in all and in him we move and have our being in order to appreciate then the narrative of the incarnation and the hebrew sense of of negotiating with a personal god a personal god who has likes and dislikes a personal god who has personality a personal god who can get angry a personal not god with whom you can have a relationship a personal god with whom you can be a friend which contextualizes the kinds of things that jesus says depart from me i never knew you now now the world is meaningful for the nuns they're not ready to give up on that because to give up on that would would be to to risk nihilism and suicide and then nathan jacobs brings up the movie life itself and the climax of that movie is is this one individual it's a very interesting movie says but life itself is also a completely unreliable narrator so out of this you begin instead of talking about god we'll talk about life or the universe but where there's a little there's a pantheism developing already a little bit later in that thing you'll say you know heidegger and pantheism it's it's almost like a cycle once we develop enough pantheism eventually there's going to be the emergence of a personal god and well now you've got the unreliable narrator well how is it an upgrade if you discard relationship in a personal god to a world of chaos at least with a personal god you had someone to blame and what c.s lewis noted is that people in self and you commonly find this are both angry with god and say he doesn't exist well that's a very interesting psychological trick we play and it's very common but but god is an unreliable narrator and that's when you get again to the the bible that well god can be trusted and this of course is centering on the book of job can job trust god even if god allows all these horrible things to happen in job's life can god be trusted even if jesus his son is crucified on the cross the title of the film is disavowed in the thematic statement of the same movie life itself is an completely unreliable narrator but then they say what goes around comes around and there is meaning and purpose and that's what the whole arc of the movie is about but the revelation of the movie wasn't written by chaos in fact where does all of this order come from a person wrote the intrinsic the the intricate storylines and brought them to a meaningful and satisfying outcome because of course it's an american film and so we bring all of these assumptions about morals to our bible readings and and we try to sort it out and we try and sort out the world one of the things that you know i've i've been noting is one of the arguments that let's say many many atheists or non-theists have is that they don't believe that a world like this could be the product of a morally good god and and that is a very real challenge that that christians have to look at because it's it's a very old challenge and and so you find all sorts of schemes trying to account for the way the world is so there was you know in some senses there was a a deficient stupid god that created the material world that is subject to decay and the better god that created the world of heaven this is the axial mythology better god created the world of heaven and so that gets mapped onto the bible so the stupid god made the world and that's the god we find in the old testament and then the gnostic um higher heavenly god is the god of jesus and that's why jesus was was not fully man and this is why of course the church comes around it says fully man and fully god they're working through all of these same things over the history of the church and so many of the issues that all of these individuals are working through are the issues that throughout time we've been dealing with in a variety of cultures and a variety of languages but but all of the present anxieties get poured into the bible readings and an outstanding post by rod dreier in 2016 september of 2016 he he he looks at uh sociologists zigmund bauman has been helpful to me in understanding why things are falling apart if you look at rod dreier's benedict option that that very much is an argument for tight closed try tight religious communities that have grip and have seriousness and have accountability and if you look at if you look at what people want you'll hear this longing for it but it's a very it's very complicated longing because we understand that with community we lose this kind of freedom that sartre was was was emphasizing and advocating and so now we have this contrast between pilgrims and tourists so the sociologist zigmund bauman had been helpful to me in understanding why things are falling apart and what might feasibly be done about it this as part of writing the benedict option bauman was known for his ideas of liquid modernity a theory that says that the rate of change has become so accelerated than the contemporary world that no customs or institutions have time to solidify it changes our perception of time and our sense of moving through life last night i read an essay of his called from pilgrim to tourist i think that pdf doesn't work anymore in which he talks about how until fairly recently talks about how until fairly recently western man experienced his journey through life as a pilgrim christianity taught him that we are all wayfarers here on our earthly exile but headed towards heaven or hell based on decisions we make and things we do on our life's pilgrimage and we are all on pilgrimage together or were experiencing at experiencing life as a pilgrimage implied a couple of things one that you had a destination two that the destination made it possible to measure the distance you have traveled the pilgrim knew that he could only be truly satisfied when he reached the destination but the process of the journey formed the pilgrim's identity w.h. outins great pilgrim poem atlantis shows how this works bauman says that if life is a pilgrimage it makes sense to choose one's destination early because you can be fairly confident that the road ahead will be straight or at least will be headed in the right direction no matter how twists how many twists and turns it involves bauman delay of gratification must as the momentary frustration it begot was an energizing factor and a source of identity building zeal so far as it was coupled with the trust in the linearity and cumulativeness of time the foremost strategy of life as pilgrimage of life as identity building was saving for the future but saving in the future might made sense in a strategy only in so far as one could be sure that the future would reward the savings with interest and the bonus once accrued would not be withdrawn that the savings will not be devalued before the bonus distribution date or declared invalid or declared invalid currency that that what is seen today as capital will be seen in the same way tomorrow and the day after tomorrow pilgrims had a stake in the solidity of the world they walked in a kind of world in which one can tell life as a continuous story a sense making story a story makes each event makes each event the effect of the event before and the cause of the event after each age a station in the road pointing towards fulfillment the world of pilgrim of identity builders which must be orderly determined predicted predictable ensured but above all it must be a kind of world which footprints are engraved for good so that the trace and record of past travels are kept and preserved world in which traveling may indeed be a pilgrimage a world hospitable to the pilgrims it's not a world of chaos post-modernity liquid modernity is our condition today bauman doesn't mention god but it's clear that losing god that is the god of the bible and with him the eschatology that is the culmination of the christian narrative is at bottom of the rapid fragmentation that has become liquid modernity i don't think it's a matter of losing god then the world speeding up and fragmenting or the world speeding up and fragmenting causes us to lose the sense of eternal of eternal and unchanging god in truth i think the process goes back and forth in any case here we are bauman again it is so trans it it soon transpires that the real problem is not how to build identity but how to preserve it this is exactly what we're seeing in how many different conversations not to how to build identity people can build identity in a moment i'm this i'm that i'm this right away i'm that right away whatever you may build in the sand is unlikely to be a castle in a desert-like world effort to blaze a trail the difficulty is how to recognize it as a trail after a while how to distinguish a forward march from going in circles from eternal return it becomes it becomes virtually impossible to patch the trot and sketches of sand into an itinerary let alone into a plan for a lifelong journey time ceases to be experienced like a river says bauman it is rather nothing more than a series of ponds and pools episodes that have no real connection to one another the horror bauman's word of the new situation is that you can't count on the work you do today counting for anything tomorrow the only way to manage life successfully under these conditions is to avoid long-term commitments to refuse to be fixed one way or the other i can be a man today and a woman tomorrow i can be a christian today and a muslim tomorrow one of the things that christianity makes interestingly enough is the capacity to have an identity and to change your identity you're no longer a jew you're no longer a gentile you're no longer slave you're no longer free now you're a christian that's a new identity and it's given to you on the basis of profession and belief that's a powerful thing but that thing requires a community around it otherwise it means nothing not to wed one's life to one vocation only not to swear consistency and loyalty to anything and anybody not to control the future but to refuse to mortgage it to take care that the consequences of the game do not outlive the game itself and to renounce responsibility for such as do to forbid the past to bear on the presence too short in short to cut the present off at both ends to sever the presence from history to abolish time in any other form but a flat collection or an arbitrary sequence of present moments a continuous presence that's what my dog lives once disassembled and no more of a vector life no longer structures the space on the ground there is no more forward or backward is just the ability not to stand still that counts again that's an important point about darwin that i've made in past videos darwin doesn't really imagine progress because that would be a value judgment it's simply change towards a desired goal which in darwinian terms would be continued existence and the ability to reproduce fitness the capacity to move swiftly where the action is and to be ready to take in experiences as they come takes precedence over health that idea of the standard normalcy and keeping that standard stable and unscathed all delay including delay of gratification loses its meaning there is no arrow like time left to measure it and so the snag is no longer how to discover invent construct assemble even buy an identity but how to prevent it from sticking well constructed and durable identity turns from an asset into a liability the hub of postmodern life strategy is not identity building but avoidance of fixation that's avoidance of fixation individually and communally it is crucially important to remember that this is not merely a result of ideas having consequences this is also about consequences shaping ideas that is the structure of our economy under globalist capitalist creates this social and psychological instability what possible purpose could the strategy of pilgrim style progress serve in this world of ours in this world not only to have jobs for life disappears but trades and professions which have acquired the confusing habit of appearing from nowhere and vanishing without notice can hardly be lived as the weberian vocations and to rub salt into the wound into the wound to demand the demand for the skills needed to practice such professions seldom lasts as long as the time needed to acquire them jobs are no longer protected and most certainly no better than the stability of the places where they are practiced he goes on about this but i want to get to the pilgrim part bauman says that liquid modernity has rendered the identity of pilgrim obsolete we are now tourists people who flip from place to place on a whim consuming what pleasures we can find there without making any commitment to the place moving on when we get bored or things get tough truman capote and a beautiful piece of writing in 1948 captures the tourist perspective as beautifully as can possibly be done in london a young artist said to me how wonderful it must be for an american traveling in europe for the time you can never be part of it so none of the pain of it is yours you will never have to endure it yes for you there is only beauty not understanding what he meant i resented this but later after some months in france and italy i saw that he was right i was not part of europe i never would be remember this is 1948 after the second world war safe i could leave when i wanted to and for me there was only the honeyed hallowed air of beauty but it was it was not so wonderful as the young man had imagined it was desperate to feel that one could never be a part of moments so moving that always one would be isolated from this landscape and these peoples and then gradually i realized i did not have to be a part of it rather it could be a part of me a sudden garden opera night wild children snatching flowers and running in a darkened street a wreath for the dead and nuns in noon light music from the piazza a parish pianola and fireworks in la gran nuit the heart-shaking surprise of mountain visions and water views lakes like green wine from the chalice of volcanoes the mediterranean flickering at the bottom of cliffs forsaken far-off towers falling in twilight and candles igniting the jeweled corpse of saint zeno of verona all part of me elements for the making of my own perspective there is an element of pilgrimage in this seeing the aesthetic world the wonders of europe does change his does change his perspective and and helps to create his identity but capote has no skin in the game because he avoids the pain because he is free to leave when it comes time to suffer he is at his core a tourist not a pilgrim willingness to suffer for the sake of the destination is what makes the difference now and he talks about saint benedict's rule and so on and so forth now in my in my talk on the discord server way back here no even further back my talk on the discord server i noticed what i noted with shelly that when i was in seminary viv greg came to calvin seminary and gave a presentation and i was terrifically admired by his commitment to the poor that he would go to the slums in the philippines and live amongst the poor and and i thought certainly this incarnational ministry is exactly what one ought to do the professor of missiology sort of snickered and i think in his 60s then knew a lot more than than i knew in my 20s but a lot of what he knew was the fact that here was viv greg at calvin seminary lecturing about this he was in fact not in the slums in manila he was in fact had the ability to go back to the west and enjoy hotel rooms and lights on all the time and all of these things and in fact even if he moved back to the slums in manila if he were to fall sick he would still have a u.s passport that he could leave that's something that is not incarnational but it is something that most mission air most mission agencies will not let you surrender we are in fact in many ways tourists and not pilgrims and it's in fact the pilgrim aspects of the suffering that we most resent and try to escape and this is in many ways exactly what people are escaping churches from and for and this is true on both sides both mike the annoyer sack writer he made that this is the this is the tweet that someone said to me it said you should contact this guy sack nurse and i thought the other day we might try attending church occasionally again then we slapped each other hard but the feeling persisted why stop attending church because churches are full of you know those kinds of people how do we find an affirming congregation in sacramento when i read that what are you kidding me they're all over the place they've that affirming congregations publicize it like nobody's business they've got the rainbow flags out all means all they've got it draped all over the front of their buildings and they're still dying and many of the public drive by and say oh isn't that wonderful that that church is so affirming but they're never bothered going to go there how could we find an affirming congregation in sacramento we would try an evangelical church but our gag reflex is too strong but let's not you know play sides too hardly because you know john christ who's been in some trouble of his own recently had these amazingly apt videos of evangelicals and the church hunters and both version episode one and episode two were absolutely outstanding satire because they pointed to exactly how consumerism impacts the church and so here we are with progressive evangelicals and what to do well the beat goes on and i think that's why in many ways the jordan peterson moment follows again there's no real clean trails um charles colson was a episcopalian before he was an evangelical and some evangelicals will become episcopalians and most actually will fall out but jordan peterson comes along and says maybe you should reconsider the bible maybe the bible is not what you think it is maybe there is actually something there worth looking at and and i look at i i don't know anything that has moved the needle more on the bible than jordan peterson in the last five years and his biblical series in terms of making people stop and think and say how about that maybe my assumptions about how to read the bible are my assumptions maybe if i read the bible with a little bit more of an open mind i might see a reason why it's the most published book in all of human history i want to mention the bible project the bible project doing that much more from a from an evangelical point of view but still being very helpful for many people in making the bible both a stranger book and helping their understanding of the bible as they go through it i don't know if that helps i don't know if it if it you know i don't i don't get the sense that a lot of progressive evangelicals would listen to this you know i talked to um oh i can't think of his name right now uh the illustrator who it announced a number of you have been through this and and and i could in many ways be someone who would be very much in their camp except that in a sense christianity without the bible for me just simply makes no sense and is the bible deeply problematic sometimes yes uh do i have anything better no and what i've discovered and again i think actually the most important work i do is in my adult sunday school class and i don't post those videos on this channel just because they're sort of of a different nature but in my adult sunday school classes is where on a weekly basis with a group of people we wrestle and we wrestle with that bible and we wrestle with the strange things in it and we wrestle with the ways in which it offends us maybe i will post that bible video um we'll see maybe i'll do a little front end to it but i'm running out of time now so yeah my video these monologue videos are thinking out loud and i try to structure my thought in a way that might be helpful and i try to bring in videos that that might be helpful for you and i'll put the links below in the comment section but i have a lot of you know i i sent i sent mike the annoyer uh sack writer i sent a message you know i should have coffee and he said that sounds good and so i'd like to meet him and because in many ways the same things that prompted me to reach out to rachel held evans years ago even though in some ways we went two different ways you know mike the annoyer is not my enemy neither is the social justice warrior neither is the libertarian neither is the just go on and on and on jesus rule is love the lord your god with all your heart soul mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself and neighbors are all the way up to and including your enemies and even though enemies are hard to love and the more bloodshed the more difficult the more hurt feelings i don't i don't diminish that um that is in fact what jesus calls us to do and it's a messy process as we figure out our way as pilgrims all the way there