https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Drm6-yjfVrI

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. What's up Paul? How you been? How was your trip? A lot of people were talking about me. That's good stuff. We had a great trip. We had a great trip. You did come up from time to time, Fred. The Freddie and Paul show came up now and then. We used some of our... Kings baby! Yeah! Might make the playoffs! Yay! Sacramento! Kings might make the playoffs. So what are we going to talk about today, Fred? Well, she's going to talk after me. But we're going to talk about the four pet peeves I want to do. And that is... Lower my smoking. Follow instruction. Treat others the way I want to be treated. My pet motive. And look for a part-time job that would suffice to my needs. And have Mom help me out when I don't have my needs met. And I'm going to talk about the four pet peeves I want to do. And that is... Help me out when I don't have money. Like seven or six dollars a week. And I'll pay the rest. And I'll do good and be decent in order. And love her. Because she's my mom and I love my mom. And I'm not trying to butter her up like I butter my whiskey. Anyway... Sounds kind of buttery to me. Well, I'm sorry. I'm just a charmer, man. I got the time to bust the rhyme. Alright, Paul. So just tell me how your trip went. How other people were. We've had meetups and talked about all kinds of things. What did they think of our program? We didn't talk a lot about our program. But Job and John watch it pretty closely. So the three of us talked about our program. And in our little reports we did the One Love and those kind of things. What did they think of the One Love? They liked the One Love. They liked the One Love. The One Love is thumbs up to the One Love. That's a send off. What do you call that? I still don't know what it means. One Love means Love one another as you would do yourself. Okay. Like I'm saying, I was hoping, like we were saying earlier, Pepsi or Coke, if you could let me know if you want me to do a commercial locally for you. I have different venues. I have Access Sacramento. I used to work for it. I might go back to work with Access Sacramento doing DJing. But I got to pay $50 and then Gordon would pay $50 and we'd have our own show. Just one time though. And then after that you don't have to pay nothing. Because you're paid for it. YouTube is free so we like that. That's true. One more thing. I'm just saying that I'd like to do a I really would like to do a commercial for Pepsi. Would you do it for free or you want to get paid? Well, a small benefit would be good. Okay, well I'm going to do my rap. I'm going to sing this. Oh I'm doing it. Yeah, no, no, no, no, no. You can do it after me. So many papers for this episode. Just let me go, Mom. I love you, it's a dwelling place. Oh Lord Almighty for my long soul, real grace for here my satisfied within your presence I seem beneath the shadowful wings. Better is one day in your courts. Better is one day in your house. Better is one day a thousand elsewhere. Better is one day in your courts. Better is one day in your house. Better is one day in your courts. A thousand elsewhere. One thing I ask and I will seek to see your beauty see to find you place your glory dwells. One thing I ask I would seek to see your beauty seek to find you place your glory dwells. Hallelujah. My heart cry out for your living God. Your springs water to my soul. I've tasted I have seen. Come again and watch with me. I draw you near to you. I draw you near to you. To you. Better is one day. Better is one day. Better is one day a thousand elsewhere. Better is one day. Better is one day. Better is one day when Paul's elsewhere. I'm better than elsewhere. But not really so cause I love Paul the most good for a stone. And don't you know sometimes I sleep and I love to preach glory glory hallelujah and amen. Your turn. I'm just kidding Paul. I just have to say that. He needs to go to heaven too. Okay here we go. No no no. We show God forever. What are you going to do Nancy? Well what I'm going to do is John 3 1-17. Now you talked about Nicodemus. We did talk about Nicodemus. Yes you did. And Jesus said to him you must be born again. Now from above I guess. Anyhow Nicodemus said now I don't understand this. You have to be you're not talking right. How can I go in my mother's womb again? Of course you can't go in your brother's womb again. No. Once you are created you are created by God's spirit and heavenly power. Yeah. Okay so his answer unique water and the capital S spirit. Spiritual water. Now that's important. Spiritual water. No the spirit. Okay spirit is one. We believe in the spirit. Spirit is one. Yeah. And the little spirit with the little s needs to be in your heart. In you. Okay. You have to have the high spirit. Right. In your heart. What do you think of your son in this one? No wait a minute. Okay. It needs to be in you. Okay. And why does it need to be in you? Why does it need to be in you? If you want eternal life you have to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. Believe in him shall be saved and you will have eternal life. Now our last song What about the serpents? I mean I made a big deal about the serpents. I'm coming to the serpents. Oh wait I'm scared of her. Now I'm coming to the serpents. Okay. As Moses raised the serpent up. Okay you sing that now. No I'm not. I'm going to read it. As Moses raised the serpent up so must God's son be lifted high like the serpent was in the sky. No on the pole. So must God's son and whosoever will believe in him guess what? Will live eternally. Yeah very good. Okay. I study life points. I study points. Brownie but. Yeah okay. So anyhow some of that Paul made me understand it better. Pastor Paul. I'm sorry. He's Paul once in a while. He's other things once in a while. Anyhow I'm done. Alright alright here. Alright we gotta land the plane here. That's true. Anglican Church wants to use the room so we gotta land the plane. Yeah we gotta land. Okay. Alright. Alright. Who steps to the brother's on third street cause Jesus Christ loves you as well as I see. If you open up your Bible we'll see. We're gonna end the show at a good note. When I'm on a mic it ain't no joke. What's up Tee Grizzly in the place to be. Don't forget about J Lo and America's Got Talent G. You can get me on America's Got Talent on Fred Schuller 228 at a G Lo on com. I'm gonna raise that out and get a hold of me if I made it it's 228 No it's not the number it's my email. Oh well that's not good either. No that's fine. 228 Fred Schuller 228 at gmail.com and let me know if I made it through to the audition and thank you very much. Better is one better is one day better is one day a thousand elsewhere ready? Yeah ready. One love That was kind of chaotic but it's okay. It's gonna be good.