https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2AsPX9lknXI

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. This is our Thanksgiving special. We are here on Thanksgiving. We just finished our Thanksgiving morning service and Freddie? It was very protective and I liked it a lot and you had a good message and I thank God for my friends, my church family, my pastor and my friends and I thank God for my mom and I thank God for Philip, my dad in God's way and he's a good man because he's a Jesus man. Anyways, thank you very much. Go ahead Paul. Okay and we've got Nancy and Philip here with us again today and anything you two like to express thanks for? I'm thankful that two years ago on December 5th I had a 308 bypass and God pulled me right through there and after that my ministry grew. I gave out a lot of Jesus signs to the people, patients and everybody else. I really appreciate it and touch people's lives. How about you Nancy? Anything you want to say you're thankful for? Well I'm very thankful for you Paul and I'm thankful for my family and my good great friend as you call him, Philip. And I'm thankful actually to be here like Philip. In January I ended up in an ambulance and on my support and 13 days in ICU and it changes you when you know that this could happen. And I'm just thankful that the Lord through miracles of medicine and everything and the support of you and Philip and Freddie and everybody else that I'm here today. I'm thankful for that. And when we talked about doing a Thanksgiving special Freddie you wanted to say something about Thanksgiving, the first Thanksgiving or any thoughts on that that you had? Oh but the pilgrims of the night. Well I think it was nice that the pilgrims and the Indians united together and they broke bread and they had a feast together. They weren't against each other. In other words they were united and they were treating people the way they would want to be treated. Do you have a Thanksgiving wrap? I've never heard of Thanksgiving. Give me four seconds I think I'm going to say. You guys talk about it. I'm thankful that we had President Lincoln and Washington that they started this every third week on November Thanksgiving. Even now our elected president is thankful and they want this country to go better. Thank you. You ready Fred? You got it? Here we go. Thanksgiving wrap. I'm not even a kid yet. Alright very good thank you. Alright well this was the Thanksgiving special. And we hope everybody out there has a good Thanksgiving and everybody be thankful for what they got and don't be bashful to talk to your friends and have a good feast at the dinner table and have a good time together. I won't be able to go with my mom but I'm going with a good friend so that's okay. And I am just thankful for my church. I'm thankful for my mom and I'm thankful for Philip and I'm thankful for my pastor Paul. And we're going to go out to coffee so we'll be going to coffee in a week or two. So we'll be back with you before either Sunday or then and then me and Paul will talk to you at the coffee shop. I hope you guys are liking our show because I love it and thank you very much. One love. One love. Thanks for watching.