https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JmzqsVDtRbs

 This is Paul. Deep beneath many of the things that we've been talking about over the last couple of years is the question of the South. It's a topic that comes up regularly. You can't avoid it with pastoral care, with many of the culture war issues raging today. Now we have a pandemic which is changing people's assumptions about normalcy. Living overseas for a number of years and then returning to the United States made me recognize the astounding stability, affluence, predictability, security of what a middle class or wealthier life may offer someone. In the United States, I think especially and increasingly so when you're coming out of a religious tradition. In many ways that the American dream is to deploy stability and prosperity to the maximum number of people for the maximum number of years possible. It's been articulated in many different ways. A chicken in every pot, a car in every garage, now the two car family and beyond. And Levittown 1957 was the picture of that reliable, deployable, scalable suburbia that was offered as an alternative to the chaotic city. Now with coronavirus very much digging into places like New York. It's although Westchester, Nassau County, Suffolk County, Long Island, you know, even suburbia has been urbanified. Eric Weinstein made a little periscope in which he commented on the end of our 75 years of good fortune. Now of course that your mileage may vary with respect to that, but our little brains regulate, our little brains regulatory calculations are all based by little windows we live in. And so if your parents never got divorced, if your father never lost his job, if your mother wasn't an alcoholic, all of those ifs, if the American dream held and deployed to you, I'm sure there's an Australian and a British version too, and a Canadian version, and gave you the kind of predictable solidarity, foundation, security. It's a very good thing. And if you can add to that a God in heaven bringing stability and bringing the promise of life everlasting, what more could be said? Pay attention to those with childhood trauma and how that has calibrated their capacity for trust and their baseline anxiety. And if you like me grew up in a good home with good parents that weren't alcoholics, that didn't cheat on each other, that were reliable and predictable and good, you were blessed. About a century of deconstructing the self, and I've sort of been doing it already in this video, we're delighted to try to figure out what makes the other guy tick. Why are they so neurotic? Why are they incapable of creating a bond? Why are they unable to create a secure relationship with another person? Oh, that's because of divorce. That's because of some childhood trauma. And so we're delighted to figure that out. Oh, now there's a reason for it. I feel better about the world even if I can't do anything about it until we discover that we are that guy or gal. We welcome that on ourselves, however, when we realize why can't I create that stable bond? Why can't I have that secure life? Why can't I experience internally the American dream of stability and reliability and prosperity? And so maybe I should listen to to Sigmund and Carl and all of the others who will help me find myself and know myself so I can arrange the things of my life to deploy for myself an outcome that I desire. But then we have to begin to wonder who is the we that is engineering this outcome? If I'm trying to escape the neurotic scared child within, how can I trust the creation and construction put together by that neurotic and scared child trying to find the home that they've never had? The meaning crisis is in some ways the not too hard to figure out result of all of this deconstruction and reconstruction. We look deep inside fearing there's no there there. If I'm just the product of my genes, my culture, my upbringing, then who cares? I'm just I'm just the sum at the end of a math problem. Sam Harris, I don't think comforting much of anyone just says, well, enjoy the movie. Well, what if my movie isn't as good as yours? What if my parents weren't as wealthy? What if what what if my my world was far more chaotic? What if all the trauma in my past has now made me flinch? Once bitten twice shy. People need a there there. There must be a real self a true self a spiritual self and my authentic self that I am alienated from now. Not only do I have a crisis of self, I have two to manage. I have the one on my hands and the one I aspire to. But but the one I aspire to seems just as just as ephemeral and illusory. And so I I I embroider it with adjectives to to give it solidity. This magazine cover strikes me. This is from Focus on the Family. Remember what I always say about conservatives say they don't know as much as the change that they're doing. They don't know as much as the change that they're doing. And so here I have no idea who Natasha Burr is finding her real self in a celebrity home. Well, happy for her, I guess, except the stars, the celebrities that we navigate have hardly been the secure ones up in the sky that we can set a course by the divorce and remarriage and reorienting and on and on and on. No wonder we can't navigate and find our true self when the stars keep moving. How will I find it? And what are you grasping at with all these adjectives? Isn't that what this is all about? When I was a little kid watching Sigmund and the Sea Monsters. Hmm, Sigmund? Paradoxically, people feel authentic. We're haunted by Sigmund running around with his sea monster. Did he rescue a sea monster from the sea? What's that boy doing? And his little friend paradoxically, people feel this is from Ralph Degan on Twitter. Someone posted this and when he posted this and I thought about the article I'm about to read for you, I thought, yeah, yeah. Paradoxically, paradoxically, people feel most authentic when they betray their true nature. True, authentic, which one is true? How will we know it? Does it come with a certificate? Can we analyze it and figure out what its constituent elements are made of? Does that help us? When they betray their true nature conform to likable, socially approved qualities. And I'll read from the little take from this Scientific American blog. And the link will be in the notes. Oops, I just messed up my camera. Everyone wants to be authentic, although most people would define authenticity as acting in accordance with your idiosyncratic set of qualities. Research has shown, this of course is how we know or how we say we know, until of course you talk to James Lindsay or one of these people and say they've been woozling the research. Anyway, research has shown that people feel most authentic when they conform to a particular set of socially approved qualities. This is the paradox of authenticity. In order to reap the benefits of feeling authentic, you may have to betray your true nature. Where does this true nature come from? Authentic people behave in line with their unique qualities even if they may, even if those may conflict with social conventions. But we view people as less than fully human when they fail to conform to societal conventions. A number of studies have shown that people's feelings of authenticity are often shaped by something other than their loyalty to their unique qualities. Their unique qualities? Is there uniqueness to the carbon and water that makes us? A number of studies have shown that people's feelings of authenticity have been shaped by something other than their loyalty to their unique qualities. Paradoxically, feelings of authenticity seem to be related to a kind of social conformity. We're navigating by the moving stars now. In these studies, people are first asked to characterize the qualities that reflect their true self. Afterwards, they complete assessments about the extent to which their behavior reflects their qualities and the extent to which they feel authentic. We would expect that people feel most authentic on days where their behavior closely matches their unique patterns of values and qualities. But people report feeling most authentic when their behavior conforms to a specific pattern of qualities, namely when they are extroverted, emotionally stable, conscientious, intellectual, and agreeable. Oh, when they're doing what everything that they've watched has says, this is how you should be. That is, we feel most authentic when we act like a cross between the perfect party guest and the perfect coworker. We're navigating, we're dead reckoning the navigations of the self. Now we've been looking at the religious deconstructions, and it would be interesting asking them about their assessment of the journey of their selves and how they would, well, quite clearly they feel that their selves have undergone an upgrade since they've left the vestiges of what they were behind. Religious communities provided answers to identity questions. This is who you are. You receive it, you don't achieve it. The plausibility structure surrounding these answers have, however, been melting away. Just like with the new self, the old self seems to have been layered in some sociology. Self-consciously migrate to the identities we see others aspiring towards. I think about my conversation with Eric, I couldn't find the link where we talked about aspiration and esteem. Aspiration and esteem are looking up at the stars by which we navigate. Now, as is most often the case, I get some of my best stuff from you people out there who find stuff and say, oh, you got to read this one. And sometimes I do, and sometimes I don't. Sometimes I read it and say, oh yeah, this, you got to read this one. This from Vanity Fair. Now I knew nothing about kinfolk or any of that. Oh, oh, oh, pause, paywall. When you know there's a paywall coming, always print a PDF before you've reached your limit of articles. Little pro tip for you there. There are other ways around too, I know. Let me see if I can make the words big enough for my aging eyes without glasses to see. And there we go. Kinfolk, never heard of these people. How kinfolk defined the millennial aesthetic and unraveled behind the scenes. The cult quarterly helped set the pace for upwardly mobile Instagram perfect 2010 lifestyle. Off the page, its creators lives had been somewhat messier. Should that surprise us? Isn't that always the way it is? Before he answers a question, Nathan Williams pauses for a longer than is strictly comfortable. He does not run a hand through his strawberry blonde hair, nor does he twist the artful rustic bronze cuff of his wrist. He does not fiddle with his silk triangle tied jaunty around his neck and dyed to the exact shade of the dark dark navy that is. See, the problem is I don't read that well. Dark Navy as the rest of his well tailored ensemble. He does however blink slowly if the question is of a personal nature. He may do this several times so that initially you read the response as panic, a classic deer in the headlights look. But between the blinks, he will hold your gaze until finally the blinking comes to a less than comes comes to seem less like protection and more like consideration, a weighing of something perhaps your trustworthiness, perhaps his own. What's interesting is if you look at the picture, in a way you might be able to guess at what this whole article is about. And you may very well be right. Kinfolk is famously about intentionality, about the kind of wholesome slow living that that exults in deliberately curated moments, carefully selected objects, and as its twee tagline once read, well written article, as its twee tagline once read small gatherings. Like all lifestyle magazines, it traffics in aspiration. And if in the past eight years or so you have found yourself craving a precisely sliced piece of avocado toast or a laundry line from which to cunningly hang your linen bed sheets in the sun dappled afternoon, you probably have kinfolk to thank for it. But the seductions featured on its pages have always been aimed at much as much at the soul as the body. Through intention kinfolk's austerely beautiful pages whisper lies not just a pretty room or a lovely outfit, but a truer expression of the self. Something more meaningful, more, as the marketers now put it, authentic. That there might be inherent tension in an authenticity that depends on buying the right leather apron or arranging a bunch of wildflowers. So is a notion that does not seem to trouble Williams. But perhaps that is because of the other tensions, the ones that would tear apart the small band of intimates who helped him found the magazine, the ones that would erupt within his own measured soul. It was certainly nothing compared to the trauma that lay ahead and would strip away the well curated facade to ultimately reveal who he really was. Because although it would not be accurate to say that Nathan Williams, who started kinfolk, was living a lie, neither was he living in truth. Authenticity, performance, brand, product, myth, reality. When it comes to the 33 year old Williams, it's unusually difficult to separate the strands. He's unfailingly polite and considerate, possessed of a humility and a lack of guile that seems almost shocking in this age of branding and fake news. And yet he himself is so intensely curated from his passions to his precisely tailored clothing that it can be hard to see him as entirely real. I'm going to name you who sent me this piece, but dead on buddy, dead on. We are the same height and have the same posture, says his friend Frederick Lentz Anderson, a fashion director for the Danish magazine Euro man. We're both super slim. But every time I see him I think, how can that suit fit you so perfectly? There's never a flaw to anything he does. It's like he never slips. He's a star. We guide our lives by him. Kinfolk's origin story seems just as perfect. A charming myth crafted along the lines of one of those Rooney Garland. Hey gang, let's put on a show musicals. Oh, Judy Garland. Perfect, perfect illustration. This piece should win an award. It is magnificent. At the time of the last decade while still in college, two young married couples have the kooky idea of creating a magazine. A few wholesome. They were Mormon. A few wholesome. They were Mormon. Hijinks. And once social media revolution later they find themselves at the helm, not just of a successful publication, but at the vanguard of a veritable moment. A zeitgeist defining social media friendly tidal wave that swores an entire generation in muted linen. Pour over coffee and gratitude. Hashtag Kinfolk life. Hashtag flat lay. Hashtag blessed. Their, no, stopping reading, but some commentary. Their Mormon upbringing is exactly right. Pay attention. How many stars, how many people who hit it just right have been birthed in a stable religious place. A home that they could count on. Maybe not in this case, as we're about to discover, but at the end of Ross Do Thoughts, the Decadent Age, he makes an observation that one young man had made in the Bellflower Meetup that what if your cultural ceiling is the same as your religious ceiling? None of them said it that way, but that's really what they're saying. I'll keep reading. There's a lot that appeared in those early pages that was an accurate expression of the lives of its young founders. Nate Williams and Katie Searle met in 2008 while both were at Brigham Young University's Hawaii campus. I was just there last Christmas. Went to Hawaii for the first time. It was magnificent and we were staying in an Airbnb just right over there by the Brigham Young University's Hawaii campus, I think at least. It was amazing. Beautiful place. He developed a crush on the quiet, luminous girl after passing the desk where she worked every day. It would take him some time to get up the nerve, as he recalls, to ask her to leave her boyfriend and date him instead. Remember these details when you read the article. Again, this article is a masterpiece. Searle insisted she had already broken things off with his predecessor, but both agreed that she said yes. And then yes again, a few months later, when they led her into the forest and beneath a bower of carefully strung fairy lights, he asked her to marry him. Wow. Oahu. That terrain, that climate, Hawaii, it doesn't get any more perfect than that, does it? Can it? How could it? And with perfection like that, doesn't happily ever after, isn't that guaranteed? And of course, they didn't just live together. They're Mormons. They married. They have a track. They have a trajectory. They know what they're doing. We know what they're doing. An assignment for an entrepreneurship class had the two of them dreaming up an e-commerce platform, which they called Kinfolk and Company, for selling plates and glasses and other things both might need for a sweet little dinner party. And that combined with the contributions Williams had gathered through a blog he kept and help from their close friends, Doug and Paige Bischoff, gradually morphed in 2011 in a tiny, very do-it-yourself magazine focused on food and small gatherings they all loved. They had no publishing experience and no defined roles at the time, but everyone just did everything. This sounds like so many church planting stories I hear so often. This is how Willow Creek started. This is how Saddleback started. This is how that church plant down the road that went from two couples to tens of thousands of people started. We all lived in married student housing. So when we weren't in class, we spent a lot of time together, says Doug Bischoff. We'd go to Nate and Katie's apartment and they'd be in ours regularly. We were always getting together to cook, to hang out, just to enjoy each other's company. We had a really, really good friendship. Williams and Doug Bischoff even looked somewhat alike, both of them tall and lean with short blonde hair worn in a neat side part and a predilection even then for sharper clothes that might be entirely normal for your average college student. The theme of the first issue was inspired by a line from Theroux's Walden. Oh, bring in the New England Transcendentalists, please! I had three chairs in my house, one for solitude, two for friendship, three for society. Williams so identified with the book that he handed out copies to his friends at his birthday party. Kinship Volume One included an article on FICA, the Swedish coffee break so in vogue now, and on Tea Time, rituals that would be incorporated into kinfolk's office life. It was really simple, really basic, but what I thought was sweet at the time, Williams says, and yeah, it was far too kitschy and cutesy, but there was this correlation there. From the start, kinfolk pulled in millions of page views. They nailed the zeitgeist. They nailed it. A response strong enough to convince the Williams's and the Biscoff's to sign on with a San Francisco based publisher to keep with printing and distribution. By September 2012, kinfolk was selling tens of thousands of copies per issue at a cover price of $18. The two couples moved to Portland, Oregon, which in addition to being Searle's hometown, had the added benefit of a large population of aesthetically minded millennials eager to express their creative identities through a well curated table setting. Yet even once kinfolk had a real office and began hiring real staff, the fairy tale quality remained. Nathan would bring in new bread he had baked, says Nathan Ticknor, who started working as a service manager in 2013. We had our tea time. At Christmas, we would all go out and chop down our office Christmas tree together. They were family. This is the family that people wanted and longed for, and they were delivering with just the right table setting. Even once kinfolks had a... When Georgia, Francis King showed up to interview for her job as editor, she was invited to join a staff party held on nearby... Saavi? Portlanders will correct me. Island. Everyone from the office was there sitting on the beach in the sunshine, swimming and eating watermelon slices with feta and rose water, she recalled. I thought, shit, it's real. Go back to that Twitter thing I read from the blog from Scientific American. This is real. The printing didn't do me well. That is your life. What is your life? Maybe shot in a better light, maybe a tiny bit beyond your financial reach, but still, in essence, you turned out to be what an entire generation was dreaming of. 2011 wasn't that long ago, but when kinfolk popped up, it seemed fresh and new, Williams said. It was the first original concept publication focused on community. Buzzword. I'm coming together around a shared table on slowing down. I think it resonated because it offered an antidote to the huge digital presence in our lives. As a company, we recognize that the more time we were on our phones, the more of an appetite we had for real connection. It was a strange transitional moment for Lifestyle magazine. The great die-off had occurred just a year or two earlier, shuddering old stalwarts like Gourmet and Metropolitan Home, as well as livelier new titles such as Domino and Plenty magazine. A few others, more niche publications that rose in their wake like Modern Farmer or Serial, lay a couple of years in the future, but now 2011 there was definitely a need waiting to be filled as survivors like Architectural Digest and El Decor took up their mastheads and a number of upstarts like Rue still around, and Matchbook, not, debuted online. That coincided as Portlandia so memorably satirized with a new generation of do-it-yourselfers. Launched in 2011 as the outgrowth of a college project. Oh, isn't that just the narrative story we love? I was just watching Theramos, the HBO documentary last night. Bill Gates left college, Zuckerberg left college, you leave college and boom, but these Mormons, they're doing it better. They're showing the world what real life looks like. This is Rhett and Link just with a Mormon Hawaiian twist in better clothes. Launched in 2011 as the outgrowth of a college project, Kinfolk immediately reflected and championed the earnest do-it-yourself aesthetic then in vogue with many millennials. Sometimes it did so to the point of parody. The New York Times called it the Martha Stewart living of the Portland set. See how it spread globally kind of astounded me, Searle said. It was pretty powerful to see the map where we would hotspot what was happening all over the world. By 2014 the magazine had been syndicated in Russia, Japan, China and South Korea. Ah, civilization. Imperial. Imperium spread throughout the world. Mormons know how to do missionary well. The founders had launched OOR Media, a creative agency that started a video series and had published a book, The Kinfolk Table. They had started this series of gatherings, dinners and other events designed to bring Kinfolk minded together for in real life communing. And all of it articulated in an aesthetic so sharply defined you could slice sour dough with it. Martha Stewart living for the Portland set is how the New York Times referred to the magazine for 2014 profile. Two years later Forbes called Williams one of its 30 under 30 and underscore magazine compared him with Lena Dunham. Noting that if the girl's creator was the voice of her generation then Williams is the eye of his. The writer of this piece, outstanding. Sometimes a publication catches a moment and crystallizes a certain thing that is happening culturally says Mark Kremers, founder and director of Future Corp, a London based digital design agency that works with magazines. It's going to be a mirror to that moment. I see it, formats it and delves into its beautiful package. That's what Kinfolk did. That's not necessarily a good thing according to Kremers. It's tasteful to a fault. It gets into the verveky stuff of of. Why do Christian movies. Why are they so popular amongst Christians and so unbelievable to others. It's because real life has this has this horizon. Horizon. And that goes into this question and the quest of the self. We all know that our our realist self has a horizon where our aspirational self falls off. Our aspirational selves are not quite believable if they're just too perfect. Okay, back to the piece. There's nothing offensive, nothing that hurts your eyes, nothing that stands out. It's very beige. An AI bot would probably churn out the same stuff very easily. I don't know what they have been. For the founders that kind of criticism was missing the point. I always tell people that Kinfolk is both an aesthetic and a worldview says King. A lot of people only focus on the aesthetic. For the partners Kinfolk wasn't wasn't something they put on. It was their life. This this wasn't this wasn't propaganda. This wasn't marketing. This was a documentary. See it was mystified by the way that kind of brand the ethos got lost. I had people coming up to me and asking me how do I join. As if there was some kind of exclusive membership. That's a church word. The Apostle Paul is still ringing through this thing. She recalled and I would say no just do it. It's democratic accessible to everyone. Again I hope you can just if you're watching you can see where I deviate from the text. If you're listening of course it's a little harder. Maybe I'll maybe the intonation of my voice. No just do it. You just invite some people over for dinner. Won't your dinner look like that Martha Stewart welcoming. Well welcome to my home. As if home is like this. Isn't this the home we've always dreamed of Martha. Except that little insider trading business and a little bit of jail time. But even actual dinner turned out to be complicated. When Kinfolk launched in 2011 Instagram was just nine months old. In many ways to media to the two media converged perfectly each seeming to make it. Each seeming to be made for the other. It wasn't long before millennial feeds were filled with the Kinfolk aesthetic. Even with images of Kinfolk itself. Somehow I don't know how the magazine became popular for social media. Williams said taking photos of it on a coffee table in a cafe on the bookshelf it just exploded. We started seeing lots of signature Kinfolk photos like the ones with flowers coming out of it. Flowers coming out of it to look like ice cream. Pick up traction and also go off on social media. Instagram is this is Instagram's world. The entrepreneur in him was pleased to have hit a nerve. But the soft spoken man who loved Thoreau and was trying to say something about what happened most what mattered most to him was saddened. Oh there's the horizon. He knows better. It might look like this from the outside and that might be feel like the horizon for others but there is a real horizon that's working in there. There were hundreds of thousands of posts that were tagged hashtag kinship hashtag hashtag Kinfolk life. Well Kinfolk life but readers were receiving it as just a photo of a pretty table or an over shops of an overhead shot of a cappuccino. It's like no these pictures are sacraments of my life. They're not just photographs. He said it became a beast that we had no control over. Beast is exactly the word that anyone reared in the biblical imaginary should use. The same held true of those Kinfolk gatherings. The whole point was to create real community but there weren't any connecting but there weren't but they weren't but they but they weren't connecting at all. He he recalled people were just showing up to get posts for Instagram. We had to start asking them to put away their phones. See now exclusivity. Watch Jonathan Pichot's commentary on the outbreak. So ubiquitous a signifier did Kinfolk become that parodies popped up to satirize what they took to be bland elitist and exceedingly white omnipresence. Of course that's going to come up. One site the conspiracy simply collected the copycat images from Instagram and published them under the tagline Kinfolk magazine making white people feel artistic since 2011. Oh gosh. It's not uncommon for people to be so excited about the news that they're going to be able to get a copy of the Kinfolk magazine. Kinfolk magazine making white people feel artistic since 2011. Oh gosh. It's not uncommon for people to characterize William as unlike anyone they've ever met. You know how people will describe someone as quiet. But when you get to know him he's really deep says King and with Nate it's actually true. He can sit there with silence. He can sit with space. He allows others to approach him and then he doesn't so much unfurl as blossom. He's the real deal. It's his his magazine was a sacrament of himself. People just want to be near him is how Searle described it which is exactly what Lentz Anderson Euromans fashion director remembered feeling when he first met Williams a few years ago at a party. Steve Martin would say in in leap of faith he's the genuine article. You got to be careful about the genuine article. There's a contrast there and that he's both extremely quiet and extremely charismatic. I've worked in this industry for a long time and know a lot of people but have never met anyone like Nathan. The genuine article it charismatic is not the first word that leaps to mind upon meeting him at least not for the author. Williams comes across as sincere and direct and though there's a dreaminess about him that seems at odds with this with the steely determined determination beneath his reserved in a way that makes his emotional range at least in an interview seem limited. And I wonder if this is something that he has developed since. Now we get to the deconstruction. Within a few years of the magazine's launch both Searle and Williams were struggling with their faith. It wasn't an entirely new sense for its sensation for either of them Searle's parents had divorced when she was very young and her mom with whom she was very close came out as a lesbian and left the Mormon Church herself. Williams upbringing was more orthodox. He had grown up in a small predominantly Mormon town in Canada and his family was devout. But the two years beginning at age 19 that he spent on his church ordained mission unleashed some doubts. He was assigned to a district in Los Angeles and although he worked hard and appreciated the discipline the spiritual aspect rang hollow. I think that if you're truly convinced with your belief convicted with your beliefs and you feel the importance of them then of course converting someone would be very gratifying and rewarding he said. I didn't feel like that I was doing it to do my mission. I didn't believe it. Somewhere there's a tension there was a doubt. Had it was there a lot longer before and going through the motions doing what was inauthentic only increases the distance and exacerbates the doubt. Among the many rules for missionary behavior is a strict ban against traveling outside the geographic boundaries of one's assigned area. It was perhaps telling that although he was never rebellious Williams broke that rule on his own. I went to the Getty. It's the Getty Museum in Southern California a few times and yeah if you look at his picture and you've been to the Getty. Yeah the aesthetic matches. The man found his place. In hindsight he sees that period as the origin of his discontent with the church. But it wasn't until after the launch of kinfolk that he and Searle began to break with it. King remembered the moment he realized that Williams was no longer holding some of his church's key practice of the church. King remembered the moment he realized that Williams was no longer holding some of his church's key practices. Nathan and I were alone in the office working late under a deadline. He silently slid a glass of wine onto my desk because if you're breaking with them and you're close with others you want your others to enjoy what you enjoy of course. And then without saying a word, Word walked back to his office with his own glass in hand turned and smiled at me. Duggan Page remained active in the church and although they were saddened that their friend's decisions meant they would no longer share a religious life, there were tears. Listen to Rhett and Link's stories again. Williams recalled, It didn't undermine their friendship. The four of us were a pack, recalled King. We were so close and intertwined. Friendship, romantic, love, familial love was all wrapped together. They were their own community. And yet, although he couldn't fully articulate why, around 2014 Williams felt like he was at a breaking point. Kinfolk was doing better than ever. Its print run had soared to $75,000 for the U.S. edition alone, but its creative director felt suffocated. There's so much energy going out into something that wasn't what I wanted it to be. Well here's the thing, once it's in print, once it's in paper, once it's out there in the world, once the image that you have created of yourself is on the minds of others embedded in others, it's not so easy to change anymore. In a piece coming forward, if modernity gives us the photograph, post-modernity gives us the moving image, the image on the screen let's say. He meant it literally. So they moved to Copenhagen and I'll just summarize some of this. And everyone was worried about, well Copenhagen's a lot more expensive than Portland. You know, you're going to make this on Copenhagen taxes instead of Oregon taxes? So they moved to Denmark. Searle had doubts about the wisdom of this move, but quietly, but quieted them by chalking it up to the one last adventure before we settled down and had kids. The Bischofs had two small children by then and the two partners in charge of the operations bought in line. They were far more intimate knowledge of the financial pressures than Williams did and were even more concerned. After eight months of uncertainty, the team was finally installed in Copenhagen in the summer of 2015. Williams felt, he said, like I had refilled the tank. How do you know who you really are? I'm reading. I'm not, this isn't me. I'm reading. How do you know who you really are? This is the question. Or whether I, that I am, if there's a there there, if I actually exist, how do you know who you really are? It's impossible to say whether the magazine changed Williams or Williams changed the magazine. Even before the move, both had gradually grown more worldly. There's an interesting word. I want to know who wrote this and what what her background is. While retaining a tone of guileless sincerity. Issue 17, the last published in Portland, reassured readers that was okay to carve personal space for their relatives. But the identity that Williams had constructed for himself would not survive the transition to the world. The image of the child himself would not survive the transition or the trauma to come. Because again, once you're in that picture, you're frozen. Can that picture be authentic? Can that image on the screen even be authentic? At the time of the move, Searle was four months pregnant. After a routine ultrasound, Searle and Williams were referred to a cardiologist who made an offhand comment about the baby's heart defect. I was pretty far along at that point, so the doctor just assumed we knew we knew about it already. But it was the first time they learned that the baby suffered from a syndrome that would require him to undergo multiple surgeries before he turned two. If their baby, whom they would name Leo, survived, he would likely not reach his twenties. Most parents who learn their baby has this condition decide to terminate the pregnancy. Remember, they're raised Mormons. The doctor informed them Searle and Williams would choose to do the same. But because the pregnancy was so advanced, they needed to decide within 48 hours. The couple had already concluded that the faith in which they grew up could no longer hold them. But they had never truly articulated to themselves, most of all, which beliefs they took with them. You see, deconstruction is very messy. And it's usually highly selective because those things that we're raised into are part of us. They're real. They're foundational. They're express in feelings. They're expressed in ideas, in our dreams, in things that we don't necessarily have a hold of. So now this couple faced with a difficult pregnancy, the assurance that their child would be disabled and die young, and that everyone else gets the abortion. Well, it was as if a magnifying glass shifted onto my ethics, Williams says, of the intense hours during which they shut themselves away to talk out the decision in private. And here's the thing, a fast decision you live with. That's why speed is so difficult in times like that. In our office in Portland was neighbors, in our office in Portland was neighbors with Planned Parenthood. Geography matters. I would drive past and there would be picketers and protesters, but it never took time to chisel out that corner of my ethics. And within 48 hours I had to decide, we had to decide how we actually thought about it. And again, these are people who are creating sacraments of their perfect life, and it's going viral out into the world. Searle and Williams had learned of Leo's illness on Monday. That Friday, Katie was induced and the pregnancy terminated after the distance had emerged and their relationship worsened. As the pregnancy progressed, Searle had cut back on her work she now withdrew entirely. Williams, meanwhile, threw himself even more deeply into kinfolk. He also began drinking more frequently. Searle in therapy for her bereavement didn't have enough experience with alcohol herself to know how much was a problem. It was only when I explained what was happening to my therapist said, oh, that's an issue, she said. Hmm, there's a reality to alcohol. Until the move Williams and Searle had been, in his words, joined at the hip. So nothing like a baby to put something between those hips. I think from our early days in school together we were on a shared crusade. Oh, perfect word. To be just who we were and to pursue what felt right to us, regardless of how our school told us to behave. That rebellion is so American. Regardless of the expectations of our family, the counterculture echoes on. But now she couldn't seem to reach him. At first she attributed the distance to his style of grieving, but at some point that ceased to feel convincing. One night she insisted they talk about the things that was eating at him. It came out. Wait for it. You're not surprised. He was gay. I hadn't been planning to tell her then, but it wasn't the glorious self-enabling moment, he said, that was most, this can't go on for our relationship and for me. It was harboring a lie to myself and to her. Do we know our true selves? What are our true selves? What are the elements of our true selves? Are our true selves marked by time? Is it my true self right now? It hadn't always felt like a lie. I was attracted to Katie. I was in love with Katie. I absolutely saw our future together, Williams said. That doesn't mean I wasn't also physically attracted to men. And that of course continued throughout our marriage. For the longest time he believed the attraction was only sexual and pushed it down. Please explain to me what only sexual means. It didn't feel like a shame. It was more like an absolute secret. But Leo's death had that annealing effect on him, making the internal conflicts harder to tolerate. Physical need or sexual desire is easier to suppress. But when it goes beyond that to a feel like self-identity, that's harder. Identity. We'll come back to that word. It started to feel like a lie to myself, like I'd not been fully who I should be at the time. I wasn't my real self, my true self, my authentic self. How about his wife? She was blindsided. I knew he was disturbed by something, but I never suspected that it was something that would affect our future together. Identity, future, past. Still, her experience with her mother's coming out made her acutely sensitive to this suffering. The day after Williams broke the news, she wrote him a letter and left it on the dining table. We have modern liturgies about such things now. The married to a gay man is so common. She was schooled in it. Her mother was a lesbian. This isn't new anymore. We have liturgies to deal with these passages, but do these liturgies speak the truth? Are they themselves sacramental? Are they revelatory? Do they point us to the stars? I told him how much she loved him, that she respected his decision. That's the liturgy. And that although she realized it would dramatically change their relationship, you think? Honesty and transparency were more important. Did I ask myself what was real? Or if I was living in alternative reality, she says? Where I've landed is that our love was real. Where I've landed is that our love was real. Our love was real. Does that mean the emotions? The feelings? Because those feelings are, boy, those feelings go like, they flicker like images on a screen. And you can pick up the monitor and shake them and nothing will come out. Where I've landed is that our love was real and that we were the right people for each other at the time. It took three or four weeks to hash out the logistics before Searle moved back to Portland. Do I ask myself if I would ever have been better if he had told me who he was from the beginning? But was he? That's my question. Was he gay then? What is gay? What is bi? What is attraction? What is real? What is identity? Was the self in, what year are we in? 2015? Was the self in 2015 the same self in 2008? What's the connection between Nathan in 2008 and Nathan in 2015? And Nathan that is attracted to this beautiful girl and within months is married to her. Not just living together, married to her. And having some sort of sexual relationship with her that would produce Leo at least and more. I didn't ask myself what was real or if I was living in an alternative reality. I do ask myself if it would have been better, alternative realities, if he had told me who he was from the beginning. If he could have, she asked. I like to think our babies are the answer to that. Something real. Our babies. Before she left Denmark, Searle became pregnant again. Their daughter Vi was born in the fall of 2016. Despite their initial reluctance, the Biskrofs also came to see their time in Copenhagen as a great adventure. But once they were all installed in that big chic office in the city's main shopping district, of course. The financial pressures that had worried them soon came to a head. The financial pressures that had worried them soon came to a head. From the early days with this business, our mindset had always been, how can we continue bootstrapping our way and not bring in outside capital partners? This is the culture of make it fast and break things. Suddenly when a pandemic hits, we thought, where are the stockpiles? Stockpiles? Stockpiles are expensive. It's the same reason. You don't have warehouses. You just keep everything in the trucks. That pressure convinced the partners that they needed to seek an outside investor and coupled with all the personal upheavals contributed to the Biskrofs and Searle's decision to sell their shares and step away from Kinfolk in order to pursue other projects, they probably sold high. The process proved grueling and the stress and conflict undid Williams and Doug's friendship. He was my best friend. He had been there for everything. He was a rock through the ordeal with Leo sleeping on our sofa for five weeks because he didn't want to leave us alone. Did you take pictures of that? Williams said it was just business. It was just business that did it. It just for once his voice faltered. He paused to collect himself. It just severed us. Was us real? That's what his wife asked. So his best friend asked what he last. What is real? They have not spoken since they signed the papers dissolving their partnership. As the people behind it changed, so too the magazine and more about that. Kinfolk still publishes quarterly from its sleek gallery space in Copenhagen with a print circulation of 75,000 and 295,000 monthly online page views. The staff is smaller though, three full time and three part time in Denmark. Denmark. Didn't you see this coming? Didn't you know this would happen? What is real? What is real? Is my self real? Which self? 2008 self? 2015 self? My self that asks a woman to marry? My self that tells the same woman? I'm attracted to men? So the liturgy that says now we split, now we divorce. We are chasing beings of light. Comics play in the pre-volitional. That interview between, just the beginning of the interview between Bill Maher and Joe Rogan when I don't remember who said it. But you know laughter is not volitional. It's what comics, the space that comics deal in is the pre-volitional. Same with these artists. Artists deal in the pre-volitional. That's the air they live but they themselves don't know what they're doing. That's why Greeks have things like muses that inspire us beyond ourselves. But how powerful are these things? Deep enough to reformat sexual orientation and identity. Oh be careful not to dead name. He was always gay. Was he? What does that mean? The self is a moving picture flickering on the screen. But here's the rub. Relationships. Relationships. At least with a photograph you can put another photograph next to it. But images flickering on a screen. There's no relationship between them. And so that thing between which is a relationship. When I was talking to Guy Sengstock and I shared with him and he and Christopher in a conversation that he and Christopher Mastropietro picked up on. You know I once thought what if you gave your marriage a name? What name would you give it? What is a marriage? Is a self more real than a marriage? Is a marriage more real than a self? These are hard questions. But here's the thing. We rely on these relationships. In 2016 Rod Rear wrote a piece that continues to haunt me on Pilgrims vs Tourists. And it's from a chapter of a Polish sociologist. Here's a distillation of that chapter. If modern problem of identity was how to construct an identity. The postmodern problem of identity is how to avoid fixation. See this is the thing. The problem they thought was how to avoid fixation. Now we're seeing that avoiding fixation is the problem. At least in terms of reliability and relationship and of all things kinfolk community. The postmodern problem of identity is how to avoid fixation and keep the options open. If the catchword of modernity was creation. The catchword of postmodernity is recycling. The main identity bound anxiety of modern times was the worry about durability. It is concern with commitment. Avoidance today. The photograph was the medium of modernity. All set in bounded books with yellowing pages. The video. The videotape. The image on the screen is the medium of postmodernity. Today's recordings only exist until something deemed more significant emerges to replace it. Modernity built in steel and concrete postmodernity in biodegradable plastic. Identity as such is a modern invention. It is the name given to escape sought from uncertainty. From the modern problem of freedom of choice which arises with social change and not knowing for certain where one fits in one's order of things. The modern quest for identity is as a response to the inability of people to clearly predict the future of the world. I wish he had told me back in that beautiful campus on Hawaii. Told you what exactly. Who he would be years from now. Lou Smedes wrote a little book called The Modern Quest for Identity. It's a book about the modern quest for identity. Identity is always a process. A critical part of the process is to be an inspiration. And to be an inspiration is to be a person who is committed to the future. And to be committed to the future. And to be committed to the future. And to be committed to the future. Identity is always a process. A critical projection into the future. It is an assertive attempt to escape from the experience of under determination or free floatingness or disembeddedness which is the natural condition of modernity. Now if you pull up the chapter itself he goes into a lot more detail. Identity in modernity is presented as an individual task. But there are experts to guide us. There are magazines to show us pictures. And those pictures distill moments. They are sacraments of the stars. To guide us to what identities are possible to achieve. I can select them from the menu. Experts such as teachers and counselors who are supposed to be more knowledgeable about the task of identity construction. Modernity gave the pilgrim a new prominence and a novel twist. Pilgrims weren't new. Now in the piece itself he goes back to Augustine and notes that well the figure of the pilgrim is not a modern invention. It is as old as Christianity but modernity gave it a new prominence and seminally novel twist. When Rome lay in ruins humbled humiliated and sacked and pillaged by Alaric's nomads. St. Augustine jotted down the following observation. It is recorded of Cain that he built a city while Abel as though he was merely a pilgrim on earth built none. True city of the saints is in heaven. Here on earth says Augustine Christians wander as on pilgrimage through time looking for the kingdom of eternity. Why is modernity the child of Augustine of Christianity? For pilgrims through time the truth is elsewhere. The true place is always some distance some time away. Wherever the pilgrim may be now it is not where he ought to be and not where he is dreams of being. The distance between the true world and this world here and now is made of the mismatch between what is to be achieved and what has been. The glory and gravity of the future designation debases the present and makes light of it. In other words the ideal self or the real self draws doubt onto your present self. In other words the stars simply show you how far you fall short and measures the distance between you and them. And that space in that space the pilgrimage comes. We are pilgrims through time was under the pen of St. Augustine not an exhortation but a statement of fact. We are pilgrims whatever we do and there is little we can do about it even if we wished. Earthly life is but a brief overture to the eternal persistence of the soul. Only few would wish and have the opportunity have the ability to compose that opportunity. Only few would wish and have the opportunity have the ability to compose that overture themselves in tune with the music of heavenly spheres. The discarded image to make their fate into consciously embraced destiny. They would need to escape the distractions of the town. The desert is the habitat they must choose. The desert of the Christian hermit was set at a distance from the hurly burly of family life. Away from the town and the village. From the mundane from the polis. Desert meant putting a distance between oneself and one's duties and obligations. And the warmth and agony of being with others. Being looked at by others. Being framed and molded or photographed by others. By their scrutiny their demands and their expectations. Here in mundane quittildianity. One's hands were tied and there and so were one's thoughts. Here horizon was tightly packed with huts, barns, corpses, groves and church towers. Even pandemics. Here wherever one moved one was in a place and being in a place meant staying put. Doing what the place needed to be done. The desert on the contrary was a land not yet sliced into places. And for that reason it was the land of self creation. The desert says Edmund J. is a space where one step gives way to the next. Which undoes it and the horizon means hope for tomorrow. Which speaks you do not go to the desert to find identity. But to lose it. To lose your personality. To become anonymous. And then something extraordinary happens. You hear silence speak. The desert is the archetype and the greenhouse of the raw, bare, primal and bottom line freedom. That is but the absence of bounds. What made the medieval hermits feel so close to God in the desert was the feeling of being themselves God like. Unbound by habit and convention. By the needs of their own bodies and other people's souls. By their past deeds and the present actions. In the words of the present day theorist one could say that the hermits were the first to live through the experience of disembedded, unencumbered selves. They were God like because whatever they did was abnihilo. Their pilgrimage to God was an exercise in self-construction. Now again this is us looking back on them. Don't forget that. Their pilgrimage to God was an exercise in self-construction. Which is why the church wishing to be a soul connection to God resented the hermits from the start. And soon went out of its way to force them into monastic orders under the closer provision of rules and routine. I'm not sure I agree with his assessment of this but the point is made. The thing is that the church also derived its antinode to decadence from those monks. The Protestants as Weber told us accomplished a feat unthinkable for the lonely hermits of yore. They became inner world pilgrims. They invented the way of embarking on pilgrimage without leaving home and of leaving home without becoming homeless. No I don't want to start a scan computer. They invented the way of embarking on a pilgrimage without leaving home. This they could do however only because the desert stretched and reached deep into their towns right up to their doorsteps. They did not venture into the desert. It was the world of their daily life which turned more and more like the desert. Like the desert. Like the desert the world turned placeless. I would imagine the printing press had something to do with this. Words now could be transmitted. Words could be placeless in a way that words weren't placeless before. The internet. Images are placeless in ways that images have not been placeless before. They do not venture into the desert. It was the world of their daily life which was turning more and more like the desert. Like the desert the world turned placeless. The familiar features had been obliterated. Isn't that modernity? Every city is the same. Every building is the same. In the new post-reformation city of modernity the desert began on the outside of the door. The Protestant, that pattern setter, or was he but an allegory for the modern man so Senate called him, was tempted by the wilderness by a place of emptiness which made no seductive demands of his own upon him. In this he was not different from the hermit. The difference was that instead of traveling in the desert the Protestant worked hard to make the desert come to him. To remake the world in the likeness of the desert. Impersonality, coldness, and emptiness are essential words in the Protestant language of environment. They express the desire to see the outside as null, lacking value. This is the kind of language in which one speaks of the desert, of nothingness waiting to become something, if only for a while, of meaninglessness waiting to be given meaning. If only for a passing one, of the space without contours ready to accept a contour offered. Isn't that our digital world? In such a land commonly called modern society, pilgrimage is no longer a choice of a mode of life, less still is it a heroic or saintly choice. Living one's life as a pilgrimage is no longer the kind of ethical wisdom revealed to or initiated by the chosen or the righteous, the elect. Pilgrimage is what one does of necessity, to avoid being lost in a desert, to invest the walking with a purpose while wandering the land with no destination. Being a pilgrim, one can do more than walk, one can walk to. One can look back at the footprints left in the sand and see them as a road, one can reflect on the road past and see it as a progress towards pilgrims progress. And advance, a coming closer to, one can make a distinction between behind and ahead, and the plot, the road ahead as a succession of footsteps yet to pockmark the land without feature. Destination, the set purpose of one's pilgrimage, gives form to the formless, makes a whole out of fragment, a fragmentary, leads, lends continuity to the episodic. But things change. The desert-like world commands life to be lived as pilgrimage. But because life is a pilgrimage, the world at the doorstep is desert-like, featureless, as its meaning is set to be brought into it through the wandering, which would transform it into the track leading to the finishing line where the meaning resides. This bringing in of meaning has been called identity building. The pilgrim and the desert-like world, he walks, acquire their meaning together and through each other. Both process can and must go on because there is a distance between the goal, the meaning of the world and the identity of the pilgrim, always not yet reached, always in the future and the present moment, the station of wandering and the identity of the wanderer. Both meaning and identity can exist only as projects. It is the distance which enables projects to be. The distance is what we call in the objective language of space, the experience in which in subjective psychological terms we speak about as dissatisfaction with and denigration of the here and now. The distance and dissatisfaction have the same referent and both make sense within the life as pilgrimage. It is the difference in amount between the pleasure of satisfaction, which is demanded, and that which is actually achieved that provides the driving factor which will permit of no halting or any position attained, but in the poet's words, presses every forward unsubdued, foused. Observed Freud in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Janine something, offers an extended commentary on that seminal observation, tracing the beginning of self-development, identity building, etc. to the primary condition of delayed gratification of the never to be bridged distance between the ego identity and the realities of the present. The distance between you and the star you are guiding by. Distance translates as delay. Passage through space is a function of time. Distances are measured by time needed to cancel them. Here is the waiting, there is the gratification. How far is it from here to there, from the waiting to the gratification? From the void to meaning, from the project to identity, 10 years, 20, as long as it takes to live one's vocation through? Time one can use to measure distances must be of the sort rulers are, straight in one piece, equidistant markings made of tough and solid material. And such was, indeed, the time of modern living towards projects. Life, like life itself, it was directional, continuous and unbending. It marched on and passed by. Both life and time were made of the measure of pilgrimage. For the pilgrim, for the modern man, is meant to be in practical terms that he should have, that he should have to select his point of arrival fairly early in life with confidence. Did Nathan Williams know where he was going? No, they're just, they're just doing it. He's not a pilgrim, he's a tourist. The world has changed. The world is not hospitable to pilgrims anymore. The pilgrim lost their battle by winning it. Nietzsche. They strove to make the world solid by making it pliable so that identity could be built at will, but built systematically, floor by floor and brick by brick. Those are, that's the medium of matter, not of the screen. They proceeded by turning the space in which identity was to be built into a desert. They found out that the desert, though conforming, featureless for those who seek to make their mark, does not hold features well. The easier it is to emboss a footprint, the easier it is to efface it. A gust of wind will do. The deserts are windy places. It soon transpired that the real problem was not how to build identity, but how to preserve it. Whatever you may build in the sand is unlikely to be a castle. In a desert-like world, it takes no great effort to blaze a trail. The difficulty is how to recognize it as a trail after a while, how to distinguish a forward march from going in circles, from eternal return. It becomes virtually impossible to patch the trod and sketches of sand into an itinerary, let alone into a plan of lifelong journey. The meaning of identity, points out Christopher Lash, features both, refers both to the person and to the thing. It's the agent and the star in the arena. Both have lost their solidity in modern society, their definition and continuity. The world constructed of durable objects has been replaced with disposable products, designed for immediate obsolescence. In such a world, identities can be adopted and discarded like a change of costume. The horror of the new situation, that all diligent work of construction may prove to be in vain. Its allurement is the fact of not being bound by past trials. Don't freeze me in the image of kinfolk that you have bought yesterday. Buy the new one today, because I am evolving and I must evolve alone. Any other encumbrances are enemies of the path. To keep the game short, beware of long commitments. To refuse to be fixed in one place, not to get tied to that place, not to wed one's life to one's vocation or another person who is similarly out there. Not to control the future, but to refuse to mortgage it, to take care that the consequences of the game do not outlive the game itself, and then to renounce responsibility for such as do, to forbid the past to bear on the present. That magazine is so 2015. Don't define me by what I said, please. To renounce responsibility for such as do, to forbid the past to bear the present, in short, to cut the present off at both ends, to sever the present from history, to abolish time in any other form but a flat collection or an arbitrary sequence of present moments, a continuous present. Once disassembled and no more vector, time no longer structures the space. On the ground there's no more forward or backward, it's just the ability not to stand still that counts. Fitness, the ability to move swiftly when the action is and to be ready to take in experiences as they come, takes precedence over health, that idea of the standard normalcy and keeping that standard stable and unscathed. All delay, including delay of gratification, loses its meaning there is no arrow like time left to measure. And so to snag is no longer how to discover, to invent, to construct, assemble, even buy an identity, but how to prevent it from sticking. Well constructed and durable identity turns from an asset into a liability. The photograph, the physical thing you can touch, replaced by the screen, always made new, there's a refresh rate, we've gone from 60 to 90 to 120. Ask the Apple people, they'll tell you, or the OnePlus people, they've got it already. Now come to your Samsung phone. We were pilgrims, now we're tourists, we're strollers, we're the vagabond. The vagabond was the bane of early modernity, the bugbear that spurred the rulers and the philosophers into ordering and legislating frenzy. Watch how the homeless are such an issue now in California. What made vagabond so terrifying was their apparent freedom to move and so to escape the net of the heretofore locally based control. It's great to be the wanderer, it's not to be the one you have wandered away from. The tourists like the vagabond used once to inhabit the margins of proper social action. The vagabond was a marginal man while the tourist is marginal activity and has now moved to the center in both senses. Like the vagabond, the tourist is now on the move like the vagabond he is everywhere, he goes in but nowhere of a place is he. But there are always differences, they are always seminal. First, the balance between push and pull factors in the case of tourists shifts from the pull end. The tourist moves on purpose, so he or she thinks his movements are first of, in order to, and secondarily, if at all, because of. Read the whole thing. Dreher had it posted in a link, but then he took it down, but I had grabbed the link when he had posted it and so still have it and should probably buy the whole book. But you see where I'm going, you see what I mean, you see this poor young man was looking to construct an identity and what his poor wife noted was that he was going to be a vagabond. He was going to have an identity and what his poor wife noted was that they're not pilgrims, they're tourists, and they met on a vacation and they had some children, but what about the children? Are they born from a tour? You become what you love, you become what you worship, you become what you see with your eyes, those stars. You don't choose what you love, and in fact, if you become a tourist, pretty soon you won't be able to choose either, because only things can choose. You love what you see the others around you loving, who you esteem loving, Rene Girard, but community, what kinfolk desire to become the sacrament of, the irony is that community is what they couldn't contain, because what community requires is that there be a there there, and what, as Lou Smedes noted, what that requires is commitment, and what commitment builds is something, something you can base a community upon. We live in the iron box of secularism and we're skeptical that the only stars we can find are the ones in Hollywood up upon the flickering image. Will these stars guide us? They can't even seem to guide themselves. What are they a revelation of? Can anything sacred be found? Isn't that what you're afraid of?