https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7ghByusnHsw

 Okay. Alright. You gotta talk up because we got mass out here. Hey Boa, how's your week? My week is good, friend. How's your week? Oh, pretty good since the Tampa Bay Buccaneers beat the Chiefs. I don't like the Chiefs because they beat the 49ers. And I don't like the 49ers. The Chiefs are good. But they beat the 49ers in the last bit. They messed up because they didn't think, uh, they the past. I think we're supposed to make a long story short Buccaneers good job Brady another celebration for you. Good job Tom Brady. And T Grizzly the rapper I opened up for you. Peace out I hope you're doing good. I've seen your videos. Subscribe to the Freddie and Paul show. Talk to Pepsi about our sponsorship. My week was fine it was a pretty normal week. My lesson went fine. What did you think of the sermon? What did you do from the sermon today? What's the sermon about? Uh, I'm trying to think. Help me out. Give me a topic and then I'll think. Jesus was on a mount. Oh wait wait wait. He died and then he arose. Yeah yeah yeah that's everything. That's at the end. Before then he was a good Samaritan. No I wasn't a good Samaritan. Is it transfiguration? No I can't say I do. That's when he shines. Oh when he arose again? No no no. Not Easter. Don't worry about it. Alright. So what's else going on? Oh I don't know. Oh the Kings won five in a row but then they lost to the Orlando Magic. I don't know why but they did. But they're still doing good. They have a chance to make the playoffs. They have a really good team. They got Fox. They got uh, what's that other guy? I haven't seen a Kings game in two years. Whitehead. Halliburton. Barnes. Barnes yeah Barnes is doing good. And uh the other guy's name was the Policeman. Okay. You're gonna do a rap for me? I'm gonna do a rap for you. Alright you gotta dance a little bit. At the end I will yeah. Okay. I'm Grady D and I'm down for the show. Thanks Paulie. Alright anybody else wanna come in for the One Love? Come on. I don't know. Ready? One Love. T-Brizzly.