https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DocQ8Z-Csdw

 He record. Okay. Hello, Paul. Hi Karen. I still can't record. Oh no. Well, let me pause this for a second. I'm super jazz to have Paul here today. Yeah, wow, we're going to talk about. We're going to talk about Jesus Christ and we're going to talk about why. So, so there's so many people who have this idea that the truth obviously that Jesus Christ is the light of the world but if they just have that light that's all they need. And so they can go out into the forest and they have his light and they can read books or study certain people and they have his light and they're enlightened and so that that's all they need. And I wanted to get a pastor's perspective on them. This is my third conversation today about the church. Very really. Yes, it is. Yes, it is. I think the other two will also be on my channel at some point so there are there are both. I had those conversations this morning and they're both excellent. The first one with a Dutch woman who is in her 20s, who she's studying theology at Compton in the Netherlands and she is just recently married, she met a guy at seminary and so he's going to be a pastor and so she's working through the church stuff and that's not easy on lots of levels for her now. The second guy is now a church planter in Arizona. So, with both of them I talked about, well the need of the church and the necessity of the church, and I think a lot of, well, we are very individualistic culture. Maybe we can use verveky language of having mode versus being mode. The church shapes us. And we don't have Jesus in many ways when we're in the church. Jesus has us. And I don't know, I don't know if that's, I don't know where you want to start with this thing but I know you are a committed churchgoer, and I obviously am. It's a little different being pastor. But, yeah, in American Christianity and American evangelicalism this has been true. There are many people in the culture who consider themselves Christians but don't go to a church. And, you know, I don't like to be terribly judgmental with that, because I know that there are seasons in life when it is difficult to find a church and being grafted in a church. But I think Christianity and participation in the church are deeply intertwined. It is, it is very difficult to be a Christian without the church. It's a big part of it. Well, let me go back in my history a little bit when I when I was younger when I first moved to California, and I was newly single after my husband had left me and we were divorced and trying to rebuild my life and everything and I started dating this guy who had told me that he was Christian. And, and he was a lot of fun had great time together and had lots to talk about and all of that. But he had become a Christian like 20 years before and then he had been confronted with some hypocrisy in a southern church that he was attending. And he never went back to the church again. And for him that was enough. He still followed his faith and tried to live his faith out. But for me I realized very shortly into this relationship that that just wouldn't work for me because the church is my family. And I don't have any family left because they had all died prior to that and So, so on that level just on a purely personal level I think there's something about it but but I also, I had a conversation last week with some people who had this idea of just needing the light and that's all. And I started thinking well there's another aspect to this too it's it's somehow it's a reflection upon Christ to say that the church is not necessary, because the church is his bride. And that we can separate Christ and the bride, and so I jotted down some notes here that I thought we could talk through just from from your perspective as someone who has much more theology than I do the role of the church and the marriage of Christ and his bride. How the church often is the unfaithful wife, just like in the story of Hosea. The word tells husbands that they're to love their wives as they love their own body, which all of these things scale so Christ loves his bride as he loves his own body. And then husbands are to love their wives as Christ loves the church and so these things kind of all fit together so I don't see how you can peel them apart and say that only one is necessary. Now, I understand that some people have been deeply wounded by experiences in the church, because I used to be a missionary. And one of the things I was warned about when I became a missionary was that the deeper you get into the inside of any organization, whether it's a church or a mission or a business, the closer you get to the center the more problems you're going to find. And I have to be aware that that exists there because we are all human, and we are not perfect and so even in the church there can be a lot of problems. And people have been deeply hurt by that but. Maybe one of the things we need to talk about is how can the church do a better job of being a body that people can abide in. Anyway, that's some food for thought. People. A few few things going on I think right now in our culture one is obviously the pervasive consumer ethic. And the idea is that it is the job of the church to be a religious service provider to deliver for me, the things I am looking for. Okay, what are people looking for out of their newfound shiny religion called Christianity. They want to have some very consumer ethics, they want to feel good about themselves. They want to be celebrated. They want to be affirmed, and they want to have a pleasing customer service experience. And in the secret wave, you know people think I'm being cynical or sarcastic when I talk this. No, no, but it's really that. It's really that bad. Churches in many ways, especially during the seeker movement churches leaned heavily into this churches had pervasive customer satisfaction surveys piece churches had exit interviews how have we failed to meet your sat meet your expectations. Now, if we were to. If we were to take this consumer ethos and apply it to a marriage, or a parent child relationship or a sibling relationship. We would, we would have a moment of realization of we're doing something wrong here, because the our life in the church should be much more like in a marriage. And, and on one hand, there's the dimensionality within a marriage that you certainly want your spouse to feel good about the marriage and be happy in the marriage. But if that is only what it's for. You do not have a marriage. And, you know, I've been thinking lately I haven't done a video on it about the degree to which this consumer ethos in our culture has given into a rather childish expectation of most of our relationships around us that what what a human being truly needs is to be And, and I think that's something that we need to look back to. Because you see this pervasively and in media where what do friends do friends tell you what you want to hear. What. Yeah, and you're older you know, real friends. They do some of that. They support you, but they sometimes tell you what you need to hear. Because if your doctor just tells you what you want to hear, you've got a bad doctor. If your accountant just tells you what you want to hear, you've got a bad accountant. And this there's a there's a big dislocation in terms of what the Christian life is what the church is for that our consumer society have pretty much just sort of snowplowed. Let me jump in here with a little illustration that was given to me years ago. So George and I are now into year 28. I think 28 years, which amazes me because we got married when I was 44. He said we're going to have 40 years together and I'm like, I don't think so. We are 28 years. And early in our marriage, we heard a teaching series by Bill and Annabelle Gillum. I think that was their name, Bill and Annabelle Gillum. And they gave they had a tremendous story about all the problems that they had had in their marriage for the first 20 years and really hating on each other. And what they finally came to realize and then they went out and began to teach these principles and one of the principles that they taught is the sandpaper principle. So, I mean, as it works out, maybe you didn't marry the right person, but the day you're married, they are the right person. So there's this kind of mysterious thing that you tend to marry the person who has in them the very thing that's going to rub you the wrong way. And so we act as sandpaper for each other to kind of rub off those rough spots in the other person and they rub off the rough spots on me where we are seeing our issues in each other and running into all these problems. And it occurs to me that our life in the church is very much the same way. You get into a small group, you don't know a lot of these people and some of them are very different than you and maybe the way that they're different is kind of irritating. And yet, when you love each other and listen to each other and truly get to know each other. This beautiful thing happens, where some of your rough stuff rubs off and some of their rough stuff rubs off and, and we start loving each other and, and it's just, it's so amazing to me that that's the way it works and and I think it has to be something to me it's a very mysterious thing that each of us uniquely needs a certain set of unique people that's going to do this in our lives, and we can't go out and find them. I can't round them up right. But the church somehow supplies the exact people that need to change me. And I'm somehow helpful in transformation for other people as well. Yeah. I think that's very true. I think it's very right. Unlike a marriage, you're not necessarily committed to a church a particular church till death do you part. Unlike a marriage, if you commit to it, you will learn to grow in love. And again, implicit in this problem in our culture is the definition that love is a pleasant experience. Love can afford many pleasant experiences, but that's not what love is love is possible writes about in first Corinthians 13 love is patient, love is kind of his long suffering, love is looking to the interests of others. And, and so what the church that the reason church is so integral in the Christian life is not that the church is a religious service provider that that delivers to you goods and services. It's that the church is actually a venue by which you can learn to love people who are different from yourself. And that includes people who are annoying that includes people who are immature. That includes people who are mentally ill. That includes children that includes senior citizens, and, and, and that's why the churches, if, if the Christian life is not about being right, or not about having the kinds of spiritual experiences you want to have, but if the churches, if the Christian life is actually growing in love, often towards those who are not easy to love growing that capacity, which is in fact the perfection of God that's talked about in the scripture. That's what it's talked about in the Sermon on the Mount. What better thing could you have than a church, which is full of hypocrites and liars and con people and, and lots of good people to who make casseroles. And thankfully, it's a wonderful organization that can afford that, but it's, you have to, it's being being part of a church is part of Christian discipleship and that we're discipleship. There's this word discipline, which is, it's a discipline to go to church. It's a discipline to support the church. What you just said though brought up like a whole bunch of red flags went popping off in my head if we're going to keep making this analogy of. Church members participating with each other being similar to a marriage, even though it's not for a lifetime, but marriage is for a lifetime so if marriage includes the hypocrite con man all that kind of stuff. You know, I mean, Maybe, maybe we are all some of that in microcosm. But what happens in a real marriage when one of those people is that in more than a microcosm, and, and yet you're committed to this lifetime. You know you're in this lifetime commitment. Right. Yeah. Well, that's where the analogy breaks down in some ways, and where the two aren't perfectly analogous to each other. Because in, in a church, well, in a good marriage there is an authority structure because you're both under Christ. And in a church, when you're in a marriage, something's going to have to mediate that structure which might be the church to help the marriage. And there, and divorce is not. I think divorce is divorce is usually a lamentable thing but divorce is sometimes a necessary thing. And there's only one other person in a church there's usually more. And what I've seen in churches is that you can deal with some degree of mental illness and some degree of stuff but there's also in the church. And so, in that sense of church is quite different from a marriage because the marriage is really tiny with just two people. Okay, so I mean that but that what that means is, so like in a church you kind of have a natural buffer if you have one person in the church that has serious problems, whether, whether those are serious, like mental problems or just many serious financial problems, and that's how everybody in the church can help to navigate that problem. But if you're confined in a marriage with just one other person, and you have those serious problems. That makes marriage look almost impossible. And with some people it is. There are some people that should not be married. I think it's true. And there are some marriages that need to end. I'm still exploring though this paradigm of So, our union with Christ as the church and Christ is a marriage, because the church is called the bride of Christ. And then about my individual union with Christ is that also like a marriage. And if it is of course on his side the covenant is perfect. He is perfectly withholding upholding his side of covenant. But on my side. I'm a hypocrite and I'm a con man in a lot of ways you know my heart is desperately wicked I've got all these things going on. And I, and he's faithful to me. But, but it's also possible for me to be unfaithful to him. So, the, that analogy and scripture is with the church, we don't tend to find Christians in the New Testament relating to them in relating as individuals to Christ in that within that marriage metaphor. It's usually Christ and the church. He calls us friend right. Yes, he calls us friend. Yeah, and he's, and he's Lord, and he's savior and friend. And so those tend to be and then Pauline in Christ, and then usually it's the slave relationship, or it's the friend relationship so the New Testament tends to use individual relational metaphors for that relationship as individuals, but the New Testament, maybe we ought to clean up that slave word just a little bit for people who aren't used to hearing that. I don't remember where the verses but I clearly remember the day I ran into it when I was reading the scripture as young Christian where a certain kind of slave or, or maybe it was an explanation of. There's a certain way that a slave can agree to be to, to stay with one master for a lifetime because of the mutual love they have for one another. And the slave goes up against the post and they drive an all through his ear to indicate the commitment. And is that a verse in the scripture I'm remembering that wrong. That is it's in the Old Testament. Yeah. And again you're right slave, we tend to think of American volunteer. Yeah, it's a voluntary slavery right and think about I mean you might someone might think about Sam and Frodo. Because Sam isn't Frodo slave, but you very much have a master servant relationship between Sam and Frodo, and that gets into English culture and, you know, we Americans don't like that, but that's, it's, you know I love Lewis in the weight of glory where he talks about the specific pleasure of the inferior, and that that's deeply grating on our egalitarian culture, but you see some of that and Sam and Frodo. And so as individuals. That is, you know our relationship with Christ. And then, and that's why it's so dramatic. When Jesus in the Gospel of john says, you know, basically I've been your master. Now I call you my friend. And in the context, especially of the Roman Empire, the Gospel of john even though it's very much situated obviously in Galilee and Judy and Samaria. The Gospel of john doesn't have the axe addendum, like Luke has. And so if you if you're a careful reader of the Gospel of john may have been written in Ephesus, there are there are some larger Roman Empire themes that are going through there. And so, in the Roman Empire, to be a friend of a high status person is to that's really something and it's not unlike what people today, I mean back in the Bill Clinton administration to be a friend of Bill, you know, that was something you have a personal connection to this person so But again, you know the different metaphors are germane to the different relationships, especially within their cultural context at the time. It's also especially important to mention that the New Testament. The New Testament Christ Church husband wife relationship is playing off of the Old Testament's playing on relationships where Israel is sometimes God's son. Israel is sometimes God's wife. So there's that father son relationship that's that's also in there. So you need to, especially if you're working New Testament metaphors, you need to not get too tight, because there's definitely fluidity that scripture uses with these working these metaphors and these images. Okay, well so two things came up for me while you were talking about that one is going back to the specific pleasure of the inferior. I can imagine exactly what you mean by that and what I haven't, I don't remember CS Lewis talking about that in way to glory but I'm sure he did if you said so. But, but the picture comes into my mind. But at the same time that picture came into my mind I'm thinking yes that that does seem more like the actuality of the relationship that we have with Christ compared to the I want to be careful how I talk about this but Jordan Peterson always says the ideal is the judge. And I understand deeply what he means by that, that even if you know somebody in your own life, who is really on top of things and they have everything together and they're so much better at doing things than you are. You always feel judged when you're around them, you can't help it because they're so far down the line beyond you and, and it just seems impossible to catch up. And that cannot be the picture that we have of what it means to walk with Christ because if it were, everybody would have given up a long time ago. So that's one question I want to pose to you. And the second one is, when you said Israel, I immediately remembered Jordan Peterson making such a point with. I think it was john Breveke that Israel means he who wrestles with God. I don't know if he was right when he said that but that's what he, that's what he got out of it. And he talks about how the husband and wife, a husband should look for a wife that he can contend with. And I think that that probably does hold true for human marriages but I'm wondering if that would also hold true in the analogy of the church in Christ. Obviously Christ is someone with whom the church can contend but is the church someone with whom Christ contends? I mean, I don't know. God likes to play rough. You know you look at you look at the Old Testament saints. And that amazing passage in Genesis 18, where Abraham, you know, will you destroy Sodom, if there are 50 righteous people? How about 40? And God wants Israel, you know, on one hand, it's not, again, we see, we see these kinds of relationships in our fiction, in story and narrative. And I think that's what is right. You know, marriages are such individual things. No two marriages the same because no two individuals are the same. And all of the complexity of both of those individuals come into the marriage. And, you know, some marriages are highly, I mean, you've seen lots of marriages, you know, some marriages are highly combative, and they work. Some marriages aren't, and they work. And some marriages are highly combative and they don't work, and some marriages aren't, and they don't work. And so, I think, I think. Sometimes I think that's a matter of time scale to though, because I mean I'm going on 28 years the first 15 years were so highly combative that there were many times if divorce had been a word that we permitted in our house, we would have been split long ago. And, and for the last 12, 10, 12 years, it's been pretty good for the last five years, it's been extra good. And you know, so it just keeps getting better. And so there's something about time scale. I mean, if you give up too soon sometimes on those things you you miss opportunities for your own growth and transformation as well. Yeah, that's true. That's true. And that's the same for churches. I've seen that with people in churches there. There are times when people fight like crazy to make their relationship with a church work, and it pays off. There are times when it's just done, and a person needs a change in their church to hit a new level. You know my friend Warren who's been on my channel. Just a second for some reason all of a sudden your screen went green. Oh, there you go. Now you're okay. It's probably an internet connection thing. Oh, I've never seen that happen. That does happen sometimes. Huh. Okay, so I didn't mean to interrupt you you were talking about your friend. Well my friend Warren in Australia. It seems to be when you lean forward how can that have anything to do. No. Okay. We've only got your recording too so this will be interesting. Yeah. So Warren your friend Warren, my friend Warren. You know he's been in so many different churches. And, but part of what that has done and I don't I don't have the sense from when I went to Australia because he had this little conference and I stayed with his house I stayed in his house with him for a week and every morning we get up and have two three hours of in depth conversation and he's like oh this is exactly what I wanted. And we talked about a lot of things but you know he's been he's been in many church relationships but I always got the sense he was never one who would leave easily. And, and in every church he's been and he's dug in deeply and he's been in dispensational churches Pentecostal churches. And now he's in sort of an high Anglican church. And he's, I think he's his Christian life has grown in each one. So, it, you know, again, Christ is Lord of this too. And as Christians we, we have to. We give ourselves to him in these relationships and we pray for his guidance and when you know perhaps a door is closed on one church relationship, we asked the Lord okay Lord show me, show me the next church and there's always a shopping that sort of like dating, you know, going around and then settling and then committing. And, and I've seen, you know, as a pastor I've seen many different types of relating to a church for different people. And I don't know, it's, but but I do know that if you're, if you, if you're just if you're walking around thinking that your individual relationship with Christ is self sufficient. You're missing out an entire dimension of what it means to grow as a Christian. I don't know any other way to say it. And the other thing is I think you also miss out on a lot of depth of what wisdom and knowledge are there, because when you're. If I'm in a Bible study with 10 other people and each person is bringing their own experiences to the table, relative to how a verse has played out in their lives and that doesn't mean that their interpretation of the verses authoritative by any way it means but while listening to each other talk about what this has meant to them. All these other connections get made in each one of us and then we learn something new about the people were with we learned something new about how Christ interacts with people. We learned something new maybe some deeper level of that verse that we hadn't thought of ourselves. And all of that, you never get if you're just on your own. Yeah. Right. Yeah. But but let's go back to this thing about the ideal and the judge. Okay. How, how do we square that circle, because obviously Christ is the ideal and he is the judge. But in our relationship with him, how do we keep from being overwhelmed by the differential between me and him. I think this is actually part of us growing up into Christ to one day be able to see God. You know for you know the Bible talks about you can't see God and live, and I always thought, why, you know, is he like real bright and it's like looking at the sun. I think this is a metaphor and it's simple. I think part of it, and I think this is only part of it because I think these mysteries are are probably too great to exhaust. Part of it is exactly the dynamic that you're pointing to that in the light of Christ. We look so bad. We can't stand ourselves. And so the question is, well how can I grow up into that and if you think about it, it's very much like recognition of my own sinfulness, looking to. This is a reformational theme, looking to Christ to give me his righteousness. And then also. And also coming into a degree of comfort with the specific pleasure of the inferior. Peterson also talks about the fact that men vote each other up the up the hierarchy. So we've been, I've been, you know, my daughter is back on a bachelor kick. So I've been watching one of the old seasons of the bachelor, and I just think this is just a way to torture young people. You take the most beautiful young people in America and you torture them. That's what this show is. But so in this particular episode you have all of these women. And of course, all of the psychological tricks that are being played, is just ramping up these, the women in terms of creating an ideal out of this man, and he's going to break all of their hearts but one. So then I watch how these women relate to each other how they encourage, did you have a nice day, and you know, you just take these powers that just, it's always what are you doing to these poor people, but it's fascinating the degree to which these women or the bachelorette these men cheer each other on when they're in direct competition with each other. I mean, really direct competition. So, what I think part of what we do. And you see this on sports teams if you've ever, you know, if you're playing on a sports team and you have a, they're not, they're not ever equal on a sports team. Some are better than other things with others so you have role players, but you've almost always got a star who's really good at three or four skills, and the whole team cheers on and rides that star. And, and in many ways and in the New Testament there are passages which talk about Jesus basically, he's our champion. And so, what we sort of do is we and again this happens in church, we create we are, we sort of become one body. And Jesus is the most excellent of our body. And so we put him forward and say, you want to see who we are, look at him. And even to the degree which I fail, I sort of say, okay, I'm me, but look at him and some of that is the specific pleasure of the And we do this in a marriage to when after you've sort of, you might know what your spouse is better at than you and so someone might come to you and you might brag about your spouse. And my spouse does really well, I don't do it very well. And part of what I now derive my joy from is her excellence in this. And so I will praise her for this, this gets into the whole Old Testament tradition of praise which is in the Psalms, if you want to praise someone, you put them in front of a meeting and you put them in front and you tell the whole world how great they are. And so there's all these subtle dynamics that that actually come into play in which the ideal is the judge and human beings can actually come into a kind of relationship And I will say, I am nowhere near like that person but I exalt in their greatness and in that exaltation, I participate in it, and I enjoy it and some of that even rubs off on me. That's a great picture, Paul. But somehow when you said it I also got the picture, you know, over the years as a believer here's so many analogies and the analogy of the judge, pronouncing you guilty because you've been, you've gone through the trial and then the evidence is against you and the judge has pronounced you guilty but then the judge turns around and says, but I'm going to take your penalty for you. And then that made me think about forgiveness and the power that forgiveness has in our lives. I mean you were saying, we recognize our inferiority and we recognize our sin which is certainly true but I think if you're struggling under the burden of your sin, it's very difficult to move forward at all. But then we know that we are forgiven, that our sins are as far as the East is from the West, we know that he has forgiven us and they're not in front of him anymore. And so that frees us up I think to move forward otherwise we wouldn't be able to move forward at all. Well, do you have anything more that you could add to that whole aspect of how, even when we forgive one another, it changes our relationship with each other and it changes the person who's forgiven. So what is that dynamic that's going on there. This is where I think Christianity is so powerful, because there's a bunch of things we need to know about ourselves and we need to know the truth, and we are markmissers we are sinners. And we need to take that in. And so, you know I see that in Peterson that sort of this Augustinian anthropology that this deep recognition of myself, of my flaws, of my shortcomings, and not just my inadequacies but as C.S. Lewis says, we are not, you know, we are rebels who need to lay down our arms. Not only are we the kinds of sinners that we are markmissers, we are the kinds of sinners that are enemies of God. And the beauty of the drama of the Christian faith is that our enemy, you know, our enemy resolves our rebellion by becoming our victim it's like, who does this. And, you know, I that scene in the mission, where the, the Robert De Niro character is dragging his armor up the waterfall. And, you know, the, the, the, the Indians are no no no no no but he's like, you know, he killed his brother over a woman. And he and slight I mean he was a horrible person. And so, forgiveness. And then the sacrifice has to come. But it can't be cheap grace. It's, it's got to be. It's got to be real and that's where of course Christ's sacrifice comes in. This is, this is the true cost of my rebellion, right there, this innocent victim, you know, the best of us, you know, voluntarily pays my pays my debt. And so, you know, I think that's the informational theme of, then we are imparted with his righteousness and of course, and to write basically says I think they're projecting that into the Apostle Paul and I say, okay, so what, it's still a great move. And, and now, suddenly and you know this is what I, one of the things that I did not too long ago was the confession of sin and the assurance of pardon, that sort of dropped out of living stones liturgy. And I don't usually make a lot of moves directly but I basically said to Pete I said, we're going to put this back in because we really need to do it because there's all this stuff going on in the country. We need to both own our sin. We need to both really believe Christ's forgiveness, because if you don't have both of these, you'll wind up sort of where I see Peterson is often where he's got this Augustinian anthropology and a pelagian so terriology, where, whenever my head you go okay. is sort of a works righteousness thing where we have to earn our salvation. And so in other words if you're if you're burdened by the immensity of your sin. And then the only solution is to earn your salvation then you're stuck in this meat grinder. And, and you have combinatorial explosion with respect to your sinful nature. Oh, that's for sure. Because at each point, even if you are doing the best you can and Peterson knows this because it's in, it's in 12 rules for life. And the best chapters of that where is he basically deconstructs do gooding. That's a brutal chapter in 12 rules for life. And, and so, and even so this conversation that he had this interview that he had with David Fuller where Fuller had just come back from California to talk to me and I said, Peterson's fairly stoic and David Fuller hits him I played that recently in a video. And so what do you find on the top of the hill. And then Peterson says that's where you, that's where you realize that you're fully responsible for the world suffering, and I'm thinking, that's on the top of the hill. There's no grace there. Because here's the, and I see this in a variety of self salvation and world salvation projects around us that you're not going to do it. You're not going to save yourself and you're not going to save the world, because you have the combinatorial explosiveness of your own mark missing of your own rebellion of your own brokenness, you need intervention and, you know, this is the height of our catechism this is the mother's milk of the Christian reform church, you need the God man to rescue you, because he needs to be fully human, because otherwise he can't really be our substitute, but he also needs to be fully divine, because, because any no one else is strong enough to take on the failings of this world. And so that all comes together in Christianity. And, but, but you know, again, all the way down. I think if you're not a part of a church. You'll never get to fully have this drama repeatedly rehearsed in your life, you experience it in marriage because a marriage is a whole lot of. And I realize, this is going nowhere. It's going nowhere. And as Peterson says, okay, let's say you win. Well that's not a solution either. What do you need to do. You need to finally own up. Okay, I was probably right about some things I was wrong about some things. I didn't act as I should have. So, forgive me. And if you're in a marriage where you're always asking for forgiveness and forgiveness is being withheld. It's not going to work. That's why if you have if you're always like this and you're you're on the bottom of the hierarchy. It's like that toy that goes like this back and forth and never gets anywhere right. That's right. But if Christ is at the top of the marriage and you're each moving up the hierarchy towards Christ you get closer together without the bang bang bang right. So when you were talking about the Peterson's top of the city, top of the city on top of the hill, being the place where you take maximum responsibility, Michael and I were having an email exchange about this, trying to get to the bottom of that because I remember a time period about probably I was going to a church where I mean at first it seemed like it was a really solid church really great teaching they were doing a lot of evangelism. The teaching was strong on sin and forgiveness and reconciliation and all that. A lot of people were coming to know the Lord. But little by little I could, I could feel myself getting in this trough of guilt. And fortunately at the same time I was going to a women's Bible study at another church where we were studying the book of Colossians and we were really deep into this whole concept of grace. And over time I began to realize what was happening at that church is they were putting all of the responsibility for everything on each person. I already had this tendency anyway to feel like I'm responsible for everybody's problems. And so I had just gotten completely subsumed in that. And it was around the time of the Kuwaiti War. And I, I actually had thoughts like it was my fault. This war was my fault and I had to try to fix it for people. Wow, I hadn't read in the paper you caused the Kuwaiti War. I thought it was Saddam. I know but I mean I always felt like I had to apologize for the people who had caused the war or you know I mean I just I always felt like I was in the middle of everything and I realized something's really off there. So I went through the book on boundaries with a lay helper from the church, and this person read it with me and we talked about it together and all these things started getting wired up and I really understood what was going on. So anyway I was telling Michael a little bit about this and I was saying, I think this is a real danger for people if they feel like what's at the top of the hill is that that's the place where they take on the maximal responsibility for everything. And Michael came back with something very, very interesting. He said, there's always something about voluntarily taking on a pain and suffering that allows us to see. This is really true and he was talking about the forgiveness of Christ. And the, and the love that we have, like the love we have for our children is the same love that that Jesus has for us. He says we really don't know what we're doing and it also makes a real forgiveness possible for others, even as we see our need in it for ourselves. There's this wonderful quote from the writer. I think it's Borges or Borges, B-O-R-G-E-S. Whatever one man does, it is as if all men do it, did it. For that reason it is not unfair that one disobedience in a garden should contaminate all humanity. For that reason, it is not unjust that the crucifixion of a single Jew should be sufficient to save it. So, Michael went on to say, you know, what if this is true, not just for Adam or for Christ, but for all of us, that how we see our responsibility to all men for all things is not a crushing weight, but recognizing that it's, it is ours to bear for one another in the church. That it's somehow the church that makes this bearing of this responsibility possible. But if you feel like you're heading up that hill alone carrying your burden, then when you get there, you're at the top of the heap, there is, there's nobody to help you up there, unless you're depending on all the people that are underneath you at the bottom to help you. But isn't it much better for all together, helping one another bear the burdens, you know? Yeah, I know, absolutely. Life is funny, you know, I very much see Michael's point, and I agree with him. And there's a, there's a, because I know, you know, after I've just said what I've said about, which is basically, you know, Protestant, Heidelberg Catechism, you know, substitutionary atonement, there's going to be some people who come back and there's Christus Victor, there's, there are all these other atonement metaphors that get used. And, you know, there's something both, if you think about, let's say, the Schindler's List, you know, Oscar Schindler towards the end of the movie, oh, there's a car, I could have bought how many with that, and here's a ring, I could have bought how many with that. And I think that there's a, there's something noble about that, but there's also something hubristic about that, because we sort of take, we sort of slide onto God's throne and make ourselves the masters and saviors of the world in this responsibility. But I love the point that you just made that. I love the conversation with Peugeot when Peterson's like, well, I've got fans and Peugeot's like, fans, no, that's not, that's not what you need. You need, you need to be part of a, you need to be part of a team, you need to be part of a tribe that's so deeply human. And actually in a church, yeah, there's, again, you don't have to tell a pastor how much is wrong with the church. But at the same time, we're not in it alone. And one of the crushing things about the crucifixion scene is, Jesus is nearly alone, you know, John is there, the women are there, but the guys who should be standing up with him, they're hiding. And so now Christ, you know, and I love, I love that you get this Porsche, you get this image in, I think it's in second Colossians, when, when our second Corinthians, when Paul is, Paul is, Paul is so bipolar. He's, he's at this point and everyone's abandoned him and he started all these fights and everybody hates him and of course all of these people are all his old friends, you know, the Pharisees and, and, and he says to the Lord, I'm alone. And the Lord says, you're not alone. I have many people in this city. And to me that strikes into you know it's a wonderful life where, where George Bailey thinks you know he's alone and rescuing Bedford Falls and you know what George, on one hand, okay that's that's kind of noble. But on the other hand, it's a little I self idolatrous because it was never just about you. And there are always people that that God has to call up and to bring forward and. And with when you're in a church. You've got people around you and yeah you'll get betrayed sometimes and they'll let you down and people get wobbly but I, you know, part of the reason I always say you know I feel for my friend John for vacay because, you know, he's got a noble crusade that he has but I just think it's, you know, I. Even when I'm looking at starting meetup groups or estuary groups. You know there's a church out there there's a network and, and in some ways, all I have to do is walk in a door and say, Jesus. And at least there's the beginning of a relationship that we have. I, you know, and people like, they want to throw away the church and I'm thinking, you're an idiot. This is, this is Christ has given us this, this treasure. Yeah, there's problems with it, but don't turn down the gift. Yeah, and probably does not even need to be said but but if you're in a church where things aren't happening we would like them to happen it's probably because you haven't knuckled under and volunteered and offered to help with making things better. It's the same problem that Peterson has identified with the world is that if each one of us does our part, the world is going to be a much better place and it's the same way with the church if each one of us does our part. The church is going to be a better place. And I believe and this is where you know the whole power of the narrative comes in, you see people and I see them in, you know, I see them in my church I see people who are just sacrificial faithful. And, you know, I know they will not receive. I know they will not receive their reward in this lifetime. But we do believe God is faithful, and will, and will give them exactly, you know, we'll get will will reward them in the next. And that's part of the reason why people want to get skeptical about the life of the age to come and I think if you lose that all kinds of things don't work anymore because then suddenly. I always emphasize misery deliverance gratitude, the work we do for Christ is out of gratitude. It's not Christ doesn't need your money. He doesn't need your labor. We have not many servants, but we do this because this is what I, this is what I, this is what I give to him out of gratitude so if all of my labors are somehow, at least in my estimation in vain. And so we don't have to lean on Christ's words, we do not labor in vain, because it's a great mystery what he's going to do with what we offer him in this life in terms of what he has for us in the next. And I tend to think, given what we know about meaning here, we will have meaningful joyful labor in the next and so it's further up and further in. And in the church, we have that. I think there's also a way that gratitude transforms us, I mean it's gratitude sort of rewrites the past we changes the story all that the more gratitude that we have the more it sort of transforms our story as we go along. Yeah. The, the, it's interesting if you look at bunch of these happiness studies. I would say well what you really have to do is cultivate an attitude of gratitude. Yeah, that's right, because gratitude will make you happy. If you, if you give something to a lost cause out of gratitude. It can still be. It can still, it can still be a pleasant experience quite frankly. Otherwise, working for a lost cause is just crushing because it's a lost cause. Yeah. And, you know, I, you know, guy just got out of the mental hospital today and he was looking good he's cleaned up he's back in his right mind you know and in what way is that dude not a lost cause I have helped, I can't tell you how many lost causes, and I watched my father help lost causes because there's, there's not going to be any redemption in this world for many of those people. I, I believe in a generous powerful God, who is able to do things that I can't imagine, and I trust he will do what's right. And if people try to talk me out of it I think. Okay, so let's say I buy into your pessimism. What have I gained. I'm going to stop helping these lost causes. That's an upgrade for this world. I don't see the argument on the other side. How is this better for all of us if people just take on a mercenary attitude in terms of what we can achieve as human beings. Well I don't want to add to your burden of work but have you seen the new Peterson talk with Lawrence Krauss. Yes. Yes. When he says, you know, when he, he makes that very point and. Yeah, that's, I'm going to have to I'm going to dissect that one next week with a physicist. Oh, that's gonna be fun. So, the mercenary deliverance gratitude what popped into my mind immediately in. It's in reverse order but it's the verse I always thought was the simplest explanation of the gospel in the scriptures. When the tax collector and the Pharisee go up to the temple to pray. And the Pharisee says, you know, oh I'm so thankful that I tied and that I give of my mind and I'm you know I'm so thankful to me that I do all the right things. And the tax collector says Lord have mercy on me as sinner. And in the whole story is there. I'm a sinner. And I recognize that have mercy on me, you have the power to have mercy on me and I need it. And so, and then Lord, you are Lord you are everything right so it's kind of the reverse it's like the center is the misery. Have mercy on me is the deliverance and Lord is the recognition and the gratitude for who he is and how much higher he is than we are. Yeah. So, it sounds like you have a couple of other conversations about the way marriage actually plays out in marriage, and all of the issues that people have to navigate around that so we will leave that for your other two videos and maybe we should call this good and wrap it up. We can wrap this up that that wasn't the other. The other videos were more about the church, so necessarily working the marriage metaphor too much. I mean, it's not a marriage metaphor but I mean, you just sort of briefly touched on the fact that this young woman is is going into marriage and kind of trying to understand the whole issue of submission. She's, she's become a Christian, and she's not going to church and she's feeling guilty about it, and she's getting a theological degree. And she's, and I shared with her I said, you know theological degrees are kind of dicey things to get because you start going to church, and you become a critic. And you can't really do that in church, because it isn't going to work. And that's another piece of people who don't go to church, they've become critics, and just be a critic in a marriage and see how well that goes. I go too good. When I started my channel I had a couple of conversations with Travis. And he's a musician. And he said it took him a long time after studying music to get to the place where he can enjoy a piece of music again. Because all this stuff that he had learned was in his head every time he listened to a piece of music he'd start dissecting it, you know, and, and, and I kind of feel that that's what happens with scientists. There's this world there for them to see. But they have all these things that they know, they know it, and so they're going to dissect everything and get get to the bottom of it, and they don't get to see the beauty of right what they're looking at right. So, if you have all this theological knowledge it's easy. So how did you avoid that. How did you avoid that, because you know so much and yet you still are able to stay grounded and and enjoy our messy middle, enjoy our, you know, the beauty of our messiness. I don't know that I've avoided it yet because I'm still preaching every Sunday. You know, ask me after I'm retired. They're there that I mean, sometimes the worst people to have in church or retired pastors, because they're just, you know, they're doing it wrong. I wouldn't, I wouldn't have preached that text that way. So my trial is probably yet to come, because I have much to grow in that. But it's, it's a, it's a. I guess I've also been humbled. You need to get defensive slash hubristic about your own theological tradition. And I have to learn to appreciate what the Roman Catholics are doing and have to offer and the Orthodox and appreciate atheists and the wisdom that they have and what they have to contribute, and and and and and you know if you're going to be honest in terms of assessment. That comes from failing. There are a few better teachers than failure. And if it doesn't embitter you. Failure can can be a wonderful gift of God. That brings us right back to the beginning when I first met you that first night I was there and I, and you said what do you want to talk about and I said, anomaly. Well, it looks like the thing that's causing all your problems is actually the gift. Yeah, yeah. Yep. Well, it's a great ride Paul we're on a great ride here what wherever it goes and whatever it means it's a great ride. Really is, it really is. It's good to talk to you Karen it's been a long time since, and you have such, I wish I could keep up with all of your content you have. I love what you've done with your channel. And I love, you know, you got, you got Tammy Peterson on there I mean you've you've gone after some people and had them on and I think it's been terrific so. The main reason I had Tammy Peterson on was not. I really wasn't. And I'm trying to be honest with myself here I wasn't trying to build my status rocket. It's that I saw her on so many places, talking about her story and coming on as his wife. I wanted to give her a place where she could talk about her work. The thing that she's really passionate right now about her art. And, and I think if I think it worked out well in that regard I think she got a chance to talk about that and I'm, I'm thankful for that. So, I thought it was a lovely conversation. And no, you're exactly right. And so I love. I love what you're doing with your channel, and so Hey, small is beautiful, small is beautiful. Where it's not nearly valued like it should be in our culture, but. Well, I mean I always say, even if there's only a handful of people who watch it as long as it's the right handful I'm fine I mean, I'm making them for some reason and God has some purpose in it and. And if, if he brings the people who need to hear whatever it was it was said and it's probably not what I said it's probably what somebody else said, or the deal logos that rises out of what the two of us say right. That's right. That's right. I like that idea. So, good talking to you and I hope you have some wonderful times with your wife in the near future. Oh, yeah, we got some vacation coming so it'll be great. We do too we're heading off on a little vacation soon so I'm looking forward to that and Thank you for coming on I know you're super busy. I mean, my pleasure. Well, you know I got to watch videos a week. Yeah, that's, that's probably too much my channel would be better if I didn't make so many but I just have too much fun doing it. So I just. Well, we have a lot of fun on what little we can keep up with you on. Well, you take care Karen it's good time. Okay, thanks. Bye bye.