https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=gPBq3Xefx-U

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hey Paul, it's nice to see you. Can I get a handshake? Oh I forgot sorry my bad people. Anyways so how's it been? Doing okay. Boring kind of. Yeah. What's the whole lot going on? You just got to turn the TV on and watch that. Turn the radio on. This is a radio caster. You know like what what's that one guy's name? Hey mom. Oh did you hear about Grant Hinkman? Yeah. They fired him. He made a racial slur. He said all people are this that are this color and that ain't right because God don't like ugly. Yeah you heard it from the man. God don't like her. Anyways okay baseball's coming back. The Giants are gonna start playing. The A's are gonna play. You have to talk up so they can hear you. The A's are gonna play. The Giants are gonna play. They already started playing. The Giants played the A's last night and the A's won. But what's going on is all the oh and basketball's coming back and the Kings have to win eight games or they do not make the playoffs. I know it's it's it's ill. It's because we don't have a lot of good coaches. We need those coaches so we all know what some coaches. I'm sure Forrest would know. We can we can look up Forrest or maybe uh what's uh. Well the Kings have a coach. Yeah I know they have a coach. They need a better coach. Seriously. Is Luke Walton still their coach? Yeah who why would they want Luke Walton when the Kings are rivals of the Lakers and he used to play for the Lakers. Yeah well I used to play for the Lakers too. Yeah but he didn't like them as much. He went to the Kings straight up because he didn't like the Lakers. So but yeah this is gonna be interesting and basketball's coming back and baseball's coming back so I'm very happy because I didn't know how long I was kind of waiting until I see my athletics. Because sports and churches what's up. Michael Jordan I'm sure you believe in God too. Peace out to you. Michael Jordan regular fan of the Freddie and Paul show. Have you seen his comments? No. I haven't either. Now I don't know how um what was that guy's name Boogie Boogie Cousins. Yeah. I don't know how he's gonna be doing because they traded him. Did they? Okay they traded Boogie Cousins to the Warriors and then now I think he plays for the Lakers but I could be wrong. I think that's what I heard. I don't know where Boogie is. But he's not with the Kings no more. That makes me sad. You know that who is a great player? Who? Mike Bibby. Mike Bibby he was a good player. He was good. Yeah. Pesce Stoyakovich. Pesce was good. That old Kings team they were really good. Doug Christie. Doug Christie yeah. Uh Waymond Tisdale he was okay but he was like the first part. Waymond Tisdale. I don't know him. Do you remember Thibweb the little guy? Yeah. He was pretty tight. Yeah. So okay well I talked now it's your turn to talk a little bit. Well I don't know what you want to talk about Fred. This is our show. What are we gonna do for the church? Well we're gonna have church today. We're gonna have music. And you saw my buddy Gordon last week. We saw Gordon last week. He said he probably can't make it this week. Yeah he told me that. He said if you don't see him you don't be upset. I said no problem. So and oh I forgot to tell you it looks like thanks to Charlie he's gonna put out I Will Always Care. He's gonna put out This Is The Way We Walk and we're gonna put on the FC Crew. Remember when we first came out? Is this you and Charles J? Yeah. Oh okay. We're gonna put it on CD Baby. Okay. So people can tune in and every time they tune in we can. Scream alive. Anyways. Alright well here's something for you. What? Kanye West announced yesterday he's running for president. Nice. Are you serious or are you joking? I'm serious. I'm serious. He put it on Twitter. Oh wow. I don't know if he's establishing an organization or not. But he was a kid right? It's always hard to know with Kanye West. Oh if he's telling the truth. When he says something exactly what he's thinking. Oh okay. So. It's a good show people. This is Kanye. Oh and don't forget America's Got Talent. All you gotta do is tune in to The Dial and my audition is run on the program. Over to you. It is there. Please contact me. I'll just give you my mom's number. No no no no no no. Don't give me your mom's number. Okay give me the email. America's Got Talent can contact me if you want to talk to Freddie. Okay. We're not gonna give. My email is easier to figure out. Okay. But we're not gonna give your mom's number out. No you're right. She wouldn't like that bro. She probably wouldn't. No no no no no. We're not gonna give your mom's number out. We won't. Alright. Alright. I'm gonna do a song but um. I think I'll sing it and not rap it. Oh I like it when you rap. Okay I'll do a rap. This governor says you can't sing in church so. You gotta rap it. You didn't say anything about rapping. Okay here we go. Not like cheers like they have on TV. But you'll be rolling like me Freddie B. Pop your collar. Make that bottom dollar. Make them holla. Skrilla. Cause you know you got it going on after the 4th of July. Everybody got it going on. Like this. Like that. Enough jitter chat. Come in like this cause it's just like that. Like Niagara Falls. I stand tall. I know it all. So what's going on Paul? I gotta say yo we're not gonna fall cause we're to the thrust and that's all. But check this out. My boy CJ. He'll make your day like kid in play. He's so funny. He's so cool. And that's right homeboy. He's not over the school. He's like this all the time. Willing to bust a hardcore rhyme. But you gotta come to church and get the word cause yo homeboy it's not absurd. Freddie B. coming to you on live TV screen and that's it. You know what I mean? That was good. I like that one. Alright. Thanks. Thank you all for watching. Gotta do the one love. Gotta do the one love. One love. Tune in every Sunday. At least when we do it. Yeah. Thanks Paul. Alright Fred.