https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=eJpOyX6jONA

 So as promised in my This is the I had two plus hours on question and answer Had a meeting after that with Josiah. I Had my rough draft for Sunday. I just did a little summary of some of the two worlds mythology stuff So this is the fourth video of today I'm getting tired. I don't know how good this will be but Griswold Grimm has been busy at work on his YouTube channel Talking about my videos and I you know, he's been on my channel. We should have another conversation But he's been doing some fun stuff with this shadow matriarchy and euphemism So this is part three. You should watch part one and part two. They're all fun to watch. He's he's a very He's a very entertaining guy. I love watching. I love watching him So let's uh, let's jump into this cuz he's well, we'll let him talk. Hello everyone. Hello. Hello Hello everyone and welcome to part three of a shadow matriarchy and euphemism My response to Paul Van der Klay's marriage crisis thingy lately I am I'm grim gris on the internet The way you do this grim is you turn the camera That's how I put me to one side Oh Here, okay, so um Euphemisms, but yeah, there was I did there's I don't have time to do a previously on cuz like He met as he mentioned well, we'll cover that we'll cover that ourselves in today's He's gonna do a response and he still doesn't get it. So I have to get this part three out. Yeah Now euphemism Is important thusly thusly To take up smoking in increasing numbers partly because of a lot of advertisements in what was America's newest mass medium National magazines made smoking attractive These ads evoke the symbolic values many men already associated with cigarettes sexual appeal And and for those of you listening on the podcast Grim is of course smoking while we talk about smoking. So that's what's And some of the other and some of the other ones he's singing so the groom's groom's fun to watch sophistication pleasure But they fail to persuade women to risk the disapproval of their menfolk by taking up cigarettes Even George Washington Hill the advertising genius who made Lucky Strikes America's best-selling cigarettes couldn't figure out how to break through the social barriers It kept women from smoking so he turned to a public relations genius Edward Bernays, he said we have a problem We're losing half the market in America Because there is a taboo against women women smoking Now I'd kind of love to see grim do a response video to this Where we would all move one frame up and Bernays would be tiny and then a little bigger Grim and then me and then a bigger grim that would be funny and on and on we go Or Eddie Eddie Bernays whatever will we do against this terrible taboo With the power of euphemism serve us and serve us true Particularly smoking in the streets He said I want your help on that So I said before I can offer you a suggestion or a recommendation I would like your authority to visit dr. A. A. Brill Who is the leading psychoanalyst of his time? So I went to dr. Brill and I said Can you tell me? What cigarettes mean to women? and As quick as that He said cigarettes to women are torches of freedom that they use to dramatize their objection to the taboo against smoking by men And then What what's this? What but he didn't even take credit for it. He's like I went and stole it from dr. Brill he added as an afterthought and They titillate the erogenous zones of the lips so I left and wondered what to do with that information and I decided we would get debutants to light torches of freedom in the Easter Parade to protest man's inhumanity to women by the taboo against smoking and And so there you see one one of the dangers of euphemism the uptick in lady smoking Which we all know now to be terribly terribly bad for them. Here's some more examples. I Don't know what this hand sign is or why I happen to have posed this now It's again for those of you listening on the podcast. There's a lot of visuals here. So my apology for that That's just the downside of using all that fancy software. So it's easy to listen to in the car is I Don't know what this hand sign is or why I happen to have posed this How birth control works from the skin? At 33 seconds, but hey At 33 seconds, but hey I did Which you know as plan B and the hormonal method aka the pill the pill is the most common form of birth control More than 20% of women who can reproduce take it every single day, but here's how it actually works with Over 20 over 20% of women. It's so normal. It's so normal everyone Out any more a woman's body releases an egg every month the pill stops that from happening Most pills increase a combo of hormones estrogen and progesterone These hormones send signals to your body to not drop an egg into the uterus and as backup Wait a minute here. Wait a minute. What what could your what could doors hormones? Be telling your body Could it be saying hey body you're already pregnant Let's go to those hormonal changes. Could that be it? No. No, surely not that right? It's just So that if an egg Accidentally drops it has a hard time attaching to the uterine wall No egg means any sperm that makes it to the uterus gets stood up and sperm can hang around in a uterus for up to five days before they die The pill puts estrogen and progesterone into your body for about 21 days a month Completely normal alter your hormones for freedom from not being able to have sex the fun fun sex You know, you like the woo orgasm. Yes. Yes Well, what if God uses that as a portal to put another human on the planet? Ah, we can stop that you see you tell your body you're pregnant already And so and so as it goes he euphemized in the front of this man High-masculine status doesn't give women what it gives a man Vidya by by using the word feminism We have to talk honestly about these issues because the boy crisis the marriage crisis These things are causing a huge amount of suffering in people's lives So I want to talk more about this. I'm gonna take apart this it's always uncomfortable watching me talk statement because I know especially some of my friends to the left are Not gonna be happy with this statement, but I've been making them unhappy for the last three years So some of them sure have written me off But and that's what we love about you ball. You're willing to be honest in this time of kek Omega So Anyway, you you've euphemized feminism there sir It's anti-natalism and part of the war on the family and I don't remember I know that I think I think it's in one of the first two parts of this review where you mentioned You say the phrase we're two generations deep. It's when you're reading your own writing, which is brilliant by the way Oh, thank you. But maybe I should find what I wrote and read it again. I Was reading my sub stack I'm not sure which one the boy crisis is going to make the marriage crisis even worse for high-status women A number of elements that have contributed to this Christian social pressure against cohabitation and premarital sex that I grew up with is gone Not only for much of the church but for society as a whole The widespread damage to children through the divorce of their parents is now two generations deep if you watch the Bachelor shows The marriage for life hunger is breathless but only seems but seems overly aspirational They sound like someone who wants to run a marathon but has never spent a day in their life training What would it take to build a lifelong marriage goes beyond good intentions? It takes wisdom tradition and community the new regime in the pursuit of lifelong marriage is an audition culture First you audition as a potential partner in bed One young man told me that the women he sleeps with often seem to be performing rather than connecting The next level of audition is move in together This is the open-ended audition comparable to a temp job where you really don't know if it will lead to a permanent position One or both parties are saying I like you enough to have sex and act married But I'm not sure I like you enough to keep you if someone better comes along you might get kicked to the curb Is that any wonder we are building an anxious generation of young adults the unreliability of their parents is now producing a premarital ritual of unreliability in the hope that reliability will simply manifest itself in some circles This has fostered the marry young versus marry late debate It's a good debate to have team marry late makes good points. I talked about that a little bit in the Q&A I believe that's what he was referring to the other again, if I'd sometimes So I should say these things always there's always a podcast version of my videos if they're long enough to have a podcast Version of and I'm doing video summaries in my sub stack. Well, what's a sub stack Paul Vanderclay sub stack calm Where I take my tweets if you're not on Twitter I take my tweets and I kind of put them down into one long version So, let's see. Where's my there's the card assification of culture that was Peugeot sexual dimorphism Masculine and feminine values It should come as no surprise that they're in opposition to the new regime coming from both men and women men are increasingly asked to selectively Sublimate their masculinity which itself isn't new but some of the new forms undermine past cultural achievements like monogamy Women have been pressured into competing in both feminine masculine and feminine expressions at once all of this while via first Mass media now social media. They are driven to be both hyper masculine and hyper feminine Hyper-masculine is the billionaire CEO and hyper feminine the sex doll. And of course, the queen of that is Kim Kardashian She's sort of the cultural Galadriel at this point You can see why men are more frust you can see why more my men are frustrated and women exhausted and exasperated The only prescription is more more beauty more power more Instagram men are checking out women are burning out marriages Can't hold families are fiction. All right back to our friend Grim The writing and reading it both The internet is internet anyway, you say we're two generations deep and that My good man is the heart of the of mice and mankind You shouldn't ever have to explain art of India, but I said I would and here it is the expert Now he pointed that Grim is on grizzles on Twitter and so we often chat back and forth on Twitter and I watched it but And at the end of this video or after I get through his commentary on it where he gets to make the points he will I will tell you Griswold Grim the message that I took away from your video, which You're right. You shouldn't have to explain Video I often have to Sometimes I need to explain it to myself But if it's done, well it evokes in us productive true things That we couldn't have had without it. So for this I thank you explanation of my clip collage for I am a clip Lord in the Mamedic War of 2021 It starts off with the part about from from Frederick no since deep dive rabbit hole into the rats at the mice of NIM Experiments The mouse utopia experiments if you're searching yourself The thing is is that there was no behavioral sync when they looked at the humans and that's the part I highlighted the front now I watched the whole Utopian mouse video that is linked to his and I'll have to link it in mine. It's a great video to watch and Basically after the Second World War there's lots of cultural layers to this but these mouse utopia Experiments really caught the imagination of the nation and launched a lot more social Sciencing about humanity. There's a lot of anxiety about urbanization again, you can read George Marsden's the Twilight of the American Enlightenment to get some of the sense of this the 50s and 60s are a very interesting time even before the 60s counterculture gets going a Lot of this has to do with the anxiety and the fear that American urbanization is going to lead to these social sinks. Well, what are these social sinks and the mouse utopian experiments? these are these are places where their sinks they're basically the the mice self destruct and they self destruct for social reasons because in these mouse Utopias they are giving all they are given all of the material material things that mice need and that's sort of the shocking aspect of this because prior to it it was thought in modernity in modern materialist modernity that human beings are simply the sum total of the Material benefits and blessings and this very easily comes out of ideas such as You know, basically everything's about material justice and this echoes today Of course the phrase given by Jesus at his temptation Man does not live by bread alone, but by every word which proceeds from the mouth of God should be taken seriously and in some ways these mouse utopian experiments Validate that they say well, how do mice live by the word of God? Well what they're concerned is that If you give a mouse everything it wants and needs It doesn't thrive What does that mean? That's the behavioral sync and then he cuts to these two people that I had never heard before and I found what they said To be absolutely true and fascinating. This is from his this is from his little video and his videos are short I'm not sure if you can see it But I'm sure you can see it. I'm sure you can see it I'm sure you can see it I'm sure you can see it I'm sure you can see it I'm sure you can see it I'm sure you can see it This is from his little video and his videos are short unlike my videos And that was like from the 70s that study so the next part of the video I show how the Experimentations have continued via Facebook now what he says Conspire much We are continuing our social experiments through Facebook but now Now you've got to get into the question of other minds Is Mark Zuckerberg basically continuing the mouse utopia studies intentionally And if not intentionally, but if in fact he is continuing those things What does that mean And this is going to bring me the thoughts that I had after the mice and men Video watching that I did which is in some ways even At least for modern rationalists even more terrifying, but let's keep going Also, look up life log the DARPA program And it depends on It depends on the cultural framework that you come in from I Read an article a long time ago seven years ago 2012. It was about Facebook and it said Facebook Runs on envy envy is the fuel of Facebook. Now, of course that After the contraports video that I did, you know envy is the fuel of Facebook Now of course that After the contraports video that I did, you know envy. Wow. Yeah, and visa powerful thing Spent his time on new subjects as he continued to perfect his enclosures and experiments until finally There I used the cut-in of the other thing to imply that Facebook was a continuation of these type of experiments and Then the important bit that the scientist guy himself actually found Through an article he entitled death squared which was published in the journal of proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine in January of 1973 the lengthy opening to this article was undeniably apocalyptic Calhoun wrote I shall largely speak of mice But my thoughts are on man on healing on life and its evolution threatening life and evolution are the two deaths death of the spirit and death of the body Evolution in terms of ancient wisdom is the acquisition of access to the tree of life And Then I go on to show the acquisition the ancient wisdom as Described by Camille Paglia in her talk with Jordan Peterson whom we all know and love The biggest un-examined issue is the transition from the great extended family hold into the nuclear family and then Phase was characterized entire generation of young who had been rejected by their mothers early and forced to leave the nest and they were therefore Unable to exhibit normal social behavior this manifested in numerous ways The females of this generation had far fewer children and those that did have children lacked the maternal instincts necessary to raise them beyond That is the bit that is the bit like I'm like I did in the first one I'm pausing and I'm underlining underlining your were to date as you said two generations deep into that already And the rest of the video highlights this resonance The females were soon dubbed the beautiful ones They never engaged in sexual approaches for females and they never engaged in fighting and so they had no wound or scar tissue Thus their pellage remained in excellent condition their behavioral repertoire became largely confined to eating Drinking sleeping and grooming none of which carried any social implications beyond that represented by contiguity of bodies We are the hottest generation that's ever lived sort of thing and the whole concept That that that there that's Richard Grandin and tentacle croissant go figure go figure so um There you go, there's there's shadow matriarchy is the The power that women always held underneath by controlling the men in their own households Okay, that's the shadow matriarchy and we've lost it and it was how the women shared the knowledge of how to raise people We've lost that these are the things that are not being spoken of to my mind well enough in this marriage crisis And I think that's a great point. I love the shadow matriarchy point and again if you go back to part one and part two He makes the point clearer Just trying to see if we're gonna have a council meeting at seven o'clock tonight The fact the larger family unit down enough in this marriage crisis this destruction of the fact the larger family unit down to the new key the nuked Family and then now population one as in the Here This is what this is where you're going if you don't fix the family thing And I have no idea where this little clip is from so I'm gonna skip it This is This is where we're going But at least we'll be six feet apart the whole time okay there you go But at least we'll be six feet apart the whole time okay there you go like don't let people euphemize a experimental mutagen therapy is Something it's not I look God bless everyone. Bye. Bye All right, that's grizzwald grims take and and I think the shadow matriarchy point Is is huge, you know camille paglia makes that point quite clear To jordan peterson that You know we have all of this That's why it's a shadow matriarchy. It's it's a power beneath and behind the power People want to debate that and so on and so forth. You know, he I very much understand that I hear arguments that the The destruction of the family is intentional And and while I I I certainly would imagine that there are plenty of individuals out there who for whatever reason maybe they had unhappy Family lives themselves. They have other visions would would love to see the destruction of the family. I completely agree that If you watch for example, I can pull some of this stuff up A video I referred to over the years quite often the merchants of cool and their updated things Uh any video about contemporary advertising or marketing? will basically demonstrate that one of the best ways to relieve people of their money is to inhibit the production of wisdom in their lives because Foolish people will blow money quickly People who have very little impulse control will blow money quickly and so For a very long time the sale of addicted substances addictive substances such as tobacco and sugar, I mean these tobacco is a drug and You know a good bit of how this the mid-american and southern colonies Survived was by selling the drug of tobacco those, you know The colonies in middle america that middle america in terms of the midwest but the middle atlantic states were doing terribly until suddenly Tobacco becomes king and then suddenly the the colonial Authorities try just beg the growers to don't just grow tobacco grow food We've really got to eat too, you know read 1493 by charles man. So there's We've known that for a long time a variety of interests Thrive by By reducing wisdom in our culture and You know, we've we've seen that suggested that those in silicon valley who on one hand You know you hear this in the jordan peterson rob henderson video Those in silicon valley on one hand keep their children away from the products that they create and put into the chile Put into the hands of the mindless masses They send their children to waldorf schools while they are putting youtube for children and video games and cheap amazon tablets in the hands of children being strolled through walmart And being fed at cheap buffets. I know I see it And That people understand this that they understand they're doing it. I'm sure that they do And is it systemic? Of course, they have an obligation to the shareholders And and and and and and the real scary thing that I found by his mice and men video Now here's his of mice and men video and He goes through the points that he goes through and again. I I really recommend reading Or watching both of the videos that he links underneath it. I often have a hard time finding this video. I don't know if it's unlisted So i'm probably going to have to list it somewhere so so you can watch it because because And I love the way grim does this here's Here's the Here's the terrifying part if you're a materialist rationalist And I I add to this the arguments that I made with verveky and and jp marceau that The corn doesn't know the farmer and the dog doesn't know the farmer And the rats and the mice in the utopian experiments don't know the experimenter. They're just going about their business and They've got these their their communities break down And they don't know why And part of what's so terrifying is because we look at these and we realize We don't know either And is there an experimenter now in the Trying to do a range of meeting while i'm doing a video so while grizzwald grim postulates about our technologic technological overlords which Is that their lack of competency And their complicity perhaps enforces greater than themselves I do not question I don't know It's it's easy and I think in some ways in a materialist culture easy to simply point to them and blame But I'm not a skeptic of systemic structural evil Partly because I am not a materialist That I think what goes on in the new testament in the language of principalities and powers in the language of spirit and flesh and Understanding what spirit is I see many of these forces as to one degree or another Malevolent and occupying us So these rationality rules videos that he's doing recently This is part of what I want to address with in addressing these videos Is because basically they they take the usual line that while there Cannot be a god because the management of this world is so appalling It's a fair argument this is a this is something that Thinking people have been wrestling and trying to account for For about as long as we've had civilization And being and have been trying to address Religiously for as long as there has been civilization and been trying to cope and deal with For as long as we have civilization, which is why? Religion is the oldest part of civilization we have And then to come around and say well what i'm doing is not religion It's kind of like chewing is not eating It's kind of like chewing is not eating Of course by the time you get to the new testament You don't have a dualism per se Now other competing Conceptualizations around the hebrews posited different sorts of dualisms But you have a rather interesting nested cosmology and Narrative to try to explain The fact of human suffering and and this has continued on and it very much if you haven't watched my conversation with John vervecki and jp marceau You know this is this is a very live discussion But the answers forwarded by new atheism They have their own issues which They tend to not like to talk about And and the real terror about These little mice and what these little mouse utopia experiments are Is not just that humanity can paint itself into a corner. We clearly can And it's not just that there are people on top of powerful hierarchies Manipulating our lives with euphemisms and Marketing and propaganda and manipulation that are doing us harm and treating us like cattle as C. S. Lewis notes in The screw tape letters and if you've never read the screw tape letters It's an amazing book It's in many ways the book that puts c. S. Lewis on the map in england in terms of writing spiritual stuff Yes, of course there are individuals in hollywood and silicon valley and washington and new york who are treating us like cattle And leading us to slaughter and yes If there's a way to really disrupt humanity it is by disrupting the family and yes Even the nuclear family itself might be part of that disruption because prior to that we had extended families and yes The industrial revolution has a part of this and urbanization as a part of this And the agricultural revolution as a part of this and yes, yes, yes, yes, yes Yes, yes. Yes to all of these things to their malevolence and their blindness and their lack of competency absolutely And I really don't I really don't hold any ill will against anyone who as job did as the psalmist do look up to heaven and say I've got deep concerns about the administration of the world that I see Absolutely And to have skepticism about answers that are all too easy I also agree Yet It is an easy thing to poke holes in someone else's argument It is a far more difficult and far more helpful thing to be engaged and involved in the creation of Helpful mappings that lead to flourishing Not only for me and mine right here and right now But for people going on out beyond myself think about peterson's a la piaget's equilibrated state That's a very hard thing and if I Well, i'm a christian minister if I continue to believe that christianity Affords the best view that we have seen in all of human civilization You can blame me or forgive me or charge me. It doesn't matter But let's have serious talks about exactly how all these things work So Keep at it grim gris. I love what you're doing And got 294 subs right now Maybe at the end of this video you'll go up over 300 That would be cool because you make fun stuff and you're fun to listen to And I think you're making more helpful suggestions than bigger channels like rationality rules And you're more fun to listen to than he is but Engage these questions. We must so thank you for your contributions I think the amount of mice and men video should make us pause and say What are the principalities and powers that are reigning over and how in fact do they intertwine? With thought and culture and what do we mean by spirit almost everything that this channel is about And not only that And not only how can we think better thoughts and say better words and write better things But how can we live better lives and how can we participate in our own tiny little mouse-like ways? Not that we will achieve a utopia in this world But that in fact, maybe we are part of a thing that leads to better worlds In this world and the next so Keep at it grizz. I love what you're doing, man His principalities and power stuff that involves hollywood and silicon valley and new york and washington and london and paris and moscow and china the whole world Jesus says in this world you will have trouble but be of good cheer. I have overcome the world now How can christians? Communicate this in a compelling way that people who have given up on The presentation that they have received of the christian faith Or have rejected it or who poke holes in it. How can we in a compelling and engaging way actually? Make productive sounds in this conversation. That is what really interests and excites me How can we encourage each other? And growing grace and love That is what really excites me because I look at those mouth you mouse utopian experiments and I say yeah, this is This is what we do This is how we are So keep at it grizz. Keep at it, baby. Love what you're doing Those the rest of you leave a comment. Maybe I will get to these rationality rules videos sometime soon We'll see I just there seems to be no end to the videos I can make sorry for making all of this that more than any Busy person can probably possibly listen to or watch so Thanks for your support. Thanks for your comments. Thanks for your encouragement Leave a comment