https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MXrid6KpsOA

 So, I've got a few minutes before I have to go out to dinner with my wife and my son, and so I thought maybe I'd play some of the C.S. Lewis video where he talks with the Swede, and give a little bit of comment on that. Yeah, I think so too. I would also, I know this has been a recurring question for you, and I'm not sure if I asked it the last time really, but it's about truth and how you return to the, that Christianity, some parts of Christianity at least has been true, you said, like the truth of the individual, I think you said, and my question is how can myth be true? And for C.S. Lewis, when he started like accepting that Christianity was true for him, it was like a mixture. He was talked into it by talking, and I don't remember the other guy's name. I think it's Hugo Dyson. Another friend. And he said like the combination of the myth of a dying God, he always loved the dying gods like Dionysus and Baldr, but in Christ he combined the dying god motif and the myth with an actual historical figure. He actually said that this is not just a myth, it's a true myth. It's true, because it's also historical. And then he said that, and then you distinguish, if you watch from the outside and analyze it, well, of course you can see that it's just, you can see similarities as a scientist, but from the inside you can see the truth. So that was his view of it. I'm not sure what the Swede here means by the outside and the inside, but I will hear what Peterson has to say. Well, here's a strange possibility. One of the things that's happened to me as I've delved farther and farther into religious stories is that I've found continually that their depth is inexhaustible. And at some point it becomes less impossible that they're true than it is impossible that they're not true. And we're going to have to deal with what Peterson means here by true, because, yeah, what do you mean by true here? Because this is, what we're really bumping into here is the turn that the West made in terms of understanding truth in the sense of what the rationality rules guy talked about. And the relationship between that and history. Well, let's hear more, Peterson. Something like that. Now, okay. So there are truths in Genesis that are unfathomably deep. And I've outlined them to the best of my ability in the biblical series that I did. I don't know how to reconcile those truths with the scientific view of the world, the view, the fact that the universe is 14 billion years old and that we've crawled our way up from the sludge and the mud. Now, again, it's not just time and materiality. And those questions about Genesis and history are difficult. But they're not. I don't think they're by any means insurmountable. Many people don't stumble on them. And then we have to ask the question, what do we mean by insurmountable? I don't know how those things coexist precisely. I know that there are truths that guide behavior, and there are truths that describe the material world. And that's important, that distinction he just made right there. But I certainly don't think that the truths that we have that describe the material world are final truths, because I don't think our materialist viewpoint is accurate. And when he says that they're not final truths, again, now we're into this question of hierarchies of truth. And I think it's more helpful to talk about nested truth. And I'm going to get into that more when I get into this monarchical vision of science and the relationship that has to Western civilization and to history. It's accurate for some purposes, obviously. And I am a practicing scientist. And an informed one, I would say. I don't believe that people act as if they confront a material reality. And this is one of the key things I've learned from Peterson, that psychologically our interaction with the world is far more complex than the materialist perspective seems to indicate. I believe that people act as if they confront an infinite realm of possibility, one pole of which is heaven and the other pole of which is hell. Now, when he says infinite here, when I look at the, when I go through the Melbourne comment, look, pay attention to how he says infinite in that speech as well. Because if I ever get the chance to talk to Peterson, if he uses that word, I'm going to pause him, or I'm never going to pause him like I can pause him here, but really pursue what do you mean by infinite? Do you mean transcendent? Do you mean more of a mathematical understanding? You're kind of punting with that word. And so what do you mean by infinite? And I believe that we treat each other as if that's the world that we live in. And again, this is as if, and Roberto Sanchez made the comment that, you know, this is, C.S. Lewis takes this turn in mere Christianity. I haven't had a chance to return your correspondence, Roberto, but I did read it. Because we upbraid each other for not upholding our moral duty. And we understand what that means and we upbraid ourselves for being less than we could. And so we confront a world of potential. We don't have a good model for that. And the mythological descriptions describe the human being as the eternal confronter of a world of potential. And you know, this is, you know, I read the current affairs article and I commented on that in the blog piece that I just did. This is why some of these simplistic slaps on Peterson don't strike me as right. Because while he's grappling with some extremely difficult things to wrestle with, he also shows humility in them. You know, people who are just kind of out there being showboats and doing things to get attention. Now, Peterson's got his motivations just like the rest of us, and I'm sure he loves the status rocket that he's been on. But my take on him is he's sincerely wrestling with these things. And he's wrestling with them out loud. And I think a big part of the problem we have currently culturally is not enough people are wrestling with these things out loud. And so good for him. And you know, will Peterson get everything right? No, absolutely not. None of us will. That's, I'm a Calvinist, is what it means to be a human being. So, and again, you know, some of you say, well, you're interrupting the talk. Well, go and watch the original version. I'm just trying to add a little bit of commentary. Don't just watch this one for Pete's sake. And there's something about that that's accurate. Now, with regards to this Christian story specifically, I do think the idea that that eternal myth was made historically concrete is one of the things about Christianity that's unutterably powerful. And I, and again, listen to that statement carefully. Every one of those words he chose, and I think they were very good, a very good way to say it. This is, this is what makes the Christian story unutterably powerful because Christians believe that the word became flesh. And when we talk about flesh, we talk about, you know, that Greek word has a lot of meanings and those who are wrestling with the New Testament understand what Paul means by sarks. You know, but that isn't Paul. It's obviously the Gospel of John. But the word became flesh. John is saying that the logos, you know, inhabited, inhabited, and I got to watch my Christology here, that Jesus was the logos. That's unutterably powerful. And Peterson's words there are correct. I don't know what the limits are. But let's, now again, when he talks about these limits, he's, this is why I call him an agnostic. He's not saying it doesn't. He's saying, I don't know what the limits are. He's not a believer who is willing to say the logos became flesh in the historical man Jesus Christ and following the book of Colossians chapter one, when Jesus comes out of the tomb, creation 2.0 begins and Jesus is the beginning of the new creation. Peterson's not ready to say that. And so he's not ready to say that. Fine. Don't force him to or coerce him to. If there's anything you've ever learned about Jordan Peterson, the last thing you should do is keep poking him because, you know, I've talked to my brother-in-law who's from Alberta and my, you know, when I listen to Peterson sometimes I think about my brother-in-law and his family. Some of these Northern Canadians, these are, you know, you poke these guys, they just poke back. That's who they are culturally. So, you know, let Peterson be Peterson. This is who he is. He doesn't know where the limits are. He's saying that publicly. Don't paint him as a confession Christian that would embrace Colossians one, that Jesus, Jesus resurrected flesh is the beginning of a new creation. Peterson's not ready to say that. Will he ever be say that? I don't know. Every knee shall bow. Philippians 2. But here he is. Let him say that. Say that what you're called upon to do in life is to open yourself up to the tragedy of being completely, to accept it, to welcome it even, even to love it if you can do that. And that's no easy thing. You watched... Boy, that's such a complicated thing he just said. Because in some ways it's a re-articulation of take up your cross and follow me. And I think that's right. But I'm not exactly sure what Peterson means by what he just said. Iraq being invaded. There's no easy way of loving that. There's no easy way of saying yes to that. But your job in some sense as a incarnated finite creature is to say yes to the possibilities of being in every possible way. The question is, well, what's the upper limit to that? Like, what are the transformations that are possible as a consequence of doing that? And I think here in some ways his individualism is showing because I believe the Christian story is not as you'll hear in a lot of evangelical churches that, well, you know, if I do the right thing, this is where I'm a Calvinist and I don't want to get into Calvinism and Arminianism. But it is not just that Jesus saves me and it's certainly not that he just saves my soul. Jesus brings in a new creation with his resurrection. And that is obviously unfathomably mysterious. But that seems to be what the Bible is pointing to. So when you get to the end of the book of Revelation anyway, there's a new heaven and a new earth for the old order of things has passed away. Well, what on earth does that mean? Well, you know, we are given intimations and hope of it. And so Peterson is wrestling with some of these things. And the answer to that is we don't know. The Christian story is in part an investigation of that. So if you're willing to accept your if you're willing to accept the brutality of the mob, the betrayal of your friends, the torture of your existence and your unjust death, if you're willing to accept that and welcome it, what happens to you? And I think, boy, there's there's a lot of gospel in what Peterson just said right there. And I and so what happens to me, I believe, is is is death and resurrection. This is the Christian story. And this is this is where if you're living in a hard materialist box where, you know, can you die for something bigger than yourself? What is bigger than yourself? And is it more than just a poignant story that your your grandfather or your uncle or your friend laid down their life for you? Is it is it something that finally? Historically, is is is the world just an incredible story or is it finally a comedy, meaning does it finally have a happy ending? And and I think this is where you know, this is what draws many of us as Christians into it and says, you know, if you're a materialist, then then quite frankly, you can't tell me I ought not believe and hope in the resurrection. I ought not to believe in the hope that C.S. Lewis expresses in the last battle further up and further in. And if I decide to to lay down my life for those who are who are struggling, for those who are poor, for those who are are weak, what business is that of yours in American culture? You know, it's it's my life. So if I want to give it for the least fortunate, you may call me a fool. And now we're into Elizabeth Elliott territory, for those of you who know who Elizabeth Elliott is. So, you know, what Peterson said right there, that's that's powerful. And the answer is. Try it and find out. Yes. And that I think is try it and find out. Well, how how far do you dare? And this is why you'll always notice in my sermons, it's misery, deliverance, gratitude. Jesus invites us. He calls us and he invites them to to follow him. Now, now you'll notice and we're getting into the Lenten season here where Christians rehearse the stories of Jesus death and resurrection. And Jesus doesn't make his disciples take crosses with him. He invites them to take up their cross. But it takes the disciples a long time to get ready to do that voluntarily. And again, Peterson talks about the difference between coercion and and when you and being involuntarily go. And so the tradition, you know, when Peter, when Peter, you know, when Peter is crucified, that he's he asked to be crucified upside down because he does not. He does not imagine he is worthy to be crucified in the manner of his Lord. And this is why. This is why Christianity needs to be a voluntary thing. This is why Jesus nobody. Jesus says nobody takes my life from me. I lay it down, but the story is told in such a way that it's you know, it's both and has its told. And so this this voluntary thing, you know, Peterson says here, try it. And that's what that's what I would tell people is is try it. Try try giving your life to Jesus as much as you're willing. He invites you. He doesn't coerce you. I think I'm going to pass on just that. Yeah. In this scenario, though. Yeah. Well, well, you did that in part, you know, when you when you were when you decided to immerse yourself in what was happening in Iraq. You know, you could have looked away. Yeah. And for I often find that my my role as a journalist or I'm not a real journalist. I'm more like an editor. I'm an editorial writer, but it's sort of a mist between me and some reality. So I could I can I can do it as I take on my. And I profoundly respect that comment by by the suite. I forget his name. Sorry, Ivar. I don't know if it's saying his name correctly, because that's true. And even as a pastor, there's a role that you're playing on the role that you're playing. Changes it. But I really appreciate Peterson drawing him in on this point and saying, you know, when you at the when you at the risk of your life, tried to tell an important story, that's that's a that's a Christ like act in a way. And and it's it's here where I want some of these religious things to go down. Part of being a reformed Christian is is we believe that that all of us are called to vocations. And it's not that pastors have a special calling over here and all of you just kind of do what you want to make money. And now that's you know, this is this is Luther and the priesthood of all believers that we are we are called to a vocation. And in our calling, we are we serve the world. And again, this gets past Peter, this gets past individualism. I can say Petersen Peterson's individual. This gets past individual individualism where Christ finally saves the world and in fact saves the universe. And I know some of you are going to scratch your head at that, but that's OK. You can scratch my jackets. And then I watch the reality through that lens. So so it sort of shields me from from from some some of it. But yeah, well, that's the advantage of having a well developed persona from the union perspective. You know, you put on an image like like Clark Kent, like Superman puts on Clark Kent. That's why superheroes always have a normative alter ego. Right. They have to be able to live in the normal world. Right. So you need to have an element of yourself that can that can exist. Well, that can act as a mask between you and the world, I suppose. That's what a persona is. So but I mean, to the degree that you're able to open your eyes, you know, Nenecha also said you could determine the depth of a man's character by observing how much truth he's willing to tolerate. Yeah, right, right. And truth in terms of suffering. How can that be associated with the idea of the truth will set you free? It's like, well, it might set you free, but it will take you places you're not sure you want to go first. That's right. That's right. Yeah. Sort of. I got I've got to run. I'm losing. I'm running out of time right now. I get caught in these things and I just want to keep watching. So, yeah, most of you know exactly what I mean. But there's a little bit. Peterson, I've never heard Peterson say he's read C.S. Lewis and that'll be, you know, that'll be interesting if he does. Maybe he has no desire to read Lewis. And again, as as a believer, God's timing is his own. If you read things like the New Testament, you read the Apostle Paul and the Apostle Paul stands holding the coats of the stoners of Stephen and the Apostle Paul persecutes the church and the Apostle Paul gets blood on his hands until Jesus. Jesus takes him down on the road to Damascus and strikes him blind. So archetypal. And and then this believer in fear and trembling has to go and, you know, pray over him. So he receives his sight again. But you might ask, well, why didn't why didn't the Apostle Paul, who obviously had access to Stephen, who if you read the book of Acts, Luke cast Stephen with with language that very much mirrors how he casts Christ. That's that's clearly intentional in the in the book of Acts. You might ask, well, well, why couldn't the Apostle Paul embrace the gospel when he heard Stephen say it. And again, this is some of you ask about my Calvinism. Well, God is sovereign. This is God's timing. And and we might say, well, why how would it serve God to to to let Paul be a persecutor and let him let him run with that until you have a dramatic intervention and then you turn him around and then he is persecuted as a founder of the church. Why God would you let that happen? You play chicken with the Almighty. See how that turns out. God does what he wants. And there's there's so much there in terms of whether or not you believe God is merely an idea, which is which is where the sweet here is is pressuring Peterson, or whether you believe that that God is God is the kind of being that that Christians and Jews and Muslims claim he is all the stuff that Peterson talks about. Even if God is merely an idea. And this is where Peterson's agnosticism gets interesting. Even if even if God is is on the minimal side of what Peterson claims he is, or whatever he is, is this the kind of thing you really want to to you know your arms are too short to box with God. Is this the kind of this is the kind of being you really want to take on. Oh mortal man. And again, this is where the Bible is so dramatic because Jacob wrestles with God, and we do and and Job, you know, Job basically gets fed up with God and calls him down and he wants to take him on that of course God shows up and Job puts his hand over his mouth. But but God respects Job for it. And so even even that isn't simple. So, yeah, it's a fun, watch the whole, watch the whole interview, Peterson's got it on his channel. It's a good interview. But good good stuff and there's there's there's a lot more the question and answer that Peterson did was interesting. I want to go through the Melbourne thing because he says a lot of interesting things there besides a lot of the stuff that he repeats that most of us have heard. And I got to do the biblical series and yeah my list of my to do list for this little project is is hugely long but I continue to have great fun with it. And I love hearing hearing what you all have to say.