https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=obb5xL3f7ic

 Welcome to the Franny and Paul show. Hey Paul, how the heck are you Puggy? What? Puggy. Who's Puggy? I'm Puggy? No that's your nickname for me? Puggy? I like that. I like the uh I like the facial hair there Fred. Looking good. Mom said you I should take it off because I look like a lamb. You look like a lamb? A sheep. But I like to go t it makes me look cool. I like the goatee. I like the goatee. This is the one love. I like the goatee. Mom doesn't like it huh? No she likes it. He looks like he's 60 years old. No I don't. Okay. All right Fred. What are we going to talk about today? You got a sports update? Yeah the A's are out of it. The Giants are out of it I think. Yeah they're out of it. Hold on the Dodgers play. Atlanta. The Braves are oh they play Atlanta? Yeah. I'm for the Braves. So we've got to be for the Braves. Okay. Okay. Put all your money on for. All my money. Well don't bet on the game you're right betting isn't Christian. I don't I don't bet on the games right now. So anyways and let's see. Oh the Kings beat the Lakers. No joke. Oh that's always a good day. They beat Portland and Phoenix so they're 3 and 0. 3 and 0. Yeah 3 and 0. The season should end today. And in football my Niners lost last week. Yeah. But Niners aren't looking real good. The Raiders lost too. Well they had the quarterback wasn't there. Tampa Bay beat the Eagles unfortunately. I got an Eagles jacket and yeah I've been doing pretty good. I look at the camera everybody's coming to see your face. I've been doing pretty good because I'm doing get to see my friend that I like a lot his name is Gordon and I get to see my boys Charles J. Not to mention we're going to have a project out called I Will Always Care and Our Lord and Savior. That's what the two songs are going to be and you'll be looking for some more songs out of me too when my stimulus comes so I can get some studio time. Anyway so basically what's happening is we keep it real and we do it game tight and that's out of sight. Like JJ says. Dynamite! Are you looking up there? Yeah. All right so there's the sports report and upcoming Freddie projects. Nancy do you have anything today? Yeah go to this. Nancy was afraid. I said I said a certain word in the sermon today begins with P. There are three P's that Roman views the P word for. You can watch the sermon for it. Yeah basically. Nancy was blushing. Yeah it was a men's thing okay. Well it was. You know I didn't know what I was going to say because I didn't want to talk about all that other stuff but thankfully he saved me because in the end he talked about love one another. Yeah but your father had a penis. So what's the problem? You were married to a penis. Okay. All right okay that's enough. Honey I don't want a penis. Let me get back to this. Anyhow now you're asking me how do I love one another? I'm talking. I'm giving a sermon here. Now how do I love one another? How can I love everybody? Well guess what? Jesus loved everybody. Jesus Christ loved everybody. And we have to be in the image of Jesus therefore we have to love everybody. I'll be honest with you there are times that I don't love everybody. You gotta walk in love and keep it going. Walk in love and then I have to pray to God and say Lord don't let me do that because I that was not a loving thing I did. Okay. Now those of you in the audience uh I guess what I'm trying to say is it's not easy. It's not easy being a Christian. It really isn't. Yeah mom for instance when I was at my other house you know when I was trying to move the guy wouldn't even help me but I had to walk in love and I misplaced my other prescription glasses that I used to wear and then I put them in the backyard and I couldn't find them and for the longest I was having mental problems but then finally I said people are good things can be replaced but people can't and that's what I just left alone so I'll get another pair and get this. That was good. That was good. That's it so that's all I get over that because I was that's why you saw me like that for a little while Paul. I was down and out because I wanted my glasses but if anybody has my glasses please give them back to me. Definitely. That would be maybe even a reward. They're gold frames and clear lenses. All right now Paul now who do you have today sir? Wait wait the mom did she wait is she done? Well I could be done but I kind of left it up in the air. Yeah it is how do I put this I love Jesus Christ and therefore every night I say in Jesus name Lord please forgive me for what I've done today that was wrong and those of you who are trying to be a Christian it will work if you pray to God. Like Hammer says you got to pray just to make it today that's why we pray pray pray pray There's a song application. Right that's it amen. All right okay wow. We've been all over today. Check this out I'm gonna do this part. Oh you just sing this. Well my eyes don't work. I'll go talk to the pastor I'll be right back. You guys give music. Okay. You ready? Yeah let's go. Okay what are we doing? Okay I'm gonna sing it. You ready? P I mean P. Rick. Yeah I'm gonna do this and you sing that. All right. The splendor key calls the majesty let us earth rejoice and rejoice he wraps himself in light and darkness tries to hide and tremble as a voice and tremble as a voice how great is our God sing with me how great is our God and I will see how great how great is our God God at age he stands and at time he opens up his hands beginning the end beginning to end the Godhead three and one father spirit son the lion and the lamb the lion and the lamb name above all names worthy of all praise my heart will sing how great that's good all right time to land clean yeah let's land it all right one love tune in every Sunday we'll have a show and we'll have some funny things for you we'll have enlightenments we will come like Kristen Kling like this full clean and everybody will like it so one love Freddy and Paul show number one check it out and what on YouTube trending we we need comments