https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=GXEh8axT2SU

 you? I'm doing well. I'm doing well. It's, it's, I, you know, this whole thing is sort of migrated. So then, you know, I had all those initial conversations, of course, you were fairly early one. And then now with the discord, get to sort of kind of maintain a little bit via the discord, even though I'm not on it, as much as some others. I lurk, more than I post. I really do. Cause it's fun. I get a lot, I get a lot out of seeing what you guys are interested in and talking about. And I also just get a lot of fun out of just the fun of the community of it. So yeah, it's a, it's a really good place. Just even, I don't have time like every day, but even having like a small interaction every day, just having few words with someone that's can make your day. And I see it making a joke or seeing something interesting on an interesting link or video or whatever. And it's like, it keeps you in touch with other people as well who are interested in the same things. Yeah. Yeah. And that's, yeah, well, I guess it's, it's the case for so many of us. And we never had that space or at least not being in contact with as many people who are interested in the same thing. So yeah, it's good. Yeah. Checking every day. Yeah. So even having, I'm doing quite well. Like I said, I was reflecting on the last year since we had a conversation, I believe like 14 or 15 months ago. And I was thinking like, well, I did make quite some progress if I can pat myself on the back in the last year. So because those years, those one or two years before was mostly Jordan Peterson. Yeah. And he obviously went away. So then you had to figure it out by yourself. Yeah. And mostly looking at other stuff, different people, your channel, obviously, and Jonathan Peugeot's channel, things like that. What I didn't notice was like a huge weight was lifted off my shoulders when I, when we had a conversation that I finally like out in the open set, like, okay, I don't believe yet, but I'm at least interested in God and religion. And that allowed me to give myself some breathing space to also dive into those things. I kind of, before was very, very apprehensive. Like I was really interested in what Jordan was doing with the Bible series, but I took the rest of it. I didn't really want to want to look at, I didn't really want to touch. And then after we had our conversations, and obviously with the discord, it all, it all changed. And while I still don't, I'm not sure if I, if I believe yet, but I, at least I'm definitely heading in that direction. Yeah. Like I, I noticed my mind shift, my mindset has shifted and the way I look at things and the way I think about things is, yeah, I couldn't have imagined it like a year ago. Like the things I'm interested in right now and the things I, that at least I needed to, to, to want to believe. And well, obviously having conversations with, with Jobe on the discord or Shelley or whoever on the discord is it, it helps to some, sometimes those things you, you run into things you're struggling with and you post something quick and people respond. And it's like, okay, does it, if I look at it this way, or if I do it like that, perhaps I can actually get past this issue. And it's yeah, like it's really been helpful. So yeah, like I said, I still don't believe, but oh, it's, it isn't far away anymore. Yeah. But it's, it's strange because when you're, when you've been so anti-religion for like 20 years and then to make such a radical shift in such a short amount of time, it's sometimes it's quite difficult to comprehend even, even for yourself. And it's actually kind of scary sometimes as well, because I remember like a moment of like a few weeks after we had a conversation and I said to myself like, is this it? Did I really finally lose it? Like I turned, I turned to religion now. Am I going crazy? Like seriously? And, and no, I didn't feel like I was going crazy. Well, I felt pretty sane still. So yeah, didn't think about it anymore. And just when, when we whatever. So yeah, yeah. It's like I said, it's been strange, but it's also been good. But like the one thing I didn't want to talk with you about and something you've mentioned as well is like, as a person, you are your friends and you are your family as well. And you're not just an individual and being the, being the only one in my family who is even interested in this stuff and being the only one, you know, with my colleagues at work and my friends, it's like I'm still being pulled back and I feel very, I haven't told anyone yet, let's say, so I'm still in the closet in that sense. But it's still, I don't, I'm still struggling with, I really want to believe in, I really want to do this, but I'm still being held back by, by my family and by not, I think I'm more being held back by myself with the idea of my family instead of really being held back by my family. But still that struggle I'm dealing with. And yeah, that's also difficult because I think that's also holding me back and finally making a final step. So yeah. You know, it's so funny how in the closet, you know, obviously had came into the culture in wide usage with the whole gay issue, but the dynamics of that process can be seen through many kinds of transformations. And I think that, I think the closet in that sense is, is the understanding that for you to come out with certain people means you lose status. And that's, that's a sacrifice and it's a, it's a real legitimate sacrifice. And so, you know, it's, it's a, it's a real thing. And it's, it's part of the reason why community, I mean, on the discord, what's so lovely about that community is that there are other people who are in similar situations, but like, you know, Job, I mean, I had this conversation with Job, you know, a year plus ago and poor Job was just really struggling with, you know, but he, he was, you know, he, he and everybody's life situation is different. Everybody has to navigate this. Everybody has to make their own decisions. And it's, it's exactly how it's supposed to be that you are in charge of this. Okay. That it's up to you what to, what to do with this. And that's exactly right. So what's fun about the discord is just that there's lots of different people with lots of different closets and lots of different processes and communities that they're navigating. Yeah. Yeah. I still need to figure that one out. That's probably going to take some more time. And just fine. Yeah. Yeah. Not blaming myself or anything. And it's the same thing with going to church. I haven't been going to church or anything. Like I am reading the Bible, like fairly consistently consistently, but I'm, there's also, well, I spoke about it on the disco, like recently with Job and we do have a number of churches here in the area. It's like church villages. So well, when my dad died, like I explained last time is we had the ceremony in the, in the funeral at the, at the Catholic church here in the city center. So every time I see that building, I, I want, I want to keep away from it. I don't even want to look at pictures from it. So it's like, it's more the trauma that's keeping me from, from actually going then, then the fear of going to church. So that's, it's not so much that the church scares me, but it's more like the, the place itself. And I still need to make some, yeah, I still need to yeah, I still need to figure some things out before I can enter a building. And so Job was kind enough to, to invite me to go to church with him. So yeah, so that's also always the possibility. And then at least I don't have to go alone. And then it's not, you're not dealing with that issue by yourself, but yeah. And they can also help like moving things along, but yeah. How far away do you live from him? About 90 minutes, I think. So yeah, when you live in the Netherlands, that's like the opposite side of the country. Netherlands isn't that big compared to some place like California. No, not at all. Not at all. So yeah, I live like in the, in exactly this, the middle of everything where I live. So it's a five minute bicycle ride to pretty much everything to the city center, to the station, to the gym, whatever. So 90 minutes sounds like, sounds like a real lot when you have to go somewhere, but it's not a big of a deal. But anyway, yeah, things like that still like being a feeling that I have with friends and family and also not going to church. It's like, I do need some time to figure those things out before I can finally make that step. But at least I've been reading the Bible, which, well, I did read the gospels like last time we had a conversation and I didn't really understand them at the time. So I read them anyway, but yeah, it didn't make a whole lot of sense. And now I'm reading the gospels again, I started all over and just reading a verse a day and really trying to understand the message or what they mean with it. And also looking up videos like, what's the meaning of this parable? I don't know. And it helps me understand things, but it does take a lot of time in that sense. I'm going through it really, really slowly. But yeah, that's really slowly. But yeah, that's also something that's that I feel I need to keep doing. And just because a few months ago, I did have like a period where I didn't watch your videos, didn't read the Bible, didn't do anything, didn't pray, didn't do nothing. And I felt that I felt like I was going back to my old habits as well, I can at the same time. And I remind myself, okay, at least do something, do something small. Just watch 10 minutes of video. I know that takes like 30 days to finish your video. But at least do create a small mini habits and get back into that rhythm. And like I am praying not consistently, but also doing that and like reading a verse a day and doing the small things at least to keep me in that space. And then I noticed like after a while, it piques my interest again. And I really want to keep doing it. And then I can keep doing more and more. And then also the feeling gets stronger and stronger. So now I figured out, okay, if I do this, I can stay on the path. And that's one of the things I've been praying about. Like I don't know what I'm doing at all when I pray, but it's like I ask God for strength and for the will to stay on the path and to ask for forgiveness for the things I did wrong and I'm probably still going to do wrong in the future. And it sounds so silly when you're actually talking out loud to yourself like that. But what I noticed is that for this, especially the last few months is that I'm actually quite disciplined and I do the things I want to do and I keep on wanting to do them. And so I don't know, is he helping me? Is he guiding me? Like those are the kind of thoughts that pop into my mind right now. What they didn't before obviously. And that's one of those major changes where everybody always wants to get disciplined and do a lot of things and nobody's able to. Because you always want to move mountains in a single day. And obviously, I also have never been able to do that. But now in these past few months, I've been consistent with reading the Bible and praying, well semi consistently, but I've been managing to do a lot I wasn't able to do before. And then thinking like, is God guiding me? Freaking me out sometimes. And then, so a few days ago, I read, I'm still reading Matthew at the moment, but if I give most chapter 10, I believe there's this piece at the end of the chapter, it isn't really inviting. I believe I have it somewhere. Yeah. Come to me all you who are. It says, anyone who loves their father or mother more than me is not worthy of me. And so I was reading that I think, for someone who is really wanting to get into God and religion, this doesn't really sound very inviting to me. I guess, and I really have to think about it because the love you have for your family or your friends, it's like, yeah, so there's supposed to be someone like God in this case, you have to love even more. What does that even mean? That's right. And aren't you in also some ways, when you're loving your father and your mother and your sibling and your neighbor, aren't you in that way also loving God at the same time? So yeah, it's figuring out, well, Jesus, what do you mean? Well, Jesus is just so full of that. It says those kinds of things and everybody sits back and you get the sense that this directness that we assume is the path to well-being. Okay, their directness has its place, directness has its strength, but then Jesus is demonstrating, well, there's indirectness too, by saying something that sounds absolutely crazy, but then as you continue to ponder it and go deeper into what he's saying, because it could be that you can't get to where he's taking you directly, which is why he takes you through this other way. So anyway, Jesus is the master of that. Yeah, so I read those few lines like four or five times and I'm like, so what do I do now? I'm really trying to understand that. Well, that's where you miss a church, pastor, a community, these kinds of things, because that's exactly what, and I think that's part of the reason Jesus has these things, because when Jesus does something like this, we quickly realize me as an individual is too shallow a pond, too shallow a pool to afford everything he would like to give me. So something like that just drives you into other people and yeah, there'll be lots of bad ideas and things that are wrong and okay and okay, but it begins a process by which other things are going to come. Yeah, that's a joke, there's a church podcast in Dutch, and I believe it was his, but they spoke about how to read the Bible and that was also his advice, like do it with a group and do it with a few people and you can help each other out and yeah, that's definitely something I'm missing and in a lot of ways, not only with reading this stuff, but also talking about it, like the Discord is helpful, definitely, but it's only helpful like to a degree. I can spam full the Discord, but it's still, there's only so many people who will reply and will reply constantly and and that's all fine, that doesn't matter, but like some having someone to talk to just semi-regularly in person that will be tremendously helpful. So that's also one of the ways I still have to figure out what to do, but at least I know I have to do it, so that's always the first step. So yeah, those are a few of the things I'm still working through, but what I initially said in my messages, I wanted to talk about stories because I've also watched those videos from stories of old. Yeah, he's a Dutchman. Yeah, he has a weird accent. He does have a weird accent. I first heard it and I thought, what kind of accent is that? And then I thought, is that a Dutch accent? That's a strange Dutch accent. It might actually be Friesian or something. Oh no! Yeah, I believe so. I believe by the way he speaks, he's either from the north of the light in the northeast, somewhere like that. Oh my ancestor is coming back to haunt me! Yeah, he does make really good videos. He does, he makes excellent videos. Yeah, but I did like the first one, but I didn't like very much like the second one, especially at the end when you get this feeling like it's, yeah perhaps it's just me, but it feels like there's some nihilism coming through as well. No, it's not just you. No. That's, you are picking up exactly what's there. Like they say about Dutch people that we're very sober, very measured, but I think we're more pessimistic really. And I can feel that he is pessimistic as well. Yeah. Like not in all cases, but at least when he spoke about this subject, and I do think he makes some valid points, but I also think what people's lives are stories. It's just a matter of perspective, like which lens are you looking through? And people's lives are not only stories. Like it's a part of their lives and like there are a multitude of stories. It's not one big narrative perhaps at the end, but it's like a subset of stories. So like you have a YouTube channel full of stories and they're not just stories. Like firstly, they matter and the stories matter to you and to the person who's telling the story and to the viewers, but it is also hero's journey for most of the people because they faced it and the people who tell the story, they faced their demons. They faced the monsters on every single day, every moment of their life. And they have conquered them in a large number of cases. It's not just like they're battling their demons, but they've overcome their depression or their anxiety, their addiction, whatever. And it's like, how can you, how do you see that? I really have all time understanding why. I mean, yes, we're not battling demons with a flaming sword or anything, but it's like, it's a metaphor and it's a story as well. Like it's an accumulation of all archetypes of all archetypal stories, of all archetypal events and crunched into a single into a single story. And it's, it's yeah, like it's, if you look at the Lord of the Rings and you would really imagine that you're like say Frodo and you're living in that moment and you're crossing Mankarajah or you're going into Mordor. It's not like they're experiencing that they're in the story. They're just doing the things they need to do. And it's one of my friends on the Discord, she pointed that out to me. Actually, it's like, I don't know if it's the end of two towers or somewhere in the return of the king, but it's like, it's a very meta scene where Sam is wondering if they'll actually write and sing stories about them. It's the end of the two towers and the extended edition that really has that full scene by Sam. Yeah, in the movies, but in the movies, right in the movies. Yeah, so I recently, well, I listened to the audiobooks because I watched those movies like 50 times already. But my friend, she sent me a link and it's a guy who does like all voice impressions and he does sound effects and he uses the music from the video. So it's really, really cool. So I was listening to that and then it's, I read the books when I was 12 or 13, like when the movies came out and that's so different in a lot of ways. And I didn't really like them at the time because it takes some time to get into them as well. And the way of talking is writing and in the beginning, there's a lot of songs involved as well. And you're like, I want to skip those. I want to go to the action scenes. But so I listened to them recently and I think, wow, they're so incredibly good and on so many different levels. Yeah. Yeah. It's it's ridiculous. Yeah. It's really ridiculous how good they are. Yeah. And it's so many themes come back into them as well. Yeah. And that's also helpful with your videos and the ones I listened to from Jonathan Pajos. You see things coming back, the Jesus archetype in Frodo and Gandalf and Aragorn. And that's a theme I've been seeing and well actually in a lot of things I've been watching and reading. It's like it's everywhere. And that's also one of the things I'm wondering about. It's like, well, that's what Tom Holland's book has been really helpful. It's like, it's everywhere that we're so oblivious to it as well. And it really makes me think as well like one of those things like if you read a lot of the Rings, Tolkien is nowhere but he's also everywhere. And that's one of the things I'm trying to imagine right now as well. It's like I still don't see God everywhere. I don't feel him. But if I apply that same thinking, well, he's everywhere as well. In the movie, there's a scene with Pippin and Gandalf in Minas Tirith, where Pippin is afraid that this will be the end. And Gandalf, it's a beautiful scene in the movie where again, it's not in the book to my recollection, but Gandalf kind of smiles. And of course, Gandalf has been to the end and back. And so then when I read someone like Stephen Pinker say, well, people who have beliefs in afterlife don't care about this world. It's like, that's crazy talk. Gandalf fights as hard as anybody. In fact, the steward of Gondor abandoned ship and Gandalf stands in the breach to defend Minas Tirith. And then in this moment when Pippin's like, oh, it's the end, there's nothing and Gandalf's like, what do you mean, there's nothing? Come on. But he still fights in the moment. And so, you know, it's, no. Yeah, when I read that tweet, that makes me think like it's really hard to love your neighbor sometimes. And it's like, because it almost feels like you can forgive people that are biased or ignorance or even when they make mistakes and whatever, but like things like that, I really feel they it's dishonest in a lot of ways. And it's on purpose and that makes it even worse for me. It's like, especially now that I'm also getting interested in it, like before I would agree and cheer them on, like keep going. And now I'm like, please stop doing that because this isn't helping nobody. Like, what are you trying to achieve when you do something like that? And that's why it also makes me quite sad because like like I said, why are you trying to convince anybody? No, especially not in that way. Are you trying to, what's the goal here? Is it trying to hurt a group of people? Yeah, that really makes me mad sometimes. And like I said, then it's hard to keep thinking to yourself to like love your neighbor. Like, how am I supposed to deal with something like that? How do I love my neighbor when they like that in such a moment? So it's one of the things I have to figure out. Like, I don't know yet. At least try to. Well, this is where Dallas Willard made an observation about the difference between training and trying because you only, and it's the same difference between freedom from and freedom to. I don't have the freedom to run a four-minute mile. I'm not in shape. I'm not that fast. If I wanted to have the freedom to run a four-minute mile, I would need to enter training. And so a lot of the Christian life is in fact training because we don't, I mean, the reading the Bible, the going to church, these are, this is so hard to describe because they are ends in some ways because as Jonathan Pujol said in my conversation with him, you know, worship is relevance realization. I thought that's exactly right. But also it is also training for, because there are real good reasons not to love your neighbors when they're idiots and jerks and evil people. There's just real good reasons not to love them. And then even developing the willingness to love these neighbors is one thing. And then developing the wisdom to know what loving a self-destruct, I mean, that's the deal with you're dealing with an addict. How to love your neighbor who is an addict. That's really hard because sometimes that might look like, all right, I'm going to help you clean up your vomit. Other times it might look like, no, I'm not giving you anything so that you can continue to drink. And other times it might look like here have a drink so you don't die on the couch right now. That's that kind of wisdom that you grow into by training. And it's just like, if you want to learn to run a four, if you want to be able to run a four-minute mile, the training isn't fun. Just like if you want to master anything difficult, the training isn't fun, but the rewards in it are immense. And this is a good point. I haven't actually thought about it in that way. But like this is a perfect example at least to apply that type of thinking to it. Yeah, and really makes me think now. Yeah, because you do find yourself in similar situations like all the time. It's like people say something to hurt you on purpose or people do something or they don't like. And in that moment, it's really easy to get emotional, to react and to to spit it all out. And that's definitely not loving your neighbor as yourself. Definitely not. I can't even speak anymore. Yeah. Yeah, it's one of the things I really have to take some time and think about it because as one of those new and there's constantly new things coming up as well. Like I said, when I read a verse in Matthew and I think it isn't very inviting or I read it sweet like that. And I think, oh, very, very difficult to love my neighbor right now. And it's like, I run into those situations constantly and then it's difficult again when you're alone and you don't have that community and you don't have someone at church to talk to. And like a conversation on the Discord can only go so far and a YouTube video can only go so far. So yeah, yeah, that's difficult. Yeah, that's why also the second video of stories of all the heroes journey is like, why I keep wondering what's his goal with these videos? It's like, is he trying to convince other people as well that this of his nihilism? I think that's the goal. And why else would you take that such a huge amount of time in effort to to say something like that? It's like, yeah, that really bugs me as well. And then I think he definitely gets some things wrong as well. Okay, there was one subchapter where he spoke, I don't know, was it like cosmic purpose or divine purpose? Oh, what do you know about it? Like, you don't even have a clue if there's anything like that. And that doesn't mean I have, but saying there isn't is worth as much as saying there is. Like, that's also one of the things where I think it's like, it's a bit disingenuous to make arguments like that and not knowing anything about it. And like I said, it makes me also quite sad because why do you keep bringing those things out? And it's like in all your other videos, it's full of meaning and purpose. Like he's been pointing it everywhere in this video, he's pointing it out everywhere. And then that's the shtick of his channel. And then in your own life, you're like, that's what blows me away by that. And he's really good at it. So he's really good at it. So you want to write it. Are you that oblivious to the, he does have like, I don't know, a sense for it or a sense of that he can find the meaning in things and find the purpose in things. But somehow in his own life, he can't find it. And not in the lives of his perhaps of his family or his friends. And that's also quite a sad thought too. Or he thinks he's just projecting meaning into them, which, well, that's sad too. Because the minute I mean, that makes it unreal at a level that leaves us really feeling abandoned. Yeah, that's what you get when you project something, it's like then it's already fake, let's say. Yeah, and then the thing is like, so many people agree with it as well. And perhaps not consciously, but definitely unconsciously. And it, yeah, there's also something I've been really worrying about lately, because I've, I know it myself as well. I've been going through years and years of nihilism and this and depression and whatnot. And I, when you've been through it, it's like you have that sensor as well. And you can pick it up in other people and then you see it all around you. And it's terrifying actually. Like, why are you getting up every day? If you, if it doesn't, if nothing makes sense at the end. And that's why I think stories are connect with us so well, because like I said, I do think our lives are stories. And perhaps not like a grand narrative, but it's at least in some way, shape or form, it is a story. And it's one of the things where if I live my daily life, of course, I don't see a story. Like last time, when we had a conversation, I was prepping like two or three weeks in advance. And then you're thinking about all the time you spent working on yourself and doing the things like Jordan Peterson suggests. And you're creating this own story of like a period of two years. And when you live in those days, you don't experience it as a story. And if you ask your friends and family, they don't experience your life as a story or even their own life, because they've been there like every single day. And they see me go to work, they see me come home, they see me do whatever. But if you then get that eagle eye view, and you look at the overall view, and you see the things that are like the grand themes that are happening, it's like you had Daniel life as a story. Yeah. Is that difficult to see, especially not when you're analyzing stories, as a in this case, I don't know, like what what's his name is, but it's like you're analyzing stories every single day, and you can't see the story of your own life. And I guess I like that accumulation of things. It's like that when I hear the nihilism and I hear that he lacks that ability and the meaning of his own life is like, yeah, that's quite sad. Because that's one of the things I have also been experiencing now is like, well, obviously, when you're when you're depressed, if you're very self self centered, like you're very self absorbed. And because it's your problems and, and your anxiety, and you're only focusing your own things, because who this worries me or this, this will hurt me or whatever. So your entire world consists of you. And it's not, not like you're doing it on purpose, or you're doing it. You do it to try to hurt other people or whatever, but it's just that mindset where you're in. And now that they've actually gone over that depression, it's like, I can finally see what I can do for other people as well. Yeah, yeah, yeah. What other people can can help me with and it's like, I'm not alone anymore. Yeah. Yeah. And then just that subtle shift of keeping in mind that someone somebody else as well and like being less self absorbed, self absorbed and a bit more hospitable to, to someone else. And that's also one of the things that I've only been experiencing like in the last year. And I also keep wondering why it's got helping me with this. And well, the first few months you're like, well, no, it's all in my head. It's all, it's all I'm cooking it up myself. It's not only in your head. It is in your head. It's not only in your head. But it manifests for a while. It manifests in real life. And then it's like, well, now it's concrete and it's actionable. So what does that mean? Yeah. And those are the solo shifts I've been making the past year and I can't keep wondering why it's got helping me. It's got guiding me. So probably I'll end up believing, but yeah, just takes some more time. And like in the very beginning, I was very focused on setting a goal for myself. Like by this time, I need to at least be convinced by this. And by the end of the year, I need to, I don't know, reach this goal or that goal or at least be able to believe because otherwise this journey or this effort, it didn't make sense and it isn't for me. But it's also one of the shifts I made where I realized, well, if I have that mindset, it actually pushes me back further than that. It helps me advance and letting go of that has been tremendously helpful. I'm not forcing myself to believe because it doesn't help anyway. And that's when I see the most progress. It's like, I'm leaning so far in that direction that it's only a matter of time at this point. But then like I said, I still need to I still need to get over going to church and finding a community in that sense. And like you said, it is one of those status things. And because you've been even depressed for so long, that you actually feel you didn't have any value to other people. And now also even at work or at school, whatever. And now that I've gone over it and I'm like sort of at work and people value me for the work I'm doing. And it's like, okay, now they value me and I throw this out in the open. What will happen? Will people look at me differently? Will people treat me differently in this, especially here in the Netherlands, where we're very a post-Christian country. We also have a small Bible belt, but above and below it's full blown atheist. Aside from a few older people, I really don't know anybody who's going to church, who's even religious. Wow. Obviously I grew up with a lot of Muslim kids, but like Christian, I mean, it's like, so you're also in this environment where nobody is interested in that same thing or willing to explore that. Or at least admitting they are. Yeah. Yeah. Well, even like Jordan Peterson is, well, he was on TV over here and he did, I believe, like one or two events in Amsterdam. But like in general, there's not a lot of people who know him. I had one colleague at work who knew him and he was mainly interested in like the political stuff and he didn't watch the Bible series or anything. And for the rest, I, nobody, nobody. Wow. Yeah. So that's also why the discord is good. Because then you can also hear in the Netherlands, there's a few people who are interested in Jordan Peterson and religion. It's like, okay, I'm not the only one. I'm not, I'm not that crazy. So I was going somewhere with that. I actually forgot. I don't know. I did. Let me check my notes because I did roll it a lot of things down, obviously. Let's see. Oh yeah. That's also one of the things is like I said with the Tolkien reference, like he's nowhere, but he's everywhere. The same, I think, with God. Like I don't see him. I don't feel him. But he's everywhere. And the same thing when I think about like, like, consciousness or the mind, like where does it enter into the system? And then it's like, I can't imagine anything else, but what God, like, I don't see like any, any, any other option. Like the concept of emergence sounds doesn't seem really plausible to me. And then it's like, well, where does it enter? And that's also one of the things where I can't help but think it's, it's most likely to God. And then, okay, what do I do with that right now? Yeah. My mind is all over the place. It's okay. Yeah. Well, but I, you know, I even, you know, since the last time we talked, It's really dark, I see. What's that? I saw on my screen, it was really dark as well. I didn't notice it. I could see you fine. But you know, I can, I can really tell a difference in you from the last time we talked, you know, via Zoom. Yeah, the depression, the nihilism, the angst. I mean, you're still, you're still, I mean, just probably by temperament, you'll always be an angsty person. You know, it's just how some people are, their temperaments, they're angsty. And, and they're, but that, but that angstiness keeps them moving forward. But you've, you've gone forward, but you've, you've gone forward since the last time. And, you know, again, I come back to the training versus trying. What's so interesting to me about the, I looked up his name, Tom Vanderlinden, like stories of old. What's, what's interesting, you see, people, see, if you immerse yourself in that much meaning and that much story, you're going to need to do some powerful training to not basically get wooed and seduced by the story. And so I think that's partly where this series comes from. And again, I fully anticipate, because I, you know, I posted on Twitter and he's on Twitter. And so we had a few brief exchanges, but I fully anticipate his third video will give the standard nihilist response to meaning, which is we know that meaning isn't real, but it's something we can enjoy, which is sort of like the difference between pornography or prostitution and a wife. The wife is way more work, way more costly, way more meaningful, way more dangerous, but so much more potential for family, you know, multi-generational story, so much more potential for glory and the wife than there is in the prostitute or the pornography. And, and that's what's really wrong with the nihilistic response to the meaning crisis. It's empty and it will stay empty because you begin, I mean, it's sort of like Jordan Peterson's observation about living with someone where, so what you're saying to your partner is they're good enough to enjoy sexually, but not good enough to marry. Wow. Everyone wants to hear that. Yeah. So, you know, I, and so, but the, what you run into is, and this is, you know, so the video I posted today, what you run into is a principality or a power which says, you know, which basically creates the closet and it's this, and it's the social spirit that's out there that keeps you in the closet for legitimate fears and concerns and making it, making the timing and the desire of leaving that closet all the more important because it's, you know, and I know Job struggled with this, but I have the sense that Job at his firefighting gig was surrounded by Christians. So, that's a very different thing than if you're, and at least his parents, so I think his parents raised him as a Christian until he was like seven or eight or something. So, his parents had that, I mean, so everybody is different with these things and you've got to figure it out because rightly so, you want to be prepared and that preparation is important. So, yeah, that'll, preparation might take a while for me, but like, that's okay. No, yeah, that's okay. And that's before I, like I said earlier, I set a goal and I need to be prepared for this, at this, this and this time whereas now whenever I'm prepared, I'll tell them, I don't doubt that, but I'm still not at that stage. Well, goals are tools, but you can't make them masters. No, no, and that's one of the issues I always had, it's like you set your goal and then your goal becomes your tyrant because you have to, you have to, you have to reach that goal because otherwise you have to set a new goal and you have to reach that goal and then it's like this self-destroying cyclist of, and it's only getting worse and worse and worse and I do set, still setting goals, but goals I know I can reach and I don't set any time limits or say I need to do it within this amount of time and the same thing because with reading the Bible, like after our last conversation, I believe I read the gospels in a week, which I'm not a fast reader at all, but and that's, I didn't understand them, but I did read them so I could check that off my list and I went on to the next thing. Like, and now I do it, do things completely differently and I make, I can say to myself, okay, at least read a verse a day and go through it slowly and try to understand it and then the approach is different and also the result will be different and the feeling you'll get will be different and that's when I know that's okay, I start again, it piques my interest again and I want to keep exploring this and it's like, there's also a shift I had to make because that's one of the things I experienced in the Jordan Peterson time period this year. It's like all those new revelations and they're constantly there and that's, each week there's something new and you can use that small thing and you see actually a lot of improvement, especially when you're so depressed and anxious all the time and you see, wow, I'm making really good progress and then you're in that mode of constantly making progress and keep making progress and keep making progress and like I said then at some point he's gone and you have to figure it out yourself and you're in that mindset of, I have to keep making progress now, I want to explore religion more and you apply that same principle and then suddenly it doesn't work anymore and then it doesn't work for this but it doesn't, it also doesn't work anymore for the other 10 things I'm supposed to do and then that's when I hit that period like somewhere in December, January that period when I stopped completely, it's like I didn't watch any videos anymore and then read anything and I noticed I was getting back into my old habits and that's when I knew like okay now I do have to do something because otherwise I'll end up where I started and then I didn't make any progress at all. Yeah. If you end up where you actually started and then what will happen then will I become nihilistic again, will I become depressed again and that's what I used to, I am an angsty person and that's one of those fears and it keeps me moving it's like I don't want to be that at all anymore and I want to go to the top of the hill and see where the city of God is and and I know I'll most likely will never reach it but at least keep going. I'm not so sure you won't, I'm not sure you won't, I think you'll get there because you know and that's where so you go back to say Matthew 13 and you have the parable of the soils and you read that parable and I think Jonathan Peugeot really laid that parable out nicely I think that's one of his best videos and but it's see the thing is you're you might say well I didn't hit these goals I set for myself but again I look at Jordan Petersen's don't compare yourselves to others compare yourselves to where you were and what I can see now over 14 months you've you've changed I can see it I can hear it. I did lose some weight so well I thought I didn't notice but I in in terms of your voice in terms of your your perspective I you know yeah you're not there yet none of us are but I you know the thing is yeah it's I'm I'm I'm optimistic so I am yeah yeah me too you because I wasn't for a very long time especially not like I wrote someone I made notes in the beginning of my phone and I said well I don't know if I if I'll ever reach a destination but at least the journey doesn't make me a bad person that was like my the mindset I had back then but yeah but like the last few months like I I do want to reach that destination I guess I don't want to be on a journey because I don't think that the journey by itself will well it doesn't make me a bad person but it doesn't make me then you'll never reach something that you you that's also something that I don't want I I do want to get there eventually well and and to go back then to the like stories of old in that video series the the implication of you are not a story and you are not a hero is you're not on a journey and so life is you know just randomness told by an idiot and it's just one thing after I mean that's that whole I used it Sunday with my with my sermon that's that whole Macbeth speech I mean Shakespeare basically nails it right there and says yeah that was a good video there's a perspective okay there it is is that the way the world is if it is well then that has implications on how you should live and and somewhat of what I hear Vanderlinden working on is okay well okay Tom what is it because if that's what there is you you sure picked a weird thing to make a career on YouTube out of yeah exactly yeah yeah he did so I saw something yesterday his next video will come out I believe Sunday it is really yeah next I'm good I've been waiting for it yeah yeah me too because the last one was two weeks ago I believe yeah like I rewatched them today and then like they're the first two like quick after each other but then you're waiting for the final one okay now I'm curious to see what you'll end up saying but like you said it'll probably be a nihilistic message and and again it completely surprised me because he's a master at this I mean his channel is so good yeah and then and then I saw story versus reality oh I saw you are not here I thought oh this is going to be interesting and he laid out in so many ways that the history of secularism right there in sort of a reversal and I thought he sees all the pieces it's like dude give up all give your nihilism up already step over the line because here's the crazy thing if you're really a nihilist there's no reason to keep thinking like one because it feels so crappy I mean what sick sense of pride do you have maintaining your nihilism it makes no sense I mean that's where I come from I look at it and I say okay let's say you're right why should I live like that why not throw myself into the hero's journey and live like that why not larp all the way to the grave it's a whole lot more fun and if you're a nihilist it doesn't matter so have at it and you're also demotivating demotivating other people in the process yeah people who might have have just started their hero's journey yeah and so what did you achieve yeah it's like you actually made things a whole lot worse than than they were before yeah all along saying there's nothing to achieve well what where is that that that then just gets can get sick because now you're just a troll now you're enjoying the suffering of others well when I watch this video I don't get the sense that that's the person he is I really doubt that's the person he is most people aren't like that thank god but that's where that path goes I don't want to have anything to do with it no no no me neither me neither so I see we are at time already yeah but it was so good to talk to you Dennis I'm so glad you found a slot yeah I've been checking regularly so then when I saw the the one for today it's like did I see that correctly like I need to be quick before somebody else could yeah I I I just it's just a matter of me figuring out all how to keep all of my plates spinning so I try to know but it no but it it's it's difficult especially the discord is growing yeah and then and there's new members every almost every day and then everybody wants to have a conversation with you and especially if they they had one conversation you you want to have the second conversation because you didn't get to say everything in the first conversation that's like there's just not enough time but that's why the discord is also a false because people are talking to each other and then the need to it's not that people don't want to speak to you but then the need to to say something they can they can do it with someone else yeah yeah yeah and and again you know the the irony of my youtube life is that on the internet I'm a very busy man in demand in Sacramento no homeless people sit with a homeless person you know any rando that walks in the door at living stones people at living stones aren't lined up to talk to me no but on the youtube youtube we were very productive like I I really can't keep up like I I was almost I was almost up to date and then there was another video yesterday and then one today and I was like two and a half hours in my god yeah I don't have the time anymore it's like everything they'll they'll they speed up they slow down they'll be they'll be there's seasons for lots of things so no but definitely also your videos like they've been tremendously helpful just in understanding like a few some core principles and and about the sacrament and things like that it's like never heard of all that stuff before and then it's like well it's actually super interesting and that's a good thing and it's always it'll always be available and you can always go back and check it that's right that's right and then that's the same with the same with the conversations yep I go back and watch them when there's a lot of good ones yeah so that's true well great chatting with you this way I'll see you on the discord yeah and thank you paul yeah just uh keep doing what you're doing you're getting there yeah I will thank you take care bye bye