https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_qgVSwT-B38

 Hi, this is Paul. I mentioned before I started a sub stack. Now that's in addition to my blog leadingchurch.com. My blog, if for any of you who have ever found your way there, is a link dump with occasional commentary of when I find things that I don't want to lose. I basically use it as a public filing cabinet to store things and sometimes to write things and I've been doing this since 2007. So that's always out there. One of the practices that I have given myself to in mornings now has been to try to summarize my video that I'm introducing that day. And again, to understand how I use my channel. I know for some of you, my channel is a way to have content to listen to, but I mostly use my channel to think out loud. Jordan Peterson in his conversation with Paul Rossi mentioned that writing is sort of both dumping and editing. Well, those of you who have watched this channel for a while know this is all dump. This is almost no edit. I don't edit anything. You're getting the stream right out of the consciousness congress from me to you. So that's what this is. But there are some real downsides with that process for me. Sometimes I need to go back and so I go back. And often I do want to engage an audience and there are a lot of people that I enjoy engaging with that I already have established relationships in real life or have relationships on the internet and a one, two, or three hour video, even a 20 minute video is not appropriate. It's not accessible. And so with the rise of sub stack, I thought, well, maybe I'll start playing with that. And another part of me thought, well, I've already got my blog. I could just post things on my blog, but no, I thought I'll play around with sub stack and see where that goes. So often what I'm doing with sub stack is I'm just cutting and pasting elements of a Twitter thread and posting them. I'm also using it for shorter thoughts that I'm not in my office. I can't devote to a video, but in the same way that if I have a thought that I think, Ooh, that thought is productive. I want to develop it a little bit, or I want to record it so I remember it, or I want to share it. I want to throw it out there in the world for all of you to sort of chew on it and kick it back at me. I want to be able to do that. So today is Tuesday. I just posted that commentary video on Jordan Peterson and religion. And part of what is fun about that is the Jordan Peterson videos always go out to a broader audience than the Rando's chats or my monologues that don't necessarily have high status people in the titles, which means that they get a broader audience. So I get more critics and more dismissive people and and people who love to give angry or dismissive or comments like that, which I really rather enjoy because I learn a lot from those comments, usually more about the other people than I myself because they heard one or two things and they just react to it, which is completely normal for human beings. Anyway, all of that to distract from some of the thoughts I had this afternoon about deconstructionists. So I use Twitter to just kind of learn about other people. And one of the people that I've followed on Twitter for a while is a, you know, fairly, she's got a five figure, I think five figure, I don't know, maybe she got a six figure. I don't know. She's got a significant Twitter account and she's, I guess, her, I don't know where she lives. Her family is from Columbia. So anyway, she very regularly posts woke deconstructed Christian things and, you know, she let loose a thread today. And I'll just read some of the first elements of the tweet. Until the church is ready to grapple with the abusive predatory theology they so comfortably teach, ready to stop seeing the Bible as the inerrant infallible word of God, bending and twisting every verse that justifies their horrors until they want to believe victims. And then it goes for, that wasn't a very long tweet thread, but it was long enough. And I read lots of those things and I watch videos that are like that too. And they always strike me that on one hand, there's anger, but there's also a deep hurt and a deep sorrow and a deep lament, which I think those of us who have not deconstructed and those of us who trust the church as a good place, I just finished making comments on another little commentary video on Jordan Peterson talking about sort of, he was, he's critiquing Jung and talking about the spectrum of clients that he had and noticing that I think in the same way that Jordan Peterson doesn't speak fondly of his guild, which is therapists. You never hear him in his video saying, go out and get a therapist, because I don't think he trusts other therapists or he doesn't trust most other therapists. I don't think he has a lot of confidence in his guild. And I've known lots of therapists that frankly have that same position, but I also think he doesn't trust churches and he doesn't trust pastors. Of course, three years ago, I had that very interesting video that I did make a commentary on about him, him and lying pastors. And you saw some of that in his interchange with David Nassar at Liberty. You know, somewhere in Jordan Peterson, there's a 13 year old who deconstructed and, you know, Jonathan Peugeot might say, you should go to church, but you know, do I really trust pastors? Do I really trust churches? I trust myself. We all do. So a little post that I wrote and my sub stack and the sub stack is easy to find. It's just paulvanderclay.substack.com and the way sub stack works. If you want to get email notifications, if email isn't broke for you, which it is for me, I'm going to put it in the sub stack. And if email isn't broke for you, which it is for me, you can sign up and they'll send email notifications. Often the sub stack is just, you don't have to do thread unroll and get that sheet so you can read them all together. I just put them all in sub stack and edited them a little bit, just a little bit amount of editing and editorializing usually. So I find it fascinating to listen to the deconstructed on social media. There's a particular combination of anger and hurt that they express about the church. On one hand, they talk about the church like it's a snake pit. A burst nuclear reactor or a Nazi labor camp, toxic, dangerous, deadly evil. On the other, there's a lament because it seems they continue to be haunted by a dream that they never wanted to wake up from. A dream of love, of peace, of community, and of everything they've ever wanted. Okay, I understand the relief at it being in your past. I understand the warning about it and to those inside, stay away from the church, don't go in there. It's toxic, it's evil, it's deadly. But then why do you keep talking back to it? Why do you keep preaching at it? What they're looking for is purification of it, but that's a very odd thing. There remains a hope beneath the sorrow that they won't let go of. Oh, the last tweet didn't get in there. I've got to edit. And that had the best line. It had the punch line. So they labor on lamenting, crying, and warning. It would be as if refugees from a Nazi death camp kept writing, you'll never get that genocide right until you own up to it or come to terms with it. What is the church? And then someone responded to the tweets, which I thought were was really terrific. Tiago, I was in church for a time and started frequent and started frequenting one of those deconstructed style groups. I identified a lot with their testimonies, myself coming up basically in a cult. But that is another story. I was excited about what kind of community that would achieve, but it never got there. All meetings were just the same anger and hate towards their previous churches. They deconstructed and something had to be, but they never constructed anything. Some others I used to follow online even preach about always being deconstructed. Parasitic processing, parasitic storytelling. It was very depressing to watch. Now about a decade later, they're very much what you would expect. The only sacred thing they hold are their political positions and we'll get mad if you even suggest that they too should be deconstructed. Now way at the end of the Paul Rossi interview, and I thought this was a terrific video as I said, dude, this is almost like a Rando's conversation that Peterson is having. He's taken, as one of you noted on Twitter, he's taken something from you, Paul. Well, he did Rando's conversations too before he gained such high status, but that was Grace Church High School teaching the voice of conscience, Paul Rossi. That was a great conversation and long too, two and a half hours. That was no little half hour Patreon foray into the life of a Rando. And it ended very interestingly, especially with respect to the deconstructed. So why did you agree to talk to me? Status. I mean, if you knew Jordan Peterson, you'd probably talk to him, but. Well, I wanted to talk to you because you've been a pretty big influence on my life. I followed you from the, you know, from the Bill C-16 video. He's a bucko. And Renny says that it's like, that's got to feel good for Jordan because, you know, his labor has not been in vain and here his message touched someone and someone who was set up. And this, this whole guy's, this guy's story was deeply moving his relationship with his father, casting about for a lot of his life. Now, you know, finally able, you know, you know, he's married within a year. The whole conversation was really lovely. I enjoyed the whole thing, but then he comes to the end and I thought, this is a story I've heard a lot. And your, your biblical lectures were very, very moving to me. I mean, I, I had never thought of, I never imagined even that this was a way to sort of harmonize, you know, evolution and religion in that way. It seemed just like a remarkable achievement to, to sort of kind of find a third way out of the, you know, along another dimension from the, the conflict of, you know, is it true? Is it not true? Is it true? Is it not to it does in and sort of saying it doesn't matter. That's not the question. The question is like, why does this matter? And, and you know, what, I don't know the way you did it was just like, it apparent matters. The question is why it seems to matter. And it, it sort of reframed it in a way that I couldn't, that I couldn't ignore and that it, because I was raised with these stories, but they didn't really make sense in the modern paradigm that I've been, you know, that, that I experienced as a kind of drifting away. I think that my, my experience. Deconstructing is more stomping out and slamming the door. And so for every deconstructor, there has to be 10 who are more like this guy. In, in relating to your work is quite common. I think a lot of people have this experience listening to your work and your lectures. And that finding a way to sort of connect with myself as, you know, when I, when I was a boy, I was an altar boy. I studied the Bible, you know, these were things that, that were important to me, but I didn't understand them. And finding a way to understand them in a new and better way, it was just marvelous. It was marvelous. And that it would have meaning for me as an adult is something I never would have even imagined was possible. So, you know, that was very important to me. And also that the importance that there is, you know, I don't, I don't know. It seems that I don't, it almost doesn't matter what your religious thing is. But it is important that there's something, there's something important about truth, that truth is important, and it's not the same as reality. And people think that reality is truth. And a lot, see now again, this is a modernist talking and you talk, he's talking reality. Well, that's physicality. Okay. So that's the modernist bias. And well, truth is something different. A lot of it is, but there's some of it that's not. And that you, and that being able to say, I don't know whether this is something that, that, that I'm getting from you or that you actually said, but I thought that you might, you might be some of the kind of understood that where I was coming from about that. And I felt the sort of kinship there. And that's why, that's why it was really important for me to go on your show. And I think that's the reason why I'm so proud of you. Go on your show. Thank you for talking to me today. Thank you. That was great. It was great. So yeah, you know, that's what we're doing here, isn't it? I, if you read CS Lewis, discarded image, what is the medieval project? The medieval project was to basically, people sometimes ask me what the book of revelation is. The book of revelation is the project of updating the Hebrew prophets with the revelation of Jesus Christ. The medieval project is to integrate the classical pagan world with Christianity in a faithful way. You can understand then the Renaissance at the height of the medieval period, and then at the end of it, and the transition into modernity. And we're, we're still working on that project in modernity and you've been working on it for 500 years, but this is what we're doing. That's part of why the deconstructionists don't, when they leave the Nazi prison camp, they say they start preaching to the prison guards, not that throw down your weapons and give it all up, throw down your weapons and give it all up, but do it better. So the deacon, none of us know what's going on. Okay. We, we, we're all fumbling around in the dark here with this stuff and we're trying to put words on it. And so, you know, Rossi, interesting guy, Peterson, all of you all watching this crazy channel, getting my unedited downloads on a regular basis, you know, this is what we're doing. So yeah, be patient with the deconstructed. They're hurt, they're angry, they're sad. I know I sometimes tend to poke them in their axioms, but hopefully I do it for a loving reason. Anyway, thanks for watching.