https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DYyz3MBLXrI

 Hello everybody welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. This is a very somber edition. It's okay It's okay. They did make it to the finals and But Toronto won but but they probably deserved it because they didn't have Oh you come through and copy and then basically We didn't know they were gonna win Because I thought you know curry would have passed the ball that time and then Thompson was doing so doggone good the doggone good was good in anyways Thompson got injured when he was going up for a dip for a dump When he went up for the dunk he got hurt. You can't whisper they're not gonna hear you. When he went for the dunk He got hurt there buddy And then after that curry had the ball and had a chance to pass it off and he didn't pass it off and now And now they lost but let's face it they've had championships over Championships, that's right. So next time next week next week. So next season is gonna be a whole new season It's gonna be interesting to see who does good next year. Yeah, well, I think the Kings are gonna be pretty good They might make playoffs next year. Oh DeMarcus Cousins did a real good job. I'm proud of you DeMarcus Cousins old Sacramento native 9-1-6 Anyways, Paul probably knows too. Well Toronto did play good though. They had Leonard, right? Yeah, and what's the other guy's name? I only watched one of the games. Oh, okay, but Toronto's hey everybody deserves their chance. So congratulations Toronto. Yeah and If anybody knows of anything of housing Just let Paul know email Paul because I'm looking for new housing because I want to be Back the way things used to be not really I just want things to be good and it's not always good right now and it's not making me happy And I'm a happy-go-lucky guy as Paul knows. I'm not shy One two three, you know, it's me Freddie D from the old-school G one two three four five six You know what Paul I got the proof this I am the one in command But Jesus is the man and he's not Shazam one two Buckle your shoe what you're gonna do when Freddie comes to you. What you are So we're going out to lunch tomorrow, yeah we are so we have a good time that's gonna be fun All right, Paul, we're ready to show. All right. Thanks for watching Good job warriors. Good job. Good job. Good job. Just congratulations one love. Amen. Amen Yes, happy Father's Day to everybody and I hope you have a good Father's Day and be cheerful and Be good Father's Day fine thing. Okay. Hey, all right. Happy Father's Day That's okay. That's okay. Ready? Oh another closing. Yeah one love. Amen. All right