https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=F5rWKvJ7lvQ

 Hi, this is Paul. This is Rough Draft for Sunday, where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. And Microsoft gives me an Xbox ad. We spent the last two weeks on Paul's silent years, and this summer we've begun looking at the Apostle Paul. Now, I'll probably keep pecking at this. I'll have some vacations coming, so there'll be some weeks that you don't get much out of me. I'm looking forward to about a good three-week rest and cessation from video making. That's coming a little bit later in August, so some of you don't have to panic quite yet. But we've been basically anticipating spending a lot of time with the Apostle Paul. He is arguably the second most important person in the formation of Christianity and the Roman Empire. The reason the Roman Empire became Christian. Now, as I've mentioned in previous videos, when you read through Acts, it all sort of seems to happen bang, bang, bang, bang, bang. But there are some pretty dramatic pauses in the book and spaces where, at least for the Apostle Paul, there's somewhere between 14 and 17 years where we don't get much out of him. And he sort of reappears in this chapter. This is the end of chapter nine, where after which we don't hear a lot from him. When he came to Jerusalem, he tried to join the disciples, but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was really a disciple, a disciple of Jesus, obviously. But Barnabas took him and brought him to the Apostles. He told them how Saul on his journey had seen the Lord and that the Lord had spoken to him, and how in Damascus he had preached fearlessly in the name of Jesus. So Saul stayed with them and moved about freely in Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord. He talked and debated with the Hellenistic Jews, but they tried to kill him. When the believers heard of this, they took him down to Caesarea and sent him off to Tarsus. And so Paul goes back to Tarsus and probably has other missionary journeys that will account for all of the sufferings that he listed in the book of Second Corinthians that we read last week. Then the church throughout Judea, Galilee and Samaria enjoyed a time of peace and was strengthened. Those are those quiet years we can assume, living in the fear of the Lord and encouraged by the Holy Spirit. It increased in numbers. Then the book of Acts begins to focus back to Peter. As Peter traveled around the country, he went to visit the Lord's people who lived in Lida. Now you can see Lida here on the map, Lod. It's more towards the Philistines end of things. And what's interesting is that it's quite clear that the church was spreading out along these lines where the Jews had networks in the Roman Empire. There they found a man named Aeneas who was paralyzed and had been bedridden for eight years. Aeneas, Peter said to him, Jesus Christ heals you. Get up, roll up your mat. Immediately Aeneas got up. And here again we can see the continuation of the kind of ministry that Jesus did. And a big part of the book of Acts is that this ministry continued with the apostles. But as we saw before, not just the apostles, also the deacons. And you get the sense from Luke in the book of Acts that it's the Holy Spirit that is doing this. It's not necessarily simply the apostles, but this is the working of God through his people as they're spreading out. All those who lived in Lida and Sharon saw him and turned to the Lord. Now we could pause and ask now what exactly did that mean? Now the circle continues to move outward and then Peter goes to Joppa and heals Tabitha, also known as Dorcas. And again, if you're paying attention to some of these names, people with Greek and Aramaic names, Aeneas, very much a not a Hebrew name. And so the circle is moving out. And then Peter goes to Caesarea. At Caesarea there was a man named Cornelius, a centurion in what was known as the Italian regiment. Now we keep bumping into these centurion. They're leaders of about a hundred Roman soldiers, part of the occupation force that's intended to keep order in these cities that Rome has subjugated. He and all his family were devout and God fearing. Now, God fearing basically means he was participating to some degree in a synagogue, but he himself wasn't circumcised. And so he's sort of in a halfway situation here, not really a Jew, very clearly a Gentile, quite likely. You know, he's from the Italian regiment. Was he from Italy or not really sure? But he was called devout and he gave generously to those in need and prayed to God regularly. And sort of there we have probably some idea of what the people around thought was Christian devotion, what looked like a or at least a Jew or someone who was a God fearing Jew, even though he's a Gentile. And as the book of Acts continues, you'll continue to find these people that are associating with the synagogue and and but not really coming under circumcision and fully becoming a Jewish proselyte. One day about three in the afternoon, he had a vision. Now, it's important here that he is having the vision. And we've noted before Paul's visions and Peter's going to have a vision. The visions seem to energize the book of Acts and bring one thing forward after another. He distinctly saw an angel of God who came to him and said, Cornelius Cornelius stared at him in fear. What is it, Lord? He asked. The angel answered, Your prayers and gifts to the poor have come up as a memorial offering before God. Now send men to Joppa to bring a man back named Simon, who is called Peter. Now, what men would he send? Well, slaves or perhaps even soldiers. It probably was a little scary to have Roman soldiers show up. He's staying with Simon the Tanner, whose house is by the sea. When the angel who spoke to him had gone, Cornelius called two of his servants and a devout soldier who was one of his attendants. That's what he's sending and told them everything that had happened and sent them to Joppa. All right. So and that's going to get a whole thing going where Peter's going to go to Caesarea and the spirit is going to fall on these uncircumcised Gentiles. And that's going to lead Peter to agree to baptize them. Now, there's a little language at the end of us this I want us to pay attention to because deep beneath this text, and it's very difficult for us to know in detail what exactly is going on, but there's a transformation taking place and that's going to take place all over the Roman Empire. And it's going to change what these Jews think about as being people of God. And it's going to give birth to the church. So I began to speak. This is Peter recounting the story as I began to speak, the Holy Spirit came on them as he had come on us at the beginning. Very interesting. Then I remembered what the Lord had said. John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit. So if God gave them the same gift he gave us who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I to think that I could stand in God's way? When they heard this, they had no further objections. They were objecting to the kinds of things that were coming out of Caesarea. They had no further objections and praised God saying, So then even the Gentiles, God, even to Gentiles, God had granted the repentance that leads to life. Now, we're going to. I want us to pause on those words to consider what it would mean in the Roman Empire for these individuals who were. And I know it's very difficult for many of us to sort of get a sense of what their lives were like in the cities of the empire going to pagan temples, the kinds of practices slavery again, about half the Roman Empire were slaves. And so this is the world that they're living in. And the gospel Christian conversion is looked at as a repentance that leads to life or repentance into life or unto life. If you look at it a little bit more. Woodenly from the Greek. Now, what are they saying exactly? Well, so it's good to pay very close attention to the kinds of words that Luke uses to describe exactly how this Christianity is just beginning to differentiate from the Jewish practices that they know, but much more dramatically from practices that were found in the Roman world. Now, those who had been scattered by the persecution that broke out when stephen was killed traveled as far away as Phoenicia, Cyprus and Antioch. If you have real good eyes, you can find those on this little map spreading the word. And it's just it's spreading the logos. OK, only among the Jews. Some of them, however, men from Cyprus and Cyrene went to Antioch and began to speak to Greeks, too. And these are people who don't have any ties to the Jewish way of life. Telling them the good news about the Lord Jesus and a little bit more literally in Greek. They were good news in the Lord Jesus. What do we imagine they were talking about? Well, from a lot of the descriptions, they were talking about the resurrection. But that, of course, fit in a particular way in the Jewish mindset. And but it had to somehow make sense for these individuals who didn't know hardly anything about the Jewish way of life. Keeps blowing that down. The Lord's hand was with them and a great number of people believed and turned to the Lord. News of this reached the church in Jerusalem and they sent Barnabas to Antioch. When he arrived and saw that the grace of God had done, he was glad and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with all of their hearts. This is one of the if you get a compliment from this is one of the highest compliments Luke gives in the Book of Acts, pretty much along with Stephen. He was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and faith and a great number of people were brought to the Lord. So, in other words, the Hebraic Jews in Jerusalem trusted Barnabas and Barnabas, who was from who was from Cyprus quite regularly. So, again, he, like Paul, understood the Roman world well, was well traveled in it, but also had the respect of the Jews. So he's another bridge figure. When then Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul. Why? Barnabas knew Saul. Barnabas knew Saul's capacity. Barnabas had seen what was happening in the Church of Antioch and thought Paul is Saul. They use this Aramaic here. Saul or Paul is exactly the kind of person now after 14 to 17 years from his his travels to Damascus and who knows how many other travels had he bumped into Barnabas along the way. Barnabas knew this is exactly the right person we need to bring the threads together. What threads need to go together? You have all of these Gentiles in Antioch with zero knowledge of, as Philippiansi calls the Bible, the Bible Jesus knew, which is the Hebrew Scriptures. Paul has that. He's he's well versed in those. He's fluent in all of these languages. And Barnabas probably knows his own limitations and says, I can encourage up a storm, but they need teaching and discipleship. And Paul is exactly the one to give it. And when he found him, he brought him to Antioch. So for a whole year, Barnabas and Saul met with the church and taught great numbers of people. The disciples there were disciples were called Christians first at Antioch. Why? Because in the broader Roman world, they first would have been called Jews. And there were these God fears. But now Christians, because they're not even connected with Jews, suddenly, well, the Romans don't know what to call them. So they call them Christians. Now, it's very difficult for us to sort of project back on to this, because what do we have in mind when we think of the word Christians? We met Cornelius before and he was a God fearer. He was a Gentile who hadn't undergone circumcision. But the Holy Spirit fell on him. Peter said, just like it fell on them at the day of Pentecost. And so he couldn't withhold baptism from them. And at that point, well, sort of assumed they were part of them, but they didn't even have a name for what they were. Now, what's fun is to look back. I don't have this book in hands reach. Oh, I do. A few years ago, I went looking for this book. This was a book printed in the Christian Reformed Church in 1967 that was intended to catechize young people. And it's part of the reason I like this book is it was written. Well, very much. It gives you a good snapshot of sort of what would be understood as the heart of what it meant to be Christian reformed in the late 1960s, in the 1950s and the 1960s. So they say a picture says a thousand words. So look at these pictures. Now, for many of us today, we think, well, they look pretty white. They look what do they what do they they look fairly suburban. They look like they're from leave it to beaver or something like that. You know, here you have the family at the dinner table out in the dining room in front of fine China. And father is eating dinner in a suit and a tie. And you can just imagine that the producers of this material like this was the days before there was a lot of stock photos around. They probably had some family maybe in the Chicago area or Grand Rapids and probably even someone watching this video might even pick out that church. It sort of looks like Oakdale Park and Grand Rapids, where my grandparents went to church as children. But that was a different building. And it's even a different building today because the snow load caved in the roof of that building a number of years ago. My aunt and my uncle were going to that church then. But but in 1967, you had an image of what it meant to be Christian reformed or a Christian. And of course, there would be different ideas for Roman Catholics and on down the line. Within every culture, there are sets of presuppositions, conditions, values, aspiration. Good newsing needs to fit into this picture in a way that makes sense and looks attractive enough for the people to be drawn by it. Now, what we've seen in the book of in progressive in Luke, it should say in acts. What we see in acts is sort of a progression, how this movement is moving out and it's being defined and growing and changing as it goes. Acts one. Now, will you restore the kingdom to Israel? The disciples asked, well, by acts 10, that paradigm is completely exploded. Acts two, you have the nations represented at Pentecost. But and this is the map of them as the listing of the nations. These are. Hellenistic Jews who have gathered in Jerusalem for the feast of Pentecost. They're not Gentiles. By acts six, we have tensions in the church. By acts seven, you have the killing of Stephen and the deacons, the Hellenistic, the Hellenistic Christian Jews are scattered. And they're good newsing as they go. By chapter 10, you have this episode with Peter and Cornelius and Caesarea. And by acts 11, you have a nameless church plant in Antioch that no one quite knows what to do. They are the Church of Antioch. Why did I call them nameless? Well, they're nameless because, well, now they're Christians because they don't know what the people around them don't know what to call them. Now, you had the Hebraic Jews in Judea and Galilee looking for deliverance from Rome. You had Hellenistic Jews in Judea. They made their money in the they made their money in the Roman Empire and they sort of retreated home. We talked about that they were anticipating the resurrection of the dead. And there was teaching saying that you you'd probably have to be resurrected from there. And they have this idea of some people that you'd sort of tumble around underground until you got there and then you'd pop up and then you would be resurrected. But these Hellenistic Jews that are living in the Roman world, well, they're always sort of at odds with their surrounding. They are very much a counterculture. And for some, they're an attractive counterculture like Cornelius. And they live a set of specific lifestyles and rules that that perpetually cause friction with the culture around them. And so part of what Paul is going to be doing with these groups as he writes letters to them, those are many of the letters that we find in the New Testament, is he sort of sorting out a lot of these issues that come up and say, this is what this is how being a Christian. Again, this new word is defined. These are the practices of Christians. Now, one of the things that you might have caught last week, I mentioned it quite quickly, is that Aquila and Priscilla are in Corinth because the Jews were exposed from Rome. And well, why were the Jews kicked out of Rome? The Jews were a significant part of the Roman Empire. Why were they kicked out? Well, we look to Suetonius, who is a Roman historian, and he has this line, which is very intriguing and has intrigued the church for. You know, hundreds of years since the Jews constantly made disturbance at the instigation of Crestus, he the Emperor Claudius expelled them from Rome. And that's around 49. Now, if you read the Book of Acts, you're going to find a lot of synagogues being sort of when I say blown up, I don't mean that literally. I mean, a lot of division in synagogues, and they always follow Paul. Why? When he goes to the synagogue, he talks about the resurrection of the dead. The pattern seems to be the controversy in the Jewish groups over the stories of the resurrection of Jesus and the claims that he was the Messiah, which, well, once you understand Jesus to be Messiah and this whole story of resurrection and ascension, this is a rather radical redefinition of Messiah ship. During this time, some prophets came down from Jerusalem from Jerusalem to Antioch. One of them named Agibus. Now, very quickly, what you have, and we know this from other sources, too, is you have itinerant prophets and itinerant preachers that are sort of making the rounds. There's a book called the Didache, which basically has instructions for churches about which of these ones to receive and which not and how to treat them and what their expectations should be of them. And that's a you know, that's a very early document, one of the earliest documents we have outside of the Bible of the early church. One of them called Agibus stood up and through the spirit predicted that a severe famine would spread over the entire Roman world. This happened during the reign of Claudius. The disciples, as each one was able, decided to provide help for the brothers and sisters living in Judea. Now, pay attention to the language. Who are the disciples? Well, they're the members of the Church of Antioch. They're Gentiles. And they've decided to provide help to brothers and sisters. These are family words living in Judea. Well, why? Well, Antioch was probably about the third largest Roman city, had like Corinth quite a bit more money, as we'd seen before. Jews would often make their money out in the broader Roman world and retreat to the relative backwater of Jerusalem as sort of a homecoming and for their religious reasons. This they did, sending their gifts to the elders by Barnabas and Saul. So wealthier Gentile Christians and Gentile churches would help financially support the poor Jerusalem church. Now, this one time donation would eventually turn into a collection that we will bump into again and again in Paul's letters. And Paul would call this a harvest of the Gentiles for God's people. So we're beginning to see a pattern here. Hebraic Jews enjoyed a temporary peace in Jerusalem. Conflict between Hellenistic Jews brought persecution, which sent them out. God fears heard about the resurrection and God sends a manifestation of the spirit on them. Hellenistic Jews in the empire start talking to Gentiles. Can they be a church? It's a good question. And some of you might listen to this and say, well, of course. Well, you're benefiting from 2000 years of church history. This was radical different stuff at that point. And this would cause really the first big major fight within the church, much of which we find in Paul's letters, at least underlying them. Can they, these Gentiles who are calling themselves Christians, be blessed by the God of the Jews? What would blessing look like? What about circumcision? Wasn't that important? What about the dietary laws? Wasn't that important? Weren't Cornelius's gifts to the poor and his prayers seen by God and to a degree rewarded by the gift of the Holy Spirit? What about participation in the civil pagan temples? See, now suddenly some of you said circumcision. Yeah, dietary laws. No, no circumcision, no dietary laws. But can you go to the temple of Aphrodite, of Apollo, of Zeus, because or of the or of the God of the city? And can to what degree can you participate there if there's a festival going on there that all of the neighbors go to? And if you don't go to it, might not they look at you and say you're not doing obedience to the gods? And if you don't do obedience to the gods, they won't bless our city and a calamity might befall us. That's going to cause tension. It did for the Jews. What about their sexual practices? Now suddenly you begin to say, oh, wait a minute. I've heard a little bit about the sexual practice of the Roman Empire and the Greeks. Before Christianity came. Now, even if you consider yourself a progressive in America, I could name a whole range of practices that you would say, no, that's just wrong. They're going to have to sort this out. All of these were markers that set God's people apart. Does anything go? I think the important thing to look at is Acts 11, 18. God gave the Gentiles the ethne. That's the word from which our word ethnic comes. God gave the ethne the repentance into life. What on earth does that mean? What did they repent from? Well, this is the kind of thing we're going to write. We're going to find all throughout Paul's letters. Take up your cross daily and follow me, Jesus says. If you try to save your life, you will lose it. But if you lose your life, repentance unto life, for my sake, you'll find it. What parts of their lives did God give them the repentance into life of? What things do they need to repent of? What parts would remain the same? Who could teach them and lead them through this process? Barnabas clearly thought it was Paul. How would they relate to the Hebraic Jews? That will be a very big question. Now, what do I want you to see in this? Well, we live in a day when the church, well, I would say that day is all the time when the church has tensions and fights and struggles. What is in? What is out? What is good? What is bad? What to change? What to remain the same? This is the normal part of the life of the church. It's in the church that God reveals how he works this out. And we should look at Paul's pattern. It's the same pattern we've been seeing week after week. It's starting to emerge. He's led by God's spirit. You saw this in the Damascus Road. And the revelations he talked about. It's led by God's word. Paul's is an expert in the scriptures. In communion with the apostles, as we saw in 1 Corinthians 15, he checked with the witnesses to make sure he wasn't running his race in vain. It was also the context of the culture on the ground. What we're going to find in Paul's letters is all of this sorting, one thing or another, What does it mean to be a Gentile Christian? Now for most of us today, we haven't known any other thing. But in ancient Antioch, in fact, there was often so much tension between the ethnays that they had walls between the different segments of the city so that different ethnic and language groups didn't have to live next door to each other so they wouldn't fight. Paul and Barnabas continue to fight for the right of the people to live in the right of the people. And I would argue that process continues today.