https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=pQoSerTd9-o

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. It's, I know all of you out there, it's cold and snowy, but here in California, spring is almost here. Oh yeah. So what are we going to talk about today, Fred? What are we going to talk about today? We should all die for our sins and we should follow Jesus and be vicious to be a little man. And the more vicious it is, the better. And do have common camaraderie and good judgment and good figure. Be grateful, loyal, industrious and cheerful. And all that in a nut sum and a crackerjack bottom means if you follow Jesus, you will be saved. You think we should get all the Christians together and storm the Capitol? No. Oh, okay. Just checking. No, we can't do that. We've got to be positive, decent and in order. Alright, alright. I agree. So you need to tell me how your lessons have been going. What lessons? You know, when you do your lesson before church. We don't do those anymore. We don't do it because of COVID. No, no, no, not that one. The one you do on Saturday before church. To prepare for your sermon. Yeah, they go okay. I had a question. Okay. Could we do a Bible study one day and then me and you just do it one time on our show? Because someone told me that we should do that. Yeah? Well, we'll see. We'll see. I think, you know, back when Nancy is here, maybe if your mom gets the vaccine. What's wrong with her right now? What's wrong with your mom? I don't understand this. What do you mean what's wrong with her? Why can't she come to church? What is her excuse? What is her excuse? I think she's a little afraid. Why is she in church? My phone is ringing. Your phone is ringing. Right in the middle of our show, your phone is ringing. I know. I'm a popular man. You can silence it. I will. I kind of like the tune. Alright. Call you right back. You're taking the call in the middle of the show. Yeah, because I'm CEO, man. I'm boss baller than I was. Watch out, Keith. One love. I think your mom's a little worried about the... about the... Shoot, man. And so I think once she gets her vaccine, she'll be back. Alright. Alright. I hope so. Do you reckon you could get it? I don't want to do it. You know why? Because it could be side effects because of my medicine. Talk to your doctor. Yes, I will talk to my doctor. Take your doctor's advice. Another thing is, okay, we've been doing this for a while now. You got the props out to people like Kanye or... Yeah, Kanye and Kim splitting. You hear that? What happened? I don't know what happened. You didn't call me. Kanye called me. Maybe I could have helped if we had talked. I don't know. Oh, yeah, we were talking about the Super Bowl. Someone gave me a comment about Brady. I said, yeah, you know that Brady's good. He's coming back next month, too. Next month. Next season? Next season. Oh, Kings, I'm a little bit... I'm a little bit upset at you, Kings, because... you won five in a row, and then you lost eight in a row. Come on. What kind of garbage is that? And you know, our fans rely on you for Sacramento sports news. Someone said that specifically in a comment. Hodges. Hodges should be doing better. And Fox is usually doing good. And De'Aaron Fox. And Hodges, forget his first name. And Barnes. And Whiteside. And a couple other guys. Anyways, so basically what I'm saying is let's land on the plane. I'm going to do a rap. Alright, land the plane. Here's my music. Here's your music. But finally a new state of rap. It's T. Grizzly and me all over the map. My phone is ringing. Don't you know? Good to go without a word to say. They call me Freddie D from the USA Westside. It's how we ride. Kicking it hard. Just like that. Because Jesus Christ got it just like that. The blood that shed me for me. Way back on Calvary. The blood that gives me strength from day to day. It'll never lose its power. Never lose its power. Tune into the Freddie and Paul show. I believe it will be the best show. Peace out to Charles J. Peace out to all my homies. And you know that's good, okay? And don't forget about, we're going to be having a podcast. Me and Charlie J. Check it out. One love, okay?