https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=IRX___vaK4g

 This is Paul and I know I already did a video today, but I came across this piece by by Adam from Think Club on oh boy. How badly does this studio set trigger you? Wow, this just is badly Adam badly. This is corporate culture right here at its finest. I have a clip from the Dr. Oz interview, which is about two and a half hours long. I listened to the whole thing and I want to make a prediction here. I think that Jordan Peterson will have a Dr. Peterson show like Dr. Oz or Dr. Phil. This just oh, I just I had a conversation with Ron Dart this afternoon and I'll post it tomorrow. The audio wasn't very good because of the internet connection, but we talked at the end of the conversation about Peterson in the future and the question of whether Peterson will stay in the academy and Ron really hopes Peterson will stay in the academy and stay in academia. So we talked about that, but when I saw this, I thought no, because if you look at Node, just call him Node now, he sees Anonymous, Node in the network guy, you look at his take on Owen Benjamin and Owen Benjamin in that first video, which I didn't treat, talks about how Peterson is being lured in by the publicists and the handlers. And then when I saw Adam's thing, it was like, yeah, I could totally see this happening. Now Peterson might be a little weird. He's quirky. Whether people will find his quirkiness endearing or just irritating. I mean, these are marketers run this stuff by the numbers. This is a business and it doesn't right, wrong, good, bad, good and evil. It doesn't matter. It's all about the numbers and the audience. And if you can attract it. And given the rise that Peterson has had, I cannot imagine there aren't executives looking at Peterson and considering this. And now that he has a publicist and handlers, I mean, and the Owen Benjamin cry over the tweet isn't just a cry over that. It's a cry over what if Peterson hits the big time? What will that do to him? This is we are we are far more tempted by fame and opportunity. And you know, when it gets to really big money, these are huge, huge deals. And if Peterson takes that route, that's that's that's just way too possible. And this might be the topic of our meetup in Sacramento tomorrow night, because I want to find out from from you all in the comments section, I'm going to ask the people in Sacramento if Peterson gets the doctor, the Dr. J show, what are you going to do? Will that ruin him? Will that corrupt him? Will that be the end of your love affair with Jordan Peterson? So I Adam made that video and it just made way too much sense to me and I couldn't not talk about it. I'm just going to throw this one out there.