https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=0GwndZccsNs

 Alright, terrific. Good. Let's see, having it record on both computers at least, so. Yeah. Just in case my question... Just in case something happens. Oh, geez. Oh, Lordy. So we talked about this and one of the things I wanted to do was sort of interview you and pull your story out of you. Now, ever, you know, you were one of the people that very early on when I started this channel, you know, you contacted me and of course I have zero or I had zero... I'd never... I didn't know anything about Carl Jung. And of course, so part of, you know, in anticipation of probably other conversations where you get a little bit more detailed into Jung, I wanted to, as I've done with so many other people on my channel, I want to help give a context to you and your thoughts. And I think especially given some of the conversations we've had already, that context in terms of your story is very helpful for figuring out what you have to say about Jung and how this has shaped your life. Because you have a pretty significant YouTube channel devoted to Carl Jung's work and exploring his work. So I thought it would be very helpful to basically hear some of your story and you and I have talked about this just on our own, but I thought it'd be fun and good to have it up on the channel. Okay, well, in 1987, I was working in the graduate school of the University of Maryland teaching finance, believe it or not. Let's bring things back even further than that, okay? The home that you were raised in, were your parents religious? Um, somewhat. My father was a career naval officer and so we lived all over the United States and later the world. And we did go to chapel, which is an interdenominational chapel, Protestant chapel in those days. And so you could think of it in those days, you could think of it as sort of a Calvinist type of environment or a Presbyterian type of environment. And so when we came back from an assignment in Kodiak in about 1954, um, we, my parents tried several churches in Kwa Pwa, Michigan and ended up selecting the Presbyterian church. There's, there's a long story there, but I'm not going to go into it. And my father had been raised as a Baptist, you know, not a Southern Baptist, but just a Northern Baptist. And my mother had been raised as a Lutheran, I think. And she came out of a family, my great grandfather was Pennsylvania Dutch. And, um, and my family was a Dutch, as I've talked about, but also, um, Swedish, German, or Pennsylvania Dutch. Well, Pennsylvania Dutch isn't Dutch, it's really, it's German. Right. But we were real, we were real Dutchmen too. So you went to, so you left the house at some point, did you go into, straight into the military for a military career? Uh, after I finished college. Okay. What was your, what were your religious spiritual ideas going into college? Did you go to secular university or to a religious school? I went to Hamilton College, which was Presbyterian in orientation. Uh, I went at a time that there were many mandatories in that school. And so we were required to prove that we had gone to church every Sunday. We, it could, it could have been synagogue. I have a classmate who's a very prominent rabbi, but, um, but the church, the chapel on College Hill in Clinton, New York is definitely a Presbyterian chapel. And, uh, it was mandatory to attend one church. I didn't use to, for some reason I didn't take to the, to the college chapel and ended up going downtown to the Presbyterian church. Uh, what was your experience of that? Was that something you were raised with and just doing? It's important for a lot of people younger than both of us to know that the posture towards religion in the United States, in the middle of the Cold War, was quite different than it is today. There was, I mean, it was very common for schools that had religious histories of which many, many colleges have to have mandatory chapel and have expectation that students will attend religious services on weekends. This is all part of being a good citizen, being a good American, being an upstanding person. That's very much the, the style of religiosity during the Cold War. That's right. But I would, I would say that my experience was very much like C.G. Young's experience as he explained in the one video where he said, of course, everybody went to church and, you know, and did you believe in God? Yeah, everybody believed in God. And so growing up, that's more or less the way it was. Um, however, my experience with confirmation was the same as his, which is, um, nothing happened on that day. And, um, you know, I still went to church, but, um, but I never had a religious experience per se at that time. And, um, then, uh, I haven't done much with church for 40 years. I was, um, after I finished law school and started practicing law, um, I was, uh, a deacon in the reformed church, the Christian reformed church in Greece, New York. Uh, about reformed church in America. Uh, don't worry about the details. So people listening to me will know the details, but nobody else will care. Right. And, and, you know, somebody who said, well, it's like Presbyterian. And then, and I, you know, I, I thought it was a distinction without a difference. So I, uh, went to that church and, um, you know, worked my way into the point where I became a deacon. And, um, and then, uh, we went off, my wife and I went off to Japan after five years. And, uh, in Japan, we were members of the Tokyo union church, which is a church that was founded about, uh, 1860. That's right. And, and, uh, right down among them in, in Tokyo on Mote Sando, which is, uh, uh, the main drag, if you've ever seen pictures of people doing 50s style dancing in the streets in Tokyo with big hoop skirts and all that stuff, uh, that was done right in front of her church in those days. And so we were, we were active members of that church. And meanwhile, my daughters, um, attended, um, kindergarten at, uh, at sacred heart. Um, the, the sisters of the sacred heart had a English speaking school in Tokyo. And so they attended there. So all my daughters went to kindergarten there and one of them went through fifth grade there. So, so you were, you were attending church, you and your wife attended church. Things began to change at some point. Right. And then, and then my family has always been affiliated with the Presbyterian church of Casanova in New York as first Presbyterian church. And that's a church that dates back to 1800. And one of my ancestors, um, stood on his head on the weather vein of the steeple of that church when he was building it, believe it or not. That's an apocryphal story, but anyway, but, and, and officially to this day, I'm a member of that church. Although my mother-in-law is now a member of the first Presbyterian church in Annapolis. And, uh, when I am motivated to go to services or go to a church for some reason, I usually go to the Naval Academy chapel. Okay. But you've had some experiences along the way that have made you, um, uh, I don't know how I should say it, that have brought you to some, some other places in your life. Yeah. Um, I started reading Jung and, and mind you that as I've learned more, um, I've learned that religious experiences often come at a time of trauma. And, um, it's so happened that I should cover a couple of quick things. One was that in 1990, I bought man and his symbols and I read it over a period of one year, about three or four pages a night to my wife before we went to sleep. And at the end of that year, I felt like I had had a year of psychotherapy. Then, uh, in 1993 or so, uh, a union analyst named Clarissa Pinkola Estes wrote a bestselling book called women who run with the wolves. And my mother gave it to my wife for Christmas. I picked it up and wouldn't give it to my wife for two days while I read it cover to cover. And, um, then at about that time, um, the American forces were coming back from Kuwait from with, uh, uh, Norman Schwartzkoff. I'm, um, I'm a 23 year service man in the Marines. I served the Lieutenant Colonel in the Marine Corps reserve mostly, but I did serve active duty in Vietnam. And, um, my church experience there was, uh, the chaplain would get up at his morning briefing with the Colonel. And, uh, typically on a Monday, he would say, well, we had 11 Marines in chapel yesterday, something like that. So the story that in there, no atheists in a foxhole just isn't true. There were, you know, people weren't going to church at that time. And I never went to church while I was in Vietnam. I did darken the door of the chapel. Exactly. Remember why, but I had some business going with the chaplain and he had a nice chapel, which was a bunker with, with plastic fake stained glass windows. And, um, so anyway, um, Schwartzkoff comes back from, from Iraq and I was rather angry with President Bush at that time for running this war parade down the streets of Washington. I did not feel that it was appropriate for us to be aggrandizing the military that way, even though I'm a loyal Marine and always will be. Um, but I didn't think that was an appropriate thing for our country. And so I was angry about it. And I went for a long walk in Washington around the U S Capitol. And I was trying to decide what I was going to be in the future. And I decided I wanted to be a writer. And so I decided to write a novel. And as I started to write that novel, um, within two days and informed by Clarissa Pincoles, as to use his book, um, I was taken over by, I was possessed by a visioning experience and archetypal visual experience, which lasted eight months. And during that period, I wrote the novel and I, at the time, I just thought I was writing a novel and I said, wow, this must be what happened to Tolstoy and all those guys. And, um, so I thought it, you know, it was just a good experience and, um, the novel had certain shadow elements into it, which I'm not going to go into here for these purposes, but, um, I was sort of shocked at the content and there was no stopping it. I mean, once, once an archetype gets a hold of you, it's going to play through just like a record on the jukebox. And, and so every morning, uh, at six AM, I was awakened by this vision and I had to go to my computer and write 500, go a thousand words. And then that was enough for that day. And I could go on with my regular life, but this went on for eight months. And at the end, when I had finished telling the story and it's the story of the first woman prime minister of Japan, as a matter of fact, um, then it stopped. Okay. Then the visual experience stopped because I had played through the archetype. And, um, so then, um, I put that novel in my drawer for 21 years for a variety. Okay. So then in 1998, my daughter, one of my daughters had gone to Russia on a USIS fellowship and, uh, she came back having gotten mixed up with Christian missionaries. I don't know what flavor in Kazan to Tarasan. And, um, we got together for her 22nd birthday, just she and I, and, um, we had a beautiful evening together for three hours. And as I was parting her from her, um, she said, well, dad, I'm sorry to say this to you, but I think you're going to hell. Quote unquote. And I was, I was really knocked by that. Okay. I mean, I was, uh, that was a traumatic experience, especially after we'd had a beautiful evening together and so on. And, um, so I got in the car driving back from Washington to Annapolis and coming across, uh, suddenly I had a vision of Mephistopheles. Well, first of all, I was asking myself who teaches a child to say such a thing to a parent. Number one. Okay. So that, so I was pretty angry and then, um, about halfway across, I had this vision of Mephistopheles plopping down in the seat next to me and I didn't know what to do. So I cut the Faustian bargain and because it was the Mephistopheles that I had envisioned from Faustus, unfortunately I knew something about union psychology. Uh, I cut the Faustian bargain. The bargain was that he could have my immortal soul on my death on condition that none of my daughters would think that of me for the rest of my life. Disappeared and he never came back. But that immediately gave me the idea. I mean, I was really angry at this, whoever this denomination was. Since I don't know, I can't, I can't, I can't announce them, but I was really angry about that. But I also realized that, wow, if that could happen to me, um, then it must be the case that pastors throughout history, uh, have scared people into being loyal Christians by, um, conjuring up images of the devil and causing them to have these kind of visions. And then people go, oh my God, I better go to church. And I'm sure that that must have happened. And, and because of my own experience with that, I know it happened. And, um, and so, uh, so I, I don't know if I've answered your question. No, you're doing great. Keep going. Okay. So, um, then over years, um, I had a number of other experiences where I would call them religious experiences. And, um, I think I've shown you this, but I'll show you this image, um, which I put on my desktop, but now can't find naturally. Just a moment. Okay. So the, to set up the situation, um, I was in a fairly intense lawsuit, uh, after 2008 and, um, I was having trouble with it. And, uh, one day I was feeling particularly down on the dumps and, um, it was actually foreclosure of my house. It's no secret. And, uh, I was quite angry about what had happened. Um, and so I was trying to fight it in the courts and not getting anywhere. And so I kept getting slapped back and I actually went to the court of appeals of Maryland five times in the U S Supreme court once. And, and I, heck of a foreclosure lawsuit. Right. Well, I, I estimated that I put about a million and a half dollars worth of time legal time into that, that effort. But in any case, um, I had been, I had just experienced one of my many losses in that case. And, um, and so I decided to go over to the Naval Academy chapel and just clear my head. And, um, I have a particular, uh, queue that I liked there. And if you go in there in the morning on a weekday, uh, none of the lights are on, but there's light from the stained glass windows. And, um, I was really, I mean, seriously down in the dumps and, um, I sat down in this pew, which was, is in one of the cross arms. It's in the right cross arm. The chapel is the cathedral of the Navy. So it's set up like a cathedral. And, um, and so I was sitting in one of the pews that goes longitudinally in the building, not, not facing the, um, the pulpit, but, um, I would have to look to my right to see it, see the pulpit, but directly in front of me was, um, a very prized, uh, stained glass window that was done by Tiffany. And, uh, I liked that stained glass window very much. Um, and it has an image of Christ and in it, I'm going to show it to you in a moment, but in any case, I'm in the darkened chapel and, um, suddenly a light came and just illuminated me. With a, with biblical reference and, um, and I looked up at it and my attitude just changed instantly. And I looked up and I saw this scene and I thought to myself, nobody is ever going to believe this unless I take a picture of it. And so I did take a picture of it and I will show it to you now. So this is the picture. Oh, wow. And you can see the Tiffany stained glass window. The, the upper three, uh, windows are the Tiffany. You can see below there, there are three smaller stained glass windows, but you can see the difference in quality, uh, between the two. And then you can see the power of the light that was coming in on me and it was only lighting up me. And this is a chapel that seats 2000 people. And, um, is that light coming through a window or is the light just there? I came through a window. I was coming through a window with sunlight and, um, that, that Tiffany window is, uh, above the balcony. So you can see the, I think you can see, yeah, the three, the three, the three, the three, the three, the three, the three. The three little windows are below the balcony and the Tiffany is above the balcony. And then there's a, an opening in the dome of the chapel through which this light was coming. And it completely changed my attitude. And I saw this scene and I said, my God, nobody is going to believe this or even appreciate what it is unless I take a picture. So I grabbed my cell phone and I snapped this picture and this was on September 6th, 2016, I believe was the date. And then I turned the camera back on myself and took this selfie. And so I'll give you the selfie. Um, and come on. All right, so here's the selfie. And so you can see that my demeanor is entirely changed. I'm no longer down in the dumps. You can see how dark it is in the chapel, except for where I was sitting. And the image over my right shoulder there, which some people have asked, is that a gargoyle or something? That's actually the great symbol, the great seal of the U.S. Naval Academy shoulder. But, but that's an example of a religious experience that, that I had. And, you know, I would define as Dr. Jung would define a religious experience as a numinous experience. It was highly numinous to me. And I'm, I would not suggest that it would be numinous to you necessarily, because these things are very personal. But nonetheless, for my lights, that was a very numinous religious experience. Let me just cut off this light from my window here. Okay, so, and I'm sure you can appreciate that that's, that's a scene like we've seen in a few movies, for example, of, you know, religious style movies. Of, you know, whoever, you know, light comes on them and shines on them, and then they're moved to become a saint or something like that. Not that I'm any saint, but, but, you know, it definitely moved me and it definitely completely changed my attitude for the day. And there was another experience at the Naval Academy Chapel in exactly the same place. One of the reasons, in my mind, why I was fighting my lawsuit was that I took an oath to defend the country against all enemies, foreign and domestic. And I had figured out that the financial industry had managed to get themselves paid double on most defaulted mortgages, once by the TARP and once by citizens who didn't understand that they didn't actually owe the money because the money had been paid off long ago. And, and so this is, this is a continuing ongoing problem we have in our economy where the financial industry has gotten away with doing that. And basically they harvested the life savings of the baby boom, in my opinion. And they got away with it. And it's going to happen again, I'm afraid, because I wasn't able to do what I hoped I could do with my lawsuit. So anyway, I was in the chapel again on another occasion. Again, I was down in the dumps after one of my losses with the Court of Appeals, I think. And I was sitting in the same seat, and I was leaning forward in an attitude of prayer. And as I said, I felt that I had, that I was fighting this suit based, in part based on my oath as a Marine officer. And as I was leaning forward and in this attitude of prayer, I envisioned the five men I know who have given their lives for the country. And they were lined up under the, under the pulpit to my right. And as I was sitting there, they were all in uniform, and they all came over and put their, their hand on my head in a gesture of blessing. And so I count that as another religious experience. And you know, that's exactly how I remember it. And whether anybody else believes me or not, I don't care, because I know it's true. And so, and just going back to the, the Naval Academy or the Navy for a minute. When I was 10 years old, I was at the, the US Navy Chapel at the Naval Air Station, Norfolk. And at that time, which was 1955 or 56, that was the busiest airport in the world. That was before, before O'Hare got busy. And it was right at the height of the Cold War. The Soviet Union had detonated an H-bomb about a year earlier. And there was a lot of naval activity, a lot of, you know, activity out of that Naval Air Station. And so, the congregation had a lot of skin in the gate. Yeah. Sorry. And so there was this one particular occasion. And this actually happened every week, but I remember a particular occasion where the congregation was singing the Navy Hymn. And it just very seriously touched my heart on that occasion. And obviously the congregation was singing the Hymn, which is eternal father, as you probably know. They were singing it very passionately. Sure. And anyway, so in the Navy, in the Marine Corps, we sing the Navy Hymn every service, and both Catholic and Protestant. And if you go into the Naval Academy Chapel on a, on just a regular business day, on the placard where they put the hymn numbers for the service, you will always find 808, which happens to be the number of the Navy Hymn in the hymnal. And it just happens that I visited the St. Andrew's Chapel next to the National Cathedral a few weeks ago, and I was there on an off day, and the hymn placard was empty, as might well be in your church today. But in the Naval Academy Chapel, and I think in other Navy chapels around the world, you will find that hymn number on that placard always. And the chapel is quite an impressive building, as you might guess. And over the altar, about, I'd say maybe 25 feet up above the altar, in foot-high letters that are carved into the concrete or the the stone, and then painted red, or I'm sorry, not painted red, they're painted gold, are the words, eternal father. Sorry. Eternal father, eternal father, strong to save, and I cannot, I can't sing that hymn anymore. I mean, I can't even talk about it anymore, that it touches me, because it touches me so deeply and profoundly every time I even think about it. And it's quite interesting in terms of synchronicities that 808 represents two signs of infinity, which represent chaos, of course, and in the center of it is a circle which represents the mandala, which is the oldest symbol that exists in living beings, and it is widely attributed to be a symbol of God, and that's why you have rose windows in many chapels around the world, including the Naval Academy Chapel. And I recently found an image of one, let's see if I have it here quickly, okay, here's an image of a of a mandala from Kimberley, Australia, and this is from 50,000 years ago that dated this image, just share it with you. It's in a cave, and as you see, it's quite large, and so that symbol has been there for 50,000 years, and I just want to show you something that may really surprise you in terms of mandalas. In the 1990s, some divers in the Sea of Japan were finding mandalas on the sea floor, and so this is one of the images that they took of it, and they were trying to understand what this was, and so over a period of a couple years, divers looked for these things very deeply, and what they discovered was, I'll show you, was this. What they discovered was this fish, it's called the puffer fish or a fugu fish, it's five inches long, and it spends five days creating a mandala that is seven feet in diameter on the sea floor, and after the male fugu fish does this, and by the way, this is the fish that in Japanese cuisine you have to have a very skilled chef because if he doesn't know how to get the liver out, he'll kill you, but anyway, it's also called a puffer fish, and so as you see in the bottom image here, it completes this mandala, and then the female fish comes and lays her eggs in the middle of this mandala, and so I think that that's a really profound idea because in human experience, obviously in human experience, you know, religions have recognized mandalas for thousands of years, but there's an example of a species that is creating mandalas and it's doing it automatically, and we must have separated off from that species, I don't know, two billion years ago, I couldn't tell you, but I think it's a pretty profound thing. So, it's pretty wild. So, when did you first encounter Jung that you can remember, and were impressed by his teaching? Was it man and his symbols when you were reading it to your wife? Was that the first time? Well, the very first time was, and only in retrospect do I know that this is the case, but when I was working at the University of Maryland teaching finance, I had a fellow professor who was a PhD in psychology, and she was a beautiful woman, and she kind of matched my anima. Are you familiar with that term? Not really. Okay, well, the anima is the image of the perfect woman in a man's psyche. Okay, so I think that's the first thing I'm going to talk about. Okay, so here's my anima. This is my mother at age 18, and I was born about one year later, and so whenever I see a woman who has hair framing her face something like that, I think it's a very interesting thing to think about. So, I think that's the first thing I'm going to talk about. Okay, so here's my mother at age 18, and so whenever I see a woman who has hair framing her face something like that, my psyche says that's the woman for you. That gets plenty of men in trouble because both of my wives have met that characteristic. But I run into women on the street every day who meet that category to learn how to work with it. And so anyway, this woman was sort of this image of my anima, so I was fascinated with her, and she asked me if I knew anything about the Myers-Briggs type indicator, and I didn't, so she spent 10 days at lunch teaching me the Myers-Briggs type indicator. Are you familiar with that? Yep. Okay, and then as I said, I was a senior officer in the Marine Corps, and I was quite, and she said it was based on the work of Young, and then it so happened that I was selected for four senior schools in the military, the Command and Staff College of the Marine Corps, the Naval War College, the National War College, and the Industrial College of the Armed Forces. And at every one of those senior schools, and oh by the way, I also experienced it at the Center for Creative Leadership, which is in Greensboro, North Carolina, and it's a place where every brigadier general in the U.S. Army, before he's fracked, in other words, before he gets his star, he has to attend the Center for Creative Leadership. And in all those places, I was introduced to the Myers-Briggs type indicator. That's how important the U.S. military thinks it is. And still, I, they still use it? Absolutely, absolutely, because it represents the four natural functions of an individual, and if you're preparing for a mission, you first want people, this forms a Z, but anyway, you first want people who are sensing, who can get all the facts, all the details, and then you want, then you want, then you want someone who's intuitive, who can figure out what the facts mean, and then you want someone who's a thinker to discern, figure out slice and dice, to figure out what to do about that meaning and those facts and exactly how you're going to go about your order of battle, and then you need someone who's a feeler, who has the feeling function, who can sort of warn you about the consequences of whatever you're proposing to do. So every military mission that is, let's say, field grade and above, so not company grade, but anything that involves a battalion or higher in the U.S. military has officers more than one who've been through the Myers-Briggs training more than once and who know that you have to have people of all those personality types in order to properly prepare your mission, and of course most military officers are sensing, thinking, and judging, and so 95% of all generals and admirals fill those criteria. It so happened that I am intuitive thinking and perceiving, and so I wasn't a classic Marine, but on the other hand, the top generals, the three-star and four-star generals, tend to be intuitive, not sensing, because they're the ones that are able to handle politics, and Marines always come to an officer and say, I'll do anything you tell me to do, sir, but just don't make me deal with the politics. Right, just give me a mission and I'll go out and kill that guy, but I'm not going to, you know, I don't want to know anything about the politics. Those are the generals are for politics. That's right, so you know the classic example would be Colin Powell, but you know General Kelly would be an example, and General, the recent Secretary of Defense would be an example of officers who are more intuitive and more thoughtful about how they proceed with what they're doing. So that's how you got to know you had an introduction to Jung, but obviously for you, you found something, you saw something there that engaged you quite a bit more deeply. Right, so then I, you know, read Women Who Run with the Wolves, and I had that eight-month long experience as a result of that, and then carrying on, then I had the experience with my daughter, and then subsequently I've had, and so you know, I have to tell you that after my experience with my daughter, I was really angry with religion for quite some time, because I realized that it was a manipulative technique, and I was angry that anyone would teach a child to say such a thing to their parent, and so I spent a good 10 years getting into Jung without going into Jung. Okay, in other words, I read a lot of things around Jung, but I had made an assumption, which is incorrect, that his main writing was about clinical psychology, in which I had no interest, but starting about 2005, I realized that the main thrust of his writing right from 1913 on was about religion, and it wasn't about, it wasn't about psychology per se. I mean, the Jungians created a psychology profession around his work, but that was not his doing, and he famously at one point said, I have no, I'm glad I'm not a Jungian, I'm glad I'm Jung, so I don't have to be a Jungian. Well, it's, you know, I think Luther would be horrified that there's a group of people that call themselves Lutherans. I think Calvin would be horrified that people call themselves Calvinists, so this is a long line of folks. Now, you just on one point said, talked about, you know, your attitudes towards religion because of the experience with your daughter, and then you just said that Jung was about religion. Now, what do you mean when you use the word religion in both of those senses? Well, I think I was thinking in terms of Christianity at the time. I wasn't really thinking of it very broadly, although my wife, and let me tell, just full disclosure here, my wife is a fully trained Tibetan Buddhist lama. However, she's not ordained. She's not Tibetan. She's Caucasian American, but she, since 1994, she wrote to me once and said that she was, she'd read a book called the Tibetan Book of Living and Dying, and it was the one book, if she was caught on a desert island, it's the one book she would want. And since then, she's been totally into Buddhism and to the point of doing everything up to ordination, and she's one of the leading teachers in the Washington area. And also, she's trained to be a companion for the dying, and she works at a hospice, and so she volunteers at the same hospice to sit with people who are dying. And so there's a joke in Japan that people are shinto when they get married, but they're Buddhist when they're dying. And so anyway. So you've got religions around you. So right. And plus I was brought up in Japan, kind of, because I went to high school in Japan, and I lived one mile from the great Buddha of Kamakura. And so I had some fundamental experiences around that. Let me just point this out to you so that you get the flavor of it here. Okay, so I lived, oops, where is it? I don't know what I was sharing there. Just a minute. Okay, so I lived one mile from this statue, which was built in 1295. I lived one mile from this statue for three years, and I've gone back to it periodically ever since. And then there was, there's another one, which I'll share with you. This is an image called Ofuna Kanon, and this is the goddess of mercy in Chinese custom. It's called Kuan Yin. And the statue was built, completed about two months before I arrived in Japan. And it's, Kuan Yin is the goddess who went into the underworld and redeemed the souls of the World War II dead for the Japanese. And when I was going to high school in Japan, every day I rode on a train, the Yokosuka line of the national railway, that went right by this. This is actually right next to the Ofuna train station in Japan. And so I would see this statue every day, and you know, sometimes I would sometimes I would be upset about something that was going on in school, whatever it might have been. And so I found this statue quite soothing to me. You know, I wouldn't say I knew anything about it other than that during my growing up period, but I just found looking at that statue quite soothing. But anyway, but again, this idea that Jung speaks about religion, I mean, I'm just trying to figure out what you mean by that. Well, he, Edward Edinger, who was a leading Jungian analyst of the late 20th century, said that Dr. Jung found the source of all religions, and he pointed to that. And so then he worked mostly with Christianity, but he had written a lot of material on other religions, including he wrote introductions to the Tibetan Book of the Dead, and to Suzuki's book on Zen, and you know, a number of other religions. And so anyway, he was up to his armpits in religion. Okay. And so he obviously created a big furor when in 1956, he was interviewed by the BBC, and he was asked, Do you believe in God? And he said, Well, very complicated, but I have no need to believe I know. And when he said that, the first time I saw that video, and he said that I had an epiphany, because I too know. And, and so then I had to spend 10 years figuring out what it was I know. So now I think I do know. I think I'm conscious of what I know. But can explain that a little bit for us? Well, because it's obviously a bit I mean, you can find it on YouTube. And it's I think when I listen to a lot of different people here, you know, okay, does that hear it? And then I'll ask them, okay, what do you what do you think that means? What's the difference between believing and knowing? Well, the difference is that believing is and this goes to the issue of the conscious and the unconscious, the profane and the sacred. And it but belief is what a lawyer achieves when he's making his oral argument to a jury. And so a lawyer can convince a jury of something, whatever it is, and that's all very logical. And so as an attorney, I'm well trained in the logic of convincing people of something. But knowing is is something else. Knowing is sacred knowing is on the opposite side of the coin, not in the logos side of the coin, but the arrow side of the coin. And so it's not a question of somebody convincing me. Okay, there was no pastor that convinced me. I mean, I asked my Calvinist, my, my reformed pastor 40 years ago, what how he would define God, or, you know, what he would could tell me about God. And he gave me a totally lame answer, which just basically turned me off at that time. And it didn't turn me away from religion per se, but it was clear to me that he didn't get it. That he didn't know, okay, that he that and, you know, so there's, there's a question of whether you, you know, as a pastor, I'm sure you're probably aware that some pastors, you know, learn the lessons and, and in Divinity School, and our cookie cutter pastors, they know what to say on a given day. So on Easter Sunday, you give this lesson and say these things and, and you've accomplished your task. And at Christmas, you do this and at Pentecost, you do this and blah, blah, blah. And I'm sure as in law school, you know, you learn your lessons and, and you can go out and you can get some people to believe, okay, no question about it. And so Dr. Young's point was that he was not doing his work for people who had the, what he called the charisma of belief. Because if people believe, then they believe, that's fine. There's nothing wrong with that. But his, his research and work for 45 years was basically to, to help those who had lost connection. And, you know, it's my analysis that the problem with the Christian Church is that largely the connection has been lost between the sacred and, and the, what's taught. And... So what is the sacred? Well, the sacred is the opposite of the profane. Okay. And so there are a few different ways we can refer to it. And this is, this is where Jordan Peterson comes in, because, you know, Jordan Peterson wants order. And so he wrote a book that's all logos, and it's intended to be a ball work against the chaos, but the chaos is where the sacred is. And so it's, we can say it's conscious or unconscious, it's logos or arrows. And so you shouldn't get me wrong. Okay, we need logos, 100%. Okay, everything that you see in this image, both your side and my side, is the result of logos, because you can't engineer something and build something or make something without having gone through a very logical, rational process. That's what logos is. And that's largely the way religion is taught these days. But, but God doesn't live there. And also, we also need the arrows, because, again, everything that you see in the image in front of you had its origin in imagination. And in, well, in imagination and fantasy. And so even you and I were once twinkles in our father's eyes. And so without someone imagining every single item that you see in this picture, none of these items would be here. So we need both sides of the equation. And unfortunately, I mean, what I saw in the discussion between Bishop Barron and Jordan Peterson was that they were both completely besotted on the logos side. And God doesn't live there. Okay, God lives in the chaos. And when you know, I'm a businessman, I'm not a theologian, and I'm not a psychologist, I'm a businessman. So I listened to Bishop Barron, and he says, Well, I'm the chairman of a group of Roman Catholic bishops or committee of Roman Catholic bishops whose job it is to bring people back into the Catholic Church. And we're losing six for every one we bring in. And I just, you know, I'm not going in. And I look at that from a businessman's point of view. And I said, man, if you were working for me, you'd be fired. You know, my sales manager, you can't sell it. Okay. And, and, and so and so the problem for Jordan Peterson seems to be that he, you know, you, any number of times have referred to Jordan as a as a union, but he's not a union because he hasn't understood Jung. And, and he explicitly says in one of his presentations about Jung that, that Ion, which is one of Jung's most profound books, terrifies him. And the reason is because it's not talking about the rational world, it's talking about the irrational. And that's the fundamental aspect of Jung going all the way back. And, you know, you were talking about John Verbecky, and John Verbecky says, you can't talk about Jung if you don't understand Kant. Well, then the thing that you have to understand about Kant and Jung is that from their point of view, you don't get anything from a psychological perspective without experience. Okay. And so if you have an experience, a religious experience, an experience of God, as I have described earlier, then, then you're going to get it. But if you don't, you won't. And so what's an example of that? Well, okay. How many books will it take you to convince a two-year-old that the stove is hot? And, you know, will they get it? And they won't. Okay, there's no way that you can convince a two-year-old what hot means until they touch the stove, then they've had the experience, and then they know what hot means. And it's exactly like that. I mean, at the end of the movie Contact, and Jodie Foster's act asked by the congressman, Do you love your mother? Or no, she's asked by the male lead in that movie. She's asked, Do you love your mother? And she says, Of course I do. And he says, Prove it. Okay. And, and so that's the point with logos, you can't prove things like that. Okay, because those are all on the other side of the coin. And all religion is there, because all religion has in its origins, numinous experience. Okay, and so all Abrahamic religions to include Christianity, Judaism, and Islam, point back to Abraham and to the the saving in Christianity and Judaism, you would say, Isaac, well, this past week, I had a Muslim young woman staying with me, and she came out of her out of the bedroom Sunday morning, and she said, It's Eid. And, and happy like a kid would say it at Christmas time, it's Christmas, right. And so she goes in the bathroom, I said, Geez, I better figure out what he does. Abhas about it turns. Right. And it turns out that he does about saving Abraham's son, except the son that's saved in Islam is Ishmael. It's not Isaac. And if you think about it, Ishmael was the first son of Abraham. And so they might be right. Except so I'm not going to get in the middle of that one. But, but my Jewish friend who is a former president of the World Union of Progressive Jews, and a classmate of mine has written a book called Finding Ourselves in Biblical Narratives. Or it's called What's in it for me finding ourselves in biblical narratives, what I which I put online. And I can give you the link to that. But anyway, his point about that story is that that marked the end of human sacrifice in the Western world in in those religions. Okay, apparently, you know, human beings got the wild idea that they should sacrifice their children to propitiate God. And it went on in horrific form for millennia until that event until Abraham's luminous event of having a vision that he could sacrifice his sacrifice the goat that was on the hill instead of his son. And that was the end of human sacrifice. And and so that was obviously a very traumatic effect event for Abraham and engendered that vision. And that vision in turn ended human sacrifice in the Western world. Now, can we talk a little bit about logos and Eros a little bit I want to kind of come back to that because that's a really important distinction and differentiation for you now Eros obviously for Eros is one of the Greek words for love. And it's there's there's actually quite a bit of interesting discussion around that word. And so I wanted to get a sense and you know, by by setting it in contrast to logos the way you did. I think I have an idea of where you're where you're going. And I understand what you say, you know, when we look, you know, through these little cameras at each other's rooms, everything in our room is a product of logos, intentionality, reason, you know, logical application, all of that, everything is also a consequence of Eros. And what I think you mean by Eros is desire. You know, they're wanting that's what you're projecting on. Okay, so I'd like to know. Right. Because, yes, because we take the word erotic from Eros. And sexual desire, but but yeah, but what you mean, that's probably what the, you know, it's something like what the Greeks were talking about. I have no idea. But the same dichotomy and and mind you, it's not right to keep putting things in one bucket or the other and saying there's a duality between these two buckets, and I'm just going to pile things up on one side or the other and do that. So so the dualities which are basically equivalent, but maybe in other dimensions, okay, so one is in a religious dimension, and one's in a psychological debate dimension. So one is the profane and the sacred, and then order and chaos, and logos and arrows, and conscious and unconscious, all those dualities are basically the same duality. And so it's, you know, it's dangerous in the in puritanical USA to mention anything that has anything to do with arrows, because the the puritan screen of the American psyche goes wild and thinks you're talking about prostitution or something like that. But the reality is that in the sacred is where God lives, okay, in the chaos is where God lives, and religions are ways of dealing with the chaos of the universe. That's what they are, as a way of explaining the chaos and interacting with it and dipping into it. And and basically that's what Dr. Young taught for 45 years. I mean, obviously, God is ineffable, omnipresent, omnipotent, and omniscient. Which are seminary attributes taught in divinity school. Right, but as soon as as soon as everything that we say is logos, okay, everything that's been in this discussion up till now, every word that ever comes out of your mouth is logos. But logos can only point at the sacred, okay, and point at what the right answers are. It cannot be it. And so that's why you cannot teach a child what a hot stove is without having them experience it. Well, you can't teach anything about God without having an experience of it, or you shouldn't. Dr. Young said only the wounded doctor can heal, while only the experienced theologian can theologize, I would think. Now it's interesting, and this is sort of where I don't know if you watched the whole Vervecki video where he talked about that. Because in some ways that boundary when only the wounded doctor can heal, only the theologian who has experienced the ineffable can theologize. I mean, there's some of that Kantian, there's some of that Kantian border in there because what Kant was dealing with is obviously the thing in itself versus this thing that is above. What's interesting about that border is that at some point when you make the distinction between only the wounded doctor can heal, somewhere in that doctor then, because the doctor is wounded, the doctor now has a new capacity to communicate, to transmit, and then the question would be to transmit through what? To transmit through logos? And so that's an interesting question to me. I mean the question is how do you produce a numinous experience so that people understand what you're talking about? Edward Edinger wrote this book, let me show it to you, The Bible and the Psyche Individuation Symbolism in the Old Testament by Edward Edinger. Now what this book does is it takes the process that Dr. Jung spoke of throughout his career, which is individuation, and let me describe individuation for you in this way. An oak tree when an acorn is planted in the ground, as soon as it sprouts in any way, it already contains everything it needs to become that oak tree, that specific oak tree. And every oak tree meets all these classifications, but every oak tree is different. Human beings are like that. We're all human beings, but every one of us is different. And the process of individuation is the process of understanding what we are intended to be. And so one of the things that Dr. Jung talked about was the fact that when you think of things as one after another, okay that's pretty easy for everybody, we all understand time as a continuum, but in Dr. Jung's point is that in the chaos, everything is time is kind of irrelevant. And so what this what the Old Testament does is it provides stories for the individuation process, and this is what you're doing when you're narrating an Old Testament story, is you're conveying an experience that we all have. Okay, every human being has these stories, but the point is they're all being experienced every day, all day long, in every human being in the world. And the Old Testament and the New Testament, but since this book is about the Old Testament, this one's about the New Testament. The point is that if you sell the Old Testament as this is about the ancients, and you start to tell me a story about what happened to them 2500 years ago, I go to sleep. Okay, I just can't stay awake in a sermon that's like that. But if you tell me that same story, but tell me how it relates to me today, then it connects. Okay, and the point is that these are not old stories. Okay, these are stories that are numinous, that are proven over thousands of years, and have been refined over thousands of years, and have been taught over thousands of years, and they're still true. And that's why the Bible is still a living document. But if you sell the document as it's just the word, and this is what we believe, you know, no, that's not what is happening anymore. The 20th century is proof of that. And Frederick Nietzsche was right when he said God is dead, because God taught in that way was killed by the scientific method, because the stories of the Bible, as presented, if they're presented as literal truth, that's why you have so many atheists and agnostics today, because they say, well, why should I believe that? Because, you know, we have this scientific thing that says this isn't right. And so it's not about that. It's about the fact that these narratives are right, they're true, and they're true right now for every single human being on the planet. And the reason they're taught is because of that. And this isn't science, this is religion, this is a way of presenting things that are chaotic, that are sacred, that are chaotic in such a way that we can interact with them. You know, and so when I listened to Bishop Barron a couple weeks back, I said, oh my God, I have to go back and look at John 1-1, because I wanted to understand, well, you know, if if in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and there was, and so on, then hasn't anything happened since the beginning? Okay, I asked that question. But then I opened my book, and lo and behold, John 1-14 isn't about that at all. It's about the light and the life. And so this is just a black doorstop, unless you put life into it. I'm sure you put life into it every week in your sermon, but you have to connect, there has to be a connection between the person and the pew and God. Now we've gone on for a little while, and I've got a limited amount of time, so I do want to hit a little bit more about Jordan, and then I'm sure in subsequent conversations we'll pick it up. So, you know, Jordan Peterson is, I've talked to a number of people who know way more about Carl Jung than I do, and for many people, they were very excited to see the rise of interest in Jordan Peterson and his work, partly because he, Peterson talks about Jung regularly. Jung is one of the most quoted people by Jordan Peterson, and those of us who have listened to a good number of his material could probably rattle off some of the favorite Jung quotes and illustrations that he likes to bring forward. And I mean, the takeaway quote, if I were taking soundbites out of video, one would be, Jordan Peterson is not a Jungian, because it's like, wow! And anybody who goes to your channel can see, I mean, you, people say to me, I put out a lot of video, and I would say, if you think I put out a lot of video, you should look at this guy. This guy puts out a lot of video. I've been doing my best. Well, so I, and you know, I probably, on a subsequent talk, I'd probably want to get into a little bit more, because we talked a little bit about your vision and your mission, why you put out so much stuff. But I'd like at least maybe a teaser for a next conversation. So Jordan Peterson kind of exploded on the scene, and you and I, I mean, in many ways, I didn't have anything of a video channel, but took off. And for both of us, probably, we gained a fair number of listeners because of Jordan Peterson, and because of renewed interest in Jung. And so, you know, we've got, I should probably wrap this up in about 15 minutes or so, but what's your, you know, what's your hot take on this with Peterson? So when you first saw Peterson on, were you excited? And then, because you've had some, you know, I've had some- Let's put it this way. I've learned a hell of a lot from Jordan Peterson, no doubt. Okay, I never took a psychology course. Okay, I've never taken a psychology course. My only exposure to psychology has been Jung. And so when I read red maps of meaning, I've learned a lot, and so on. But then when I read 12 Rules of Life, I had to say, no, you know, because you can't live by rules. And because, you know, a professor can give you all the rules and everything in a textbook up to the day you graduate. But oh, by the way, then you have to go out and live your life. And there, and that's chaos. And so, you can't think that you can live your life based on rules, because, you know, they can point you in the right direction. Theologians can point you in the right direction on Sunday morning. But in the end, we have to live our lives. And so then, then you have to understand something about living. And so the fundamental thing that Jordan has missed, I don't know how consciously he's talking about this, but I mean, he explicitly said on one of those videos about Jung, he says, well, the way to talk about Jung is to talk about this other thing. No, he didn't talk about Jung. And what he said was in that same lecture that Ayaan terrifies why does it terrify him? Because he wants a bulwark against chaos, which means he wants a bulwark against the sacred. And Dr. Jung was not about logos, not one bit, not for a minute. And so I happen to have my copy of the Reader's Edition of the Red Book here. And so this was Jung writing in 1914 or so. And I just want to read the first two paragraphs. So this was 46 years before the end of his career. And his whole career was about this first two paragraphs. So it'll help you get an appreciation because it's what Jordan has gotten. Okay, so he says, If I speak to you in the spirit of this time, I must say no one and nothing can justify what I must proclaim to you. Justification is superfluous to me, since I have no choice, but I must. I have learned that in addition to the spirit of this time, there's still another spirit at work. I think you've referred to this other spirit as the spirit of finesse in the last couple of days, but there's another spirit at work, namely that which rules the depths of everything contemporary. The spirit of this time would like to hear of use and value. I also thought this way, and my humanity still thinks this way. But that other spirit forces me nevertheless to speak beyond justification, use and meaning. Filled with human pride and blinded by the presumptuous spirit of the time, I long sought to hold that other spirit away from me. But I did not consider the spirit of the depths from time immemorial and for all the future possesses a greater power than the spirit of this time, who changes with the generations. The spirit of the depths has subjugated all pride and arrogance to the power of judgment. He took away my belief in science. He robbed me of the joy of explaining and ordering things, and he let devotion to the ideals of this time die out in me. He forced me down to the last and simplest things. The spirit of the depths took my understanding and all my knowledge and placed them at the service of the inexplicable and the paradoxical. He robbed me of speech and writing for everything that was not in his service, namely the melting together of sense and nonsense, which produces the supreme meaning. That's 1914, which is obviously a very interesting year. Right, and he was going through a traumatic experience of his own at this time, at the time that he wrote the Red Book. He had been steeped in Nietzsche, but steeped also in Calvinist religion because his father was a reformed pastor. So we're six or seven of his uncles. He was up to his armpits. They come that way often. And so Nietzsche proclaimed that God is dead and thus spoke the stutra. Jung comes along in the next generation. He finds the living God, where he lives, and how he goes about doing the business of the Godhead. That's the fundamental story of Jung. Jordan Peterson said he's terrified of what he found, but what he found is the sacred, the chaos, the unconscious, and what you teach every Sunday, actually. Simple as that. So it's interesting. So you read maps of meaning, but then 12 Rules for Life for You was really a departure from Jung because he has distilled these rules. It's an antidote to chaos. That's the subtitle of the book. And he is trying to give these rules to young people, young men in many ways. Let me clarify something. I think Jordan Peterson represents a father figure. For at least half of the male population of the world right now, who have been brought up in homes with no father figure. And so I agree with Jordan 98.5% of the time, probably 99.5% of the time. Where I get off is where he starts to name drop on Jung. And it's fine that he comes up with a few Jungian concepts, which are true enough as far as they go. But the fact that he's not willing to go over into Ion and to understand what Jung's work was about is a mistake. And and it's very simply it's a mistake. And and it you can see it in his video about whether he believes in God. He's so pained. He's in such angst about that, because from a Logos point of view, he cannot, he cannot say he believes in God. And, you know, on from a Jungian point of view, I can say I don't have to believe, I know, you know, there's nothing that you can say on on Sunday morning that will convince me anything more than my personal religious experiences. Let me just give you an example. I mean, these things come up as synchronicities. But about two weeks ago, I had done an interview with Murray Stein, who wrote a book called Jung's Map of the Soul, an introduction. And during that interview, Murray Stein said that he had talked to a grandson of Jung. And he said that that Jung always carried a Bible in his pocket. And whenever he had a free moment, he could be seen reading his pocket Bible. I've never thought about having that was Sunday. 10 days ago. All right. And so on Monday, I was doing my regular evening, Monday evening, live stream. And five minutes before that, I've never thought about having a pocket Bible never occurred to me. I mean, I heard Mary say that on Sunday, Monday evening at at 750. My Muslim houseguest walks into the room hands me this and and says, well, actually, she handed me two. She handed me two. She says, I want you to have these. He had been to a county fair. The Gideons were there. And the Gideons were there. And they gave her a Bible. And she said, I want you to have this. Okay. And so for me, that's a religious experience. That's a synchronicity that definitely points to the sacred. Okay. Because Murray Stein mentions Jung and the Bible and a pocket Bible. And the next day I have one in my hand from a Muslim. Okay. That's fun. That's why I have no need to believe. Okay. And it's also why I wore my purple shirt today. Well, we've got just a few more minutes and I've I've you've been really gracious in that I've been sort of driving with my questions and you've been answering my questions and I appreciate that. Any any last things in the next seven, eight minutes you'd like to ask me or we'd like to wrap up with? I mean, I are going to talk more obviously as months as months go. But I really appreciate you. And I mean, you and I have exchanged emails back and forth and messages and such. And you've always been extremely gracious. And I've had questions sometimes about Jung and you've sent me many materials and I've really appreciated your willingness to share with me a lot of what you've gained over the over the years. Well, so Paul, I'm extremely pleased to find you. Okay. And to see how you had been drawn to Jordan Peterson's Old Testament lectures, his 13 lectures. And it shows that you understand that there's something missing. There's something needed in the way religion is presented in the world. And there's no doubt in my mind that that's true in both the Protestant and the Catholic denominations. And there and I see I do see an evolution in the way you interact with these things. Okay. And I see it, you know, even though you rarely mention me occasionally you do, but and I'm not asking you to but I but even though you rarely mention me, I do see an evolution in your perspective. And and so I hope that continues. And I know that that's necessary if religions are going to mean what they should mean going forward. And of course, the burning question for Christianity is is Christianity pass a or is Judaism pass a and what I would say is, and as proven by these books, okay, this is the other one Christian archetype, Union commentary on the life of Christ. What they prove is that they're incredibly now. Okay. These narratives are not stories about people 2500 years ago or 3500 years ago in the case of Abraham. But these are stories about us now, we have to understand them. And it needs to be sold in that way. It's not about, you know, I'm going to now tell you a story that's 2000 years old. Okay, that's not it. Okay, it's a story about now. And we all have these experiences. And these experiences have been refined over 1000s of years. The reason the Bible is the most widespread book in the world is because it contains the truth of the human condition. And it contains it just as much now as it did in 325 AD, or in whatever, when the book of Job was written, or whatever. And they need to be understood in that way. Okay. And from a religious point of view, I hope you'll think about it in that way. I certainly do. I would phrase it more that the book isn't merely stories about people in the past. And I think that's I mean, as a preacher, preachers are always stop, John stop made the point in his book on preaching, preachers are always working between two worlds. And so someone, you know, I in fact have the experience of people sleeping through my sermon sometimes. Well, and in fact, if you know, I will sometimes put earbuds in and fall asleep and other people's sermons. So that's I don't, I don't get offended when people sleep in mine sometimes. But you know, when someone wanders into my church and sits down in a seat, very much what I want to do is help them see that the things in this book are in fact, talking to them about their life. And it's in that middle space where we try to connect it. Well, that's the challenge. And that's in many ways, you know, when the magic happens that I've told the story quite often that often when someone will, after a worship service, they'll come and they'll shake my hand and they'll say, Pastor, your sermon really spoke to me. And if I get a chance to say, Okay, well, what, what, what, what did you hear that spoke to you? And often they'll say something I didn't say. And so it's like, Okay, well, you know, something I said prompted something and it was helpful for them. And so I, I preachers are, are just one small part of a much bigger picture. And I'm, I'm happy to be a small thing. Well, I think I think you're potentially a big thing, because I think that you're potentially the one of the few people that can understand the value of what you heard from Jordan Peterson. Okay, I don't want to, I don't want to detract from the brilliance of his Old Testament lectures. They're brilliant. There's no doubt about that. And he's a brilliant man. There's no doubt about that. And, and, but the issue really is this issue of two sides of a coin logos versus arrows, and sacred versus profane, the sacred being all those things that we can't put our hand fingers on. And, and, but you can't live without, but you can't live without right because you because as Jung demonstrated, we, we have to have a religious function going in our body. And, and he said clearly that, that you, you, he never, he never, he never achieved a cure of anyone who was having a mental health issue if they didn't find a religious attitude toward life. And in the latter after age 35, and, and one can know, Dr. Ender gave a lecture called encounters with a greater personality, which is one name for the God image or the self in variously used in Jungian psychology. But in his talk on encounters with a greater personality, he, he said that the one can know when something falls on him, that he would, or Jung said, the experience that one has to have so that they know instead of believe it is similar to the enunciation. That's how he would describe it. And I can definitely tell you that my experiences are in that order of magnitude. And, and so, you know, from my point of view, I know I don't have to believe that that's the way it is. Thank you. Thank you so much, Skip, for your time. I know you're, you're very busy with your channel and with the other things that you do. And, and I really appreciate you being, you've been very generous with your time with me, not just now, but in other conversations, you know, the emails and messages, and you've shared so much material with me. And I really appreciate your spirit of generosity and how helpful you've been. And I hope to continue to be a help. Okay. Well, thank you, Skip. It was good talking to you and we'll schedule another talk. Shall we go ahead and publish this interview? Sure. That's fine. You can go ahead and publish it today. It'll probably come out a little bit later this week for me. Okay. Well, terrific. All right, Skip. Take care now. Bye-bye.