https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ryf6eE2mPn4

 All right, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. What's up, Paul? How you been, homeboy? What's been really going on up in this? OK, this is episode? 54. Nice. 55? 55. Yeah, 55. Yeah, we've been doing this for two years, brother. Give me some of that ABM juice. We got special guest. Special guest today. ABM juice, OK. Special guest today, we got Charles Jones. Oh, good. Hello, brother. Charles has been on the show before. He's in the Middle East. All right, so what are we going to talk about today? Let's talk about Superman, like he said. Talk about Superman? OK, this guy during the sermon, you shouldn't see the expression on his face. I had my laugh, man. I almost started laughing during the sermon. That wouldn't have been good. But you made me laugh when you talked to me about, when we went to Golden Corral and we had fun, and you asked if I'd back you because somebody met with you. I said, of course, because I got him. Because it's all like popcorn. And it's all good, you know? Anyway, go ahead and talk a little bit. Go ahead and talk a little bit. OK, you can talk to me. I know how to talk. OK, nice. So how have you been, Charles? Me, just fine. Just doing a lot of work. OK. And of course, behind the scenes, still trying to set up the Charles Jones channel on Facebook and rapping, yeah, rap chat. Oh, I'm on rap chat. Yeah, we were for rap chat. The rap battle. Look it up on rap chat. Rap chat. Yeah. You're both on it. What is rap chat? I don't know what that is. It plays a little rap. Oh, OK. It plays a beat. And you can do a rap to it. Play it back. I'll have to play it to you sometimes. Is it then online? So you just look up your raps. I'd follow you there. Find your account. Find your account. OK. Rap chat, CharlesJ48. Rap battles, I think it's CharlesJ48 or CharlesJ16. CharlesJ16? OK. Yeah, I'm rap battle. And thank you, Paul. And Star Maker. Tell me that we can audition here so we can bring our. You can practice. Yeah. We'll practice. You have to audition. I get to audition to be me. Thank you. We practice here on the stage. And we play the music back there. And can we turn the mic on? Yeah, you can use the mic. When we're here on one day? That'd be fine. OK. But we can't have no visitors because we've got to be private because this is my homeboy. We can't do that. Oh, practice is for. OK. Practice is practice. I got something to tell you very funny. You're going to be weak. This guy was in the market one time. And this thing got mad. He got mad because when she said, you don't want to be. Kiss Bob. Yeah. Blank. Yeah. B? Yeah. B. And you're in the live broadcast. Freddie, you're telling stories in front of our 200 viewers. I know, but that's what makes it funny. Oh, and by the way, we've got viewers. Because we met you last week. Yeah. So I'm watching from Alaska. Oh, nice. Germany. Whoa. So all over the world watching Freddie and Tasha. Keep commenting. Keep commenting. OK. I'm going to do. OK. Well, can you do a quick? OK, let's talk a little bit. So what do we got going on, CJ? I mean, how are you going to get this thing rolling with the music connection, man? How are we going to make money and be boss ballers at Sac-Cow 916 till you drop home, boy? Oh, Mike Hogan. Hogan. Anyway. OK. So what's going on, man? How you been? Well, I'm just fine. What did you think of the sermon? You been feeling good? Why don't we talk about the sermon, Fred? Yeah, go ahead, CJ. Talk about the sermon, if you remember. Oh, I know. You want me to talk about the sermon? The sermon was a good sermon. Since I get to talk to everyone from him to me all of a sudden. OK. That's right. That's right. Oh, I got another one. I got another one. The sermon was good because it said, you didn't understand why God said you've got to be like this. And he was a certain way. And I understand that God died for our sins so he could basically make all the creation and all his own ideas. And because he's Jesus. He is risen from the dead and he is the Lord. You know? From our sins. Yeah. And God is good all the time. And we're bad all the time. No, we're not. No, we're not. Do we have to forgive anything? We're sinners though. No, but we're Jesus' child. Yeah, but we sin still. So we're not perfect either, right? Aren't you being chicken McNugget? OK, Fred. All right, Fred. I'm going to do my song. All right. You can do your song. We're at four minutes. OK, I got two minutes. I know he rescued my soul. His blood has covered my sin. I believe. I believe my shame has taken away. My pain is healed in his name. I believe. I believe. All praise to banner. Cup of Lord has ordered a game. My Redeemer lives. Come on, Doug. My Redeemer lives. My Redeemer lives. My Redeemer lives. You live, my burdens arise. With you, I'm dancing on the mountain top. To see your kingdom come. You left your burdens. You brought them all away. I love you, Jesus Christ, because the 916 don't play. One, two, three. Don't you know it's me? I got my boy CJ down with me. Pastor Paul, he's good to go. He's the best man in the 916. Really, though? Good to go without a word to say. Look out for Niner, because she came to play. Like one, two, three. Look at Philip. He's got his giant shirt on, and he's a good man in command. What's up, Gordon? In a place to be. And then she's walking down in a consistent reed. Love your mama. You're on top. You're the best mom, and you don't even stop. You got to get it going on just like that. You got your black hat on, and that's a fact. Nice. All right. I think that's a good way to end the show. Remix. Remix. All right. We got to remix the re-person. Put more of this beyond so I can watch it today. Number 55. I'll see if I can get it out. If I don't get it up today, it'll be up tomorrow. All right. Give me some of that. And that's how we do it in Up to Jet. Now, I always get this wrong. Do I go the left hand or the right hand? I'm the dyslexic one. I don't know which way it goes. Oh, because the L goes like that. I always get it wrong. Oh, no, no. Is it this way, mom? The right? Love. Yes. The right? Right. Right. Right. OK, OK. Let's do this, CJ. It's been a blessing to see you. Thanks for everything you've done for me. You're the man, man. You got it going on. Trying. And Paul, don't forget Paul, my number one pastor. Anyways, that was a good show. Here we go. Ready? We got to do the one love. No, I'm not. No, don't. I'm just kidding. No, I'm just kidding. You're busy like mommy. I'm just kidding. Hands up. One love. Amen. Number 55. Ain't no jive.