https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=h7i-1LjZzyU

 Hey what's up Freddie? Glad to see you. You know we've been missing the Freddie and Paul show for these weeks while Paul's gone so I figured I'm here at Living Stones. I ran into you and I thought man I want to hear what's going on with Freddie. I want to hear about some sports, some music and maybe if you're ready I don't know if you have one prepared maybe you could give us a little bit of a verse for us. Put it out there and see we'll see what you got today. So first off I saw you were wearing the New Orleans but you said that's just a sweatshirt that's not your team. Tell me about your Kings. Oh you do like them? Okay. Was that guy Zion Williams? Oh Zion Williams? Zion Williams, he was good. And he was in college, didn't he go to Kentucky? No he went to Duke. Yeah he's a Dukie. Haha dude. He's a Dukie. Anyways so what do you like to talk about? You know you're here, you like to, let's see, baseball, the HB angels. So when I was my kid's age I was a baseball fan but I grew up to a man's sport called basketball. Yep, sure. Mark knows that. Oh yeah for sure. He played on River. He's a basketball player himself. So tell me what's going on with the Kings, what do you think will happen this off season? I'm not sure, we'll probably get a few prospects. Yeah. He was Christian. What was he called again? Rippin Christian. He went to the finals. Yeah, state champs. Look at that. Yeah so uh, let's see what? How about what's going on in the news these days, are you hearing anything interesting? The news I don't pay attention to. I like decent in order. Has anybody put out some albums recently? Tell me about the albums you have. Nelly is going to be coming out with a new one. He's from the Lou and he's proud right? Yeah. And so is uh, what's that one got his name? Oh, Jay-Z will be coming out with something new. And I like Tee Grizzly. Of course Snoop Dogg always comes out with something. Ice Cube comes out with something. And Tee Grizzly like I said. Oh and there's this one lady named Tweety Bird. I don't know if you've heard of her. She's from Sacramento, Hamadus. Tweety Bird like the character? Yeah, but that's her name. That's her rap name. And then my friend. Okay Jonah. Jonah wanted to ask you something. Yeah. Yeah. His question was trying to get out like this. He's super cold so. They work out the whole work out. And the after. And so it's just not as hard to get out. Well I fished into him this morning. I just like them. Okay. Oh man. Well Jonah's in there with our little news corner about terrible news. Thanks Jonah. I wanted to ask you. I went into the music studio. It was called Unique Music Studio. Yep. And they had beats right? But I'm wondering how is. If there's like beats on here too. So what we're looking for. Like I told you. I don't really know much about music and production. But what we need are. All those folks out here. Fans of the Freddie and Paul Show. And Freddie needs those beats. Where can he find free beats. How can we get him some free beats so he can rap to them. So I do want to take us. I talked to Paul. I talked to Paul James. And he said the same thing. I want to talk to him. But my friend thinks he can't do that. He thinks they have some copy. But his name is Charlie J. Anyways. Well the big beef between Paul and Charlie J. We'll have to sort out another day. But do you want to carry us out of this episode. This first stand in episode. Of James and Freddie. Well no it's the Freddie and Paul Show. You know when the night show host. Did a guest host to come in. I'm just guest co-hosting Freddie today. So we can make the show. Yep. Alright so let's take us out. Are you ready for this? Alright so I'm going to step aside. Jonah will come with me. I'm Freddie and he's going to take us out. And then you can do the one love by yourself. Alright? Alright. Roll the tape. We're at the Christian show. Everybody knows. I got the time, the rhymes. Don't you know. We're going down to where to say coming up we pray. To God this is true. Paying attention is what you must do. Because we're here with the Christian people. Rocking on the mic like all we are people. Coming up like this. Coming up like that. Enough jitter chat. My stuff is fat.