https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Pix033CSIIg

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm continuing my series of comments on Jordan Peterson's Easter video. The video I released at the early part of the week is Jordan Peterson and the history of the Christian God where I ran through kind of the development of God as he comes about in the Christian faith. Video I released yesterday Jordan Peterson, Sam Harris, Bart Ehrman, Dr. Drew, Brent Shapiro on human sacrifice where I talked about human sacrifice and how that plays out through the biblical story a bit and I promised to do a video on understanding the symbolism of sacrifice. Sometimes people ask me where I get my ideas. I get them from doing ministry and reading and like a lot of the ideas I have in this video I don't claim that they're unique to me. I find them in the Bible. I don't always find them in other places. So however you want to categorize that, there it is. But just after continuing to preach through the Bible, read through the Bible, do the normal work that I do as a pastor in terms of biblical interpretation, reading the stories, trying to piece it together, trying to connect it to our contemporary world, these are the best answers I have to date. And as I promised with all of these videos, these are thinking out loud for me to sit down and write. Well, maybe that'll come at some point, but I'm in many ways I'm still figuring things out, thinking out loud, trying to process and integrate everything I know when it comes to this. Now at our last meetup, Tyler gave me a gift. He gave me Krabs English Synonyms, which is a book I'd never heard of before. And I've been looking through it and enjoying it. And when I started to do this video, I thought, oh, I've got to look at this book and look for sacrifice and look at the synonyms of sacrifice and the etymology and the backstory. And this is quite an interesting book. Well, it didn't have an entry for sacrifice. So I looked up offering and found some things there, but a little disappointed. But I'll keep enjoying the book and keep working through it. So I want to talk about the symbolism of sacrifice, because sacrifice is obviously a very old and nearly ubiquitous universal aspect of human life through whether it's cultic or formal or metaphorical or symbolic or something that we just identify in each other. Sacrifice runs throughout human relationships. So maybe some definitions. An ancient cultic practice of killing, burning, destroying something of value to a god for a relational purpose. And often those relational purposes are different. It might be an overture asking for, you think of Agamemnon offering his daughter for favorable wins so he can go and attack Troy. Offerings are sometimes an overture. It's an introductory thing. Here's a gift. It might be a transaction. It might be, okay, if you offer me favorable wins, I will offer you my daughter. There might be a quid pro quo in there. And often vows have that nature. You think of Jacob's, Jacob wakes up from his dream of seeing the stairway to heaven God has promised him to make him a great nation, basically reiterates Abraham's promise. And Jacob stands up and says, I'll give you 10%. And it's kind of like he didn't ask for anything. So this is the nature of offerings. It might be an expression of thanksgiving. In the book of Genesis, Noah comes off the ark and the first thing he does is sacrifice animals and you want to say, hey, the whole point of the ark was to save these critters and now you're cutting them up and putting them on the altar. Well, we took seven of the cleans so maybe we have a few extra to spare. Don't sacrifice the animals you only have two of or there'll be a great extinction. So it might be an expression of thanks. It might be, again, to fulfill an obligation. So the sacrifice gets abstracted and you can see this in the Jordan Peterson treatment. Peterson runs through lots of different abstractions of it and he kind of runs through it, you know, here and there and here and there and here and there. He doesn't necessarily give an orderly or complete list of them, but they're abstracted in many ways of delaying gratification, of forgoing, denying or destroying something now in hopes of receiving something better or for a preferred later. We do this in life in all kinds of ways. We might scrimp and save to save up money to go somewhere later or saving for a college education or saving for retirement or, you know, this is all sacrifice. Something is, sometimes it's just accepting a lamentable loss. Something happens that you didn't intend to happen, but you see its connection to the future and you say that was a sacrifice. And so there's this element of sacrifice that, and I think Jordan Peterson gets this right in his section in that video where it's deeply connected with the future. And so again, you can go back and listen to Jordan Peterson's thing and his chapter on do what's, you know, do what's meaningful, not expedient. And so what Peterson does in a sense there is say that there's a deep meaning between sacrifice and what you're gaining. There's this old John McClain, is it John McClain? The more you pay, the more it's worth. And I remember listening to that song in college and thinking the more you pay, the more it's worth. Well, that's true. If you strive for something and then earn it, it has great value to you. Think of again, Jacob and Leah and Rachel. You think of the difference between inherited money or lottery money and money that you've made out of the sweat of your brow. The effort gives value to the money, not the other way around. Sacrifice has all of this connected to it. And so the experience of meaning and of course, meaning is pretty important in Peterson's thought and in Peterson's idea about psychology and how this all fits together. You know, this is all very tight, which is why in his chapter seven is do what's meaningful, not what's expedient. So expediency and meaning are in a sense opposites of one another. Now, this is universal. Ancient cultic practices were remarkably universal on this piece of sacrifice. And Dr. Drew talks about that in the Ben Shapiro interview. Carrying on in lots of ways in contemporary religion today. And this is kind of why the treatment that Sam Harris and Bart Ehrman get it. It seems, you know, as I think Dr. Drew very much saw, it's dismissive and naive. You know, it's kind of like saying, ah, my idiot mother who cleaned floors on her hands and knees, scrubbing her, you know, wiping her fingers to the bone. What a dupe. That's not a sacrifice. You know, I got FAFSA to pay for me. It's the stories behind these theologies are ancient and they're deep and they're rooted. Now, we might look at them and say, oh, this is just God beating up his son to forgive other people. You don't have to, you know, it's like if I, you know, had to kick the dog in order to forgive my son. Well, actually, if you sit down with a psychologist, you might say, what does it mean to kick the dog to forgive your son? I just did my rough draft for Sunday video where I talk about Joram in a sense, kicking the dog, wanting to kill Elisha because God hasn't rescued his city in time. And so this dismissive nature isn't, and I think this is part of the reason psychologists like Jordan Peterson and Dr. Drew, what's his last name? Pinsky? I don't remember. Dr. Drew, they're not as quick to jump on the bandwagon and be so dismissive of this. There's something deeply tied to just about everything and how we work society with this. Even in secularized societies, we preserve the concept and find it usefully, its usefulness ubiquitous. I guess that's my favorite word for this video. Maybe I should look up ubiquitous in Tyler's book, but not right now. You have the Hebrew origin story in Genesis. Genesis 1 through 3 is remarkably devoid, however, of cultic sacrifice and even implicit sacrificial transaction. You can compare this, let's say, to the competing origin myths in some of the surrounding communities around the Hebrews. You know, Marduk in a sense sacrifices the body of his mother, Tiamat, in order to construct the world. Sacrifice and violence and killing were common parts of creation myths in various cultures, but they're completely absent in the stories in the Bible. You know, we don't even see a thank offering for the remarkable generosity shown by the creator God, such as the creation of the woman. We get a song, but there's no sacrifice. We don't have Adam reaching back and grabbing a ram and say, Oh Lord, thank you for this woman here. I sacrifice this ram. Nothing. There's no altar at all in Genesis 1 through 3. And it was a few years ago, I'm working through, when I was in terms of my Sunday morning sermons, I was working through Leviticus, that it dawned on me. I said, you know, where is the first altar in the Bible? And well, it's in Genesis 4. And then I began to think about that there's something really strange about this, because again, if you look at some of my earlier videos where I go through John Walton and some of his things, John Walton does a good job in both his popular books and his more scholarly books about showing that Genesis 1 is a temple text. Well, ancient temples always, or almost always, had altars. Sacrifice was just part and parcel of relating to the gods. Altars were the ubiquitous technology of meaningful relational communication with the gods and the conveyance of transactionality. There's a bunch of words for you, but there it is. That's what it was. And no altar appears until Genesis 4. Why? Well, altars and covenants aren't themselves the relationships between the gods and people, but they administer and they facilitate the relationships. The relationships are prior to the means we have of overcoming the difficulties in them. The altars and covenants facilitate the relationship, but they aren't the relationship itself. It's in some ways like your marriage vows facilitate the relationship in marriage, but aren't the marriage, the vows aren't the marriage itself. Now, is there sacrifice in a perfect order? I got this question a couple of times in the comments of my last video. For Christians, generally speaking, if you want to look at relational perfection, you look at the Trinity. And so in Christianity, the relational liturgies within the Trinity are ideal. Christian theology has long seen as the dance of mutual submission, other glorification amid the union of purpose between distinct persons. It took quite a few centuries for the Christian church to try to figure out this Trinity and all the balances. So is it a strict hierarchy of God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit? Well, if you have them as a strict hierarchy, then suddenly you have problems with their being equal. And so part of what the Trinity is always trying to work with, and this is part of the reason Christian theology has the shape it has, is right there in the Trinity, Christians are working on these two problems of hierarchy and equality. And so it's a triangle which seems to have, which is one of the simplest, the simplest low resolution drawings of hierarchy and circle. And so often Trinity will be expressed a triangle and a circle together because you have both hierarchy, the Son submits to the Father, and I don't want to start a food fight between the West and the Eastern Church. The Holy Spirit serves the mission of both of them, so they're united in essence, they're united in mission, but they mutually submit to each other and they serve each other. And so to the degree that the Son serves the Father, they do so out of the necessity of the mission. There isn't anything, now we get into Aristotelian terms, like I said in previous videos, you really can't do theology without philosophy. And so the theology you do is always connected with the philosophy of the host culture, on and on and on, but the theology and the history of the Christian Church has to try to work out the tensions between hierarchy and equality, and all that comes together in the theology of the Trinity. So there's a sense of implicit sacrifice between the parties without the need for facilitated administration, like we have in altars or covenants. There is sacrifice to the degree that, well, the Son sacrifices his many good things that he could have in service to the mission of the Father and in service to the mission of the Holy Spirit, you might say. And so, but the sacrifice isn't a formal cultic sacrifice in the way that we talk about literal sacrifices, dead animals on religious barbecue pits, or even putting a gift in the basket at church. It's what sacrifice is intended to act out. Now, remember all of your basic Jordan Petersonian things. You act out things, you act out knowledge that you can't articulate. You possess it in the community as what James K. Smith would call liturgies. So that's in a sense the knowledge you possess in community, but you act it out together, even if you can't put it into words and say it as such or write it in a book. It gets acted out in drama, and we watch each other acting it out, and we learn it at that level, even if we can't articulate it. And so what we see in the drama of the Trinity is this being played out, and we struggle to represent it in our words or in our theology or in our philosophy. So there's no altar in Genesis 1 through 3. Genesis 1 is a temple text. Heaven and earth are God's dwelling. Now, I just started reading Jonathan Peugeot's brother. I'm not sure how to say his first name. I don't know any French, so I don't want to butcher your name, brother of Jonathan, but I started reading the book, and I've already got a few thoughts on it. But one of the things I liked about the book is that the strong emphasis on heaven and earth, because that is a corrective from some of what happened through history, that the focus in contemporary American and Western Christianity has been heaven and hell. That's not the focus of the Bible. The focus of the Bible is heaven and earth, as we're going to see in a few minutes. So heaven and earth is God's dwelling. So Genesis 1 is the story, is a song really, of the glorious creation of the temple of God, which is heaven and earth, all together. Genesis 2 is the temple garden. So we change venues of the story, and now we zoom into the garden. And Israelites in Babylonian captivity would have been familiar with Nebuchadnezzar's garden. And Nebuchadnezzar builds his famous hanging garden for one of his wives that missed the mountains. And Babylon, of course, is on flat land, and so he builds a mountain. And now we get into all of the mountain symbology that is in the Bible that Jonathan Pagel speaks so well about and helps to articulate. So Hebrews would have had an understanding of gardens, more contemporary people. You have the palace of Versailles, and you have the gardens for the palace of Versailles. And so Genesis 2 is the garden. The man and the woman are the gardeners. They're the caretakers. Not just these ancient royal gardens weren't just plants. They were also animals and zoos. They were ways to manifest the glory of the great king. Now in Genesis 3, we have the story of rebellion and the exiles of the gardeners. And we could compare this to hothead Nebuchadnezzar in the book of Daniel, who, you know, is always ready to take his servant's head. The Lord is not Nebuchadnezzar. He is not a petty potentate in the way that Nebuchadnezzar is. Now we have relationships in geography. God is present, and he's interested, and he's involved in every, oh, I hate typos, in every ontological layer in his creation that exists. And I talked about this in the previous videos. If you want to ask me about Jesus bodily, Jesus material resurrection from the dead, part of my theological assertion about that's necessity is I think just, I think we see the redemption of creation at every level. Now I think our view of the levels of creation are very limited. And they are skewed because both of our fall and because of the limitations that we have as human beings. So we know God is the creator of the material level. We know God is the creator of the relational level. And there are more than we can see or imagine. Now you might, again, if I'm reading, I want to say Matthew, because that would be the anglicized version of his name, I assume. You might notice that I am highly reluctant to use the word spiritual. And I follow in a sense another Peterson in that who is Eugene Peterson. Because once we use the word spiritual in our present context, the word spiritual is like a chaotic snake, and it goes off in all kinds of different directions right away. And so I would choose to use relational here because in many ways it's easier for us to understand in a concrete acted out way that relational is vital even if it's not material. And this is part of the reason I'm not a materialist. Because as Peterson notes with hierarchies, with all, with the story verse that we live in, it's the relational governs the material. And I know C.S. Lewis uses the word spiritual. The apostle Paul uses the word spiritual. But when you get into 1 Corinthians 15, when Paul uses the word spiritually, almost always uses the word as spirit meaning connected to the spirit of God, which means in submission, which basically in our culture we use the word spiritual as immaterial, and that's a perfectly legitimate definition of the word spiritual. But it tends to be a little untethered in the way that the apostle Paul would like it to be untethered. So there's a rather large sideline for you. But God's work of redemption is on every layer of his work of creation. And so I make this little diagram, heaven and earth, absolutely as low resolution as I can. Maybe I could get rid of the lines, but I think something would be lost. This is the Genesis 1 representation. There's heaven and earth. And heaven and earth are one at the beginning of the story. You get to the end of the book of Revelation and heaven and earth will be one again. And in fact, the entire story of the Bible is the story. And I think, again, I like Matthew Peugeot's emphasis on this in his book. The entire story of the Bible is the story of heaven and earth and the relationship between them. Now what happens in the rebellion, also known as the fall, is that heaven and earth get cut off. And what we're left with below here is chaos and, in a sense, empire Egypt. And so Genesis goes into Exodus. And I know there's a lot of people anxiously anticipating Jordan Peterson on Exodus. I am too. I'm very interested to hear what he's going to do with those stories. But basically, the idea is that in the rebellion, heaven and earth are cut off. And God, in a sense, withdraws, which is an act of enormous mercy because Nebuchadnezzar would never do that. Any Near East potentate would never do that. They would claim the rights of ownership and kill the rebels. But God wants to redeem the rebels and save the rebels. And so what the story of the Bible actually is, is the long story to try to answer the question, how can God save us? How can God save and buy us also his whole creation? And so this is how we get a new creation at the end of the story. This is the story of the Bible. And to a certain degree, that's when Bar-Ehrman tells Sam Harris, a lot of these Christians running around as imagining that the earth is some kind of sorting station between heaven and hell. That's not the story of the Bible. The story of the Bible has to do with the resurrection. It has to do with new heavens and new earth. Read the Bible itself. Read the book of Revelation. Read the book of Genesis. This is the story of the Bible. So I'm going to read a little bit of Genesis 4, where we have the first altar. And some of these times I'm going to read from Tanakh, which is the Jewish English translation of the Bible, or at least one of them. Now the man knew his wife Eve, and she conceived and bore Cain, saying, I have gained a male child with the help of God. Eve's pretty upfront about that. She remembers him, apparently. And she then bore his brother Abel. Abel became the keeper of the sheep, and Cain became a tiller of the soil. Now if you remember my last video, what happens to Cain is that the earth will no longer produce for him, which is quite interesting because as opposed to Abel, Cain is a tiller of the soil and Abel is a keeper of the sheep. Now in the course of time, Cain brought an offering to the Lord from the fruit of the soil, and Abel, for his part, brought the choicest of the firstlings of his flock. This text is so dramatically debated, looking for in the text the difference between Cain and Abel. Some say you can see it, some say you can't, some say they don't know. The Lord paid heed to Abel and his offering, but to Cain and his offering, he paid no heed. Cain was much distressed, and his face fell. And the Lord said to Cain, why are you distressed? Now it's interesting because what does it mean that the Lord didn't heed his offering? Were these thank offerings? The assumption is that these are thank offerings for what had been given, but was the expected response from the Lord more bounty? Could be. There was an expected response from the Lord that Cain did not receive. Now again, I just did my Rough Draft to Sunday video where I talk about Elisha and the siege of Samaria and King Joram, and I talked about the fact that King Joram is full of entitlement, and he thinks that how could God let this stuff happen to a city? And he's contrasted with the lepers at the gate who have nothing left to lose. And they're feasting on the plunder of the Arameans while the king is inside starving. And so if you want to listen to that, you can listen to that. I'll probably post this video for Saturday, and I will have posted the other one on Friday. But in any case, something happens here, and the Lord receives Abel's offering in a way that he doesn't receive Cain's offering. And what this does for Cain is make him resentful and make him angry, and both seem to see it. And so the Lord said to Cain, why are you distressed? God hasn't cut himself off from Cain. Why has your face fallen? Surely if you do right, there is uplift. I really enjoy Tanakh. It's a really wonderful translation of the Bible. Or of the Hebrew scriptures of the Old Testament. But if you do not do right, sin crouches at your door. Its urge is towards you. It wants you. Yet you can master. Yet you can be its master. You can master this. Now, what is a sacrifice? In the dominant, most literal sense of it. It is taking something of value, usually a living thing, sometimes food. And you put it on fire, and fire consumes it and turns it into smoke, and the smoke goes up. Now, if you pay attention to the Genesis 1 representation, it makes perfect sense what a sacrifice is, what an altar is. Alters translate, consume. You take the thing that you're offering and you turn it into smoke and you send it to God. Short of a stairway to climb your little beast up to God, or short of an elevator to put it on up to God, this is the most basic way to send your animal, or your child, or whatever it is you're sacrificing, to send it to God. In some temples in the ancient Near East, they'd have holes, let's say, in the bottom of the temple, and you'd throw your offering down the hole. And well, maybe that says something about where you think the God of that temple lives. He lives down in the hole. Well, the Lord lives up in the heavens, above the heavens, and so send the altar, send the offering up to Him. Well, why fire? And what goes in? Well, what goes into the fire is a representative. Now, as food, it's representative of our lives because we depend on food. By offering food, we could eat, we express gratitude and trust in our future. And again, remember Jordan Peterson's section on sacrifice, and we do this in all kinds of abstracted ways, too. But it's the same drama that we're playing out. So if you're in a church service, and they pass the plate, and you put something in, well, what do we call that in a church service? We call it the offering. Well, what are we doing? We didn't bring in a chicken, and we didn't bring in a goat. We brought in a check, and we're putting money in the plate. Sometimes it's a guilt offering. Sometimes we've violated, or offended, or we want to somehow keep God off our backs. And again, you can look at Dr. Drew in the Ben Shapiro video talking about the Aztecs. And Dr. Drew was fleshing out some of those kind of things in terms of a psychological perspective on that. We owe something, and the animal stands in for us. The food animal, a clean animal, the best animal. This is why you don't sacrifice unclean things. It has to be yours. Now, unclean is a little distracting for us, perhaps, because what you'll notice, and I've brought this out in various sermons in the past, the wild animals belong to God, too. But in a sense, they don't belong to us, and so we are not to take them. It's a bad idea to try to read onto our pragmatic, scientific things onto the Bible. For a long time, that was done. Oh, the Israelites couldn't eat pig because, you know, trichinosis, I think that's the word for it, where they would get sick. No, that's not it. It has nothing to do with hygiene. It has to do with order and their worldview and their sense of order in the world. So the wild animals, they belong to God. They're not for you to eat. Clean animals, you may eat. And this gets into the theology of Israel being God's chosen people and the nations. And these themes run throughout the Bible, and they're played out and worked on and used for all of the theological conveyance that the Bible affords. But why fire? Well, that's actually a more interesting question. It transforms, it translates, and it transports terrestrial objects into heaven. Again, I'm in 2 Kings, Chapter 6 in my sermons, and when Elisha is in Dotham, and he prays that his servant's eyes might be open, they see horses and chariots of fire. It's horses and chariots of fire that take Elijah from earth to heaven. It's horses and chariots of fire that are imagined that frighten the Aramean army away. In the transfiguration, Moses and Elijah and Jesus shine like the sun. So you've got the association, the symbolic association between the sun and heaven and fire. And again, Peterson and his biblical lectures have drawn out some of this symbolism too. So fire transforms, translates, transports terrestrial objects into heaven. Now, there's lots of representations about this, and it's interesting, because the earth is actually, this is true in the medieval period. You have different conceptions in different cultures in the ancient period, but we've tried lots of different ways to draw this stuff out. This one on the right, I never know if it's your right and left because I'm dyslexic, so the black and white one, that's from Dante. And earth is actually a fairly low level status of existence, and mountains of course are higher. And so in the Dante thing, you have purgatory and then you have the heavens and so on and so forth. It's very much a hierarchy. In this other representation, it's kind of nice because it shows the connection, the umbilical. I talked about that in my Ezekiel studies. The umbilical between heaven and earth. Now, the Babylonians believed that Babylon was the umbilical. In our terms, we say things like New York is the center of the world, so on and so forth. So we have representations of these. And now again, fire, well, where is fire? Fire is associated with the brilliance and the light and the clouds and the sky, and earth is actually quite far below. And in the ways of talking about reality, even in the 16th century, in the 17th century, they're kind of trying to work out science and let's call it physical theology, and they're trying to work all those kinds of questions out. But then all throughout the Bible, you have verses like this. Exodus 29. Take one of the rams and Aaron and his son shall lay their hands on its head. This is, in a sense, acting out the representation. The ram stands in place of the family and the ram goes into the fire. Well, what is the fire? The fire is God. Well, what happens when we walk into fire? We are consumed. Slaughter it and take the blood and splash it against the sides of the altar. Why the blood? Because the blood belongs to the Lord. They're not allowed to eat the blood. They can eat the animals. This comes after Noah, but they can't eat the blood. That's part of Noah's covenant. Cut the rams into pieces and wash the internal organs and the legs, putting them with the head and the other pieces. Then burn the entire ram on the altar. It is a burnt offering to the Lord, a pleasing aroma, a food offering presented to God. See, the altar takes the substitute animal, goes into the fire, and the fire represents God and translates it up to heaven. It's actually pretty obvious. Now, again, why fire? Well, it transforms, it translates, it transports. But just as the animal stands in for us, fire stands in for God. Now, Moses was tending the flock of Jethro, his father-in-law, the priest of Midian, and he led the flock to the far side of the wilderness and came to Horeb, the mountain of God, another mountain. There the angel of the Lord appeared to him in flames of fire from within the bush. What was the appearance of the angel of the Lord? It was fire. That's how he represented himself to Moses. Moses saw that though the bush was on fire, it did not burn it up. This burning bush becomes the symbolic representation of Israel's mission. Israel's mission is to be the place where a consuming, a physical people can live in the midst of a consuming fire. Now, you say of a physical people, you can't live in the fire. And that's the miracle of the community because God would destroy them. So Moses thought, I will go over and see this strange site, why the bush does not burn up. And that miracle, that attractional miracle that Israel should be this, at this moment, you basically have the entire missiology of the Old Testament story, that Israel is supposed to be this miracle of the consuming God living in the midst of his people to bring that in. Now, here's the thing. What do you do when you put say gold into fire? It purifies it. It burns up the dross. Now, here's another symbolic representation and element of the entire story. If the story is God living with Israel, Israel's sin is going to be burnt off and the story of the Old Testament is the story of that burning away of the sin. Now, this gets translated by Jesus and the New Testament authors into new terms. Take off my watch, it keeps turning on. On the morning of the third day, there was thunder and lightning, this is Sinai, with a thick cloud over the mountain and a very loud trumpet blast. And if you read throughout the Bible, you'll see these images again and again and again as theophany in the Bible. Everyone in the camp trembled. Then Moses led the people out of the camp to meet with God and they stood at the foot of the mountain. Mount Sinai was covered with smoke because the Lord descended on it in fire. So here again, God is fire. The smoke billowed up like the smoke from a furnace and the whole mountain trembled violently. And the people of Israel are like, we're going to live with that guy? As the sound of the trumpets grew louder and louder, Moses spoke and the voice of God answered him. This is the picture. This is what it's supposed to look like. Now, pretty quickly, Israel will say, ah, we don't want this. Let's just have a substitute to deal with. How about Moses? Find this in Deuteronomy 4. Be careful not to forget the covenant of the Lord your God that he made with you, not to make for yourselves an idol in the form of anything the Lord your God has forbidden. For the Lord your God is a consuming fire, a jealous God. Now, remember the difference between jealousy and envy. Envy is to want and hate because you can't have something that another rightfully possesses. Jealousy is your zeal to possess exclusively what you rightfully own exclusively. Moses and Aaron then went inside the Temple of Meeting. This is the book of Leviticus, right before an important moment where God initiates the tabernacle, which is God's portable temple in the desert. When they came out, they blessed the people and the presence of the Lord appeared to all the people. What's the presence? It's this shiny cloud, this glory. It's this fiery cloud by night and a cloud of smoke by day. The fire came forth from before the Lord and consumed the burnt offering and the fat portions on the altar. And all the people saw and shouted and fell on their faces. We're not sure if they shouted in delight or terror of both. Now, what's important to know here is that the Israelites are supposed to keep the fire going perpetually on the altar. They're supposed to not let the fire ever die out. Now, why? Well, the fire in a very strong sense is God. Well, what does that mean for sacrifice? Well, they take the substitute representative animals and they put them in the fire. And again, every time this happens, this is a symbolic reenactment of Israel living in the midst of that God living in the midst of his people and Israel living in the fire of God. That's what the sacrifice means. Now, when you get that in your head and you start drawing all of these vast wide very wide lexicology, the lexicology of sacrifice and all the ways we abstract it, life is worship. Gets into a lot of Christian theology. But so right here at the altar, you have the center of it and it's the center of the community. And again, Peterson will talk about that when we get into part four. It's the center of the community. But this is what sacrifice is. And it's interesting here again for Peterson in part three of his Easter thing. This is really in some ways the closest so far we've gotten on to the ontology of God and his argument for the presence of God, even if for Peterson ontology is suspect because of his Darwinian epistemology, at least to the degree that he's willing to talk as a psychologist in public, so on and so forth, yada yada yada. Sacrifice here is right at the center. And it is right there, us living in the midst of God. But, you know, you don't walk into a fire pit because you know what will happen will be burnt up. And so these images and this symbolism just gets worked and worked and worked and worked and worked in all kinds of different ways. This is really easily seen in what happens next in the story because Aaron's son, each took his fire pan and put fire in it. Now, the problem is the priests are supposed to take fire from the altar. Why? They're supposed to take fire from the altar because the altar is in a sense that fire is God. And now if you take other fire and you use it in the temple, this is other gods. You shall not have other gods before me. It is alien fire. And so you might look at what about what's about to happen as well. God is being petty. God is just all about rituals. No, but the rituals mean something and they mean something foundational for the people. And obviously for the history of the Jews and the zealous way in which they protected the temple after Ezekiel, after the exile. And I talked about a lot of that in my first video about the history of the Christian God. These things mean a lot and people are willing to die for them because they're considered things that God is willing to kill over. And the fire came forth from the Lord and consumed them. So they themselves become the sacrifice, but their sin destroys them. And this is why a lot of New Age thought and a lot of biblically uninformed ideas of us just schmoozing up to God just doesn't have any place in the Bible. Because, well, you can schmooze up to God, but would you schmooze up to a nuclear reactor? And God is way more powerful than a nuclear reactor. You'd say, no, I'd never do that because that would kill me. Well, just schmoozing up to God would kill you too. That's in a sense what the story says. Fire came forth from the Lord and consumed them. Thus he died at the instance. Thus they died at the instance of the Lord. Then Moses said to Aaron, this is what the Lord meant when he said, through those near to me, I show myself holy and gain glory before all the people. And Aaron was silent. And right in that moment, now we've got the layers. We've got the material layer. We've got the layer of the presence of God. We've got the family layer of Aaron and his sons. And Moses enlightening the moment, not livening the moment and saying, this is a holy God. This is the definition. This is the definition of holiness. And if that doesn't make you stop and think, and if you believe, well, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. And whereas we often talk about that word in awe, fear is not divorced from it. It should be a synonym because when you get down to the center, it's all right there. So what does fire do? It consumes. It purifies. Can flesh and fire live together? What do you ritually, what do you do ritually when you put that substitute into the fire? What does it mean? Well, this is sacrifice. It is a symbolic ritual that expresses the relational realities between ourselves and God. These get played many, many different ways in relational terms throughout the Bible and theology and thought. And it comes to play often in ordeals. The Book of Daniel, the first six chapters, is a series of ordeals. Passing through the water of the Red Sea is an ordeal. Passing through the Jordan is an ordeal. Baptism is a ritualized ordeal. You go down into water and to death and you come up a new creation. I told the stories of the Haitian baptisms that I took part in in the Dominican Republic where the Haitians would go into the water and they would start to fight. And then the pastor would grab the Haitian and put him down again and they would fight some more. And the pastor would keep putting the Haitian in until they were then at peace. Well, what did that mean? That meant that the spirits were in the Christian and the waters of baptism drown the spirits out. And, you know, this has played off another thing. Luther, I think it was said that, you know, that in baptism, Adam is in at in baptism, our sinful nature is drowned in Adam. But Adam is a strong swimmer. And this is so we play on these things. And it's because in a sense, sacrifice is a ritualized ordeal. And so every time the animal goes into the fire and consumes as it is consumed, we are reminded of our sin and we are reminded why. Now, we can't just stroll into the presence of God like we can't stroll into a nuclear power plant. Well, a nuclear power plant functions on one layer of reality, whereas God is on all. So that should really terrify you. So ordeals of various kinds, water, file, wild beasts that Daniel and the lions den, that's an ordeal. Daniel comes out of the den, but those who accuse Daniels don't even hit the ground of the den before the lions are all over them. All of these wild things become proxies for the creator God. And, you know, these this language is still even in our laws. If if a hurricane comes through and destroys your house, this is a what an act of God. So this this continues to be preserved even in our legal code. So you the freedom from found freedom from religion, people should go ahead and sue and have act of God taken out of all of the all of the insurance documents, except you might decide to leave them in there because, you know, well, then everybody should think that God is a bad guy, which again is what gets popularized. Is that such a bad thing? The point is he's a holy God. Well, what does that mean? It means you can't pay him off. He's untouchable. He's you can't you can't bargain with him. You can't impugn. Well, do you bargain with him? Well, this is this is some of the tension of some of the stories when when Abraham bargains with God about Sodom and Gomorrah when when you know and then you get into this this idea that this this Hebrew God is so holy, but he condescends and he'll talk to us. And well, you can try to bargain with him, but maybe he's in a good mood and maybe if he has his reasons, he'll talk to you. But try bargaining with a tiger doesn't work. Now you see how the elements are played with with to express value in ultimate terms. God offers his son. The sun offers himself the ordeal of the cross and the empty tomb express victory of God's adversaries personal and personified. Now, cynics expose our literal our cultural literal bias. And again, if you look in my other videos in terms of the history, when you when you get into the Enlightenment period, we tend to just focus on the material layer. And so this is why Peterson calls Sam Harris and Richard Dawkins Newtonians because you see objects, but you're not seeing enough layers. And so Peterson wants to help us see the relational layers through hierarchy and through through being capital B being which is this this bigger layer of described in phenomenology of this richer world that we live in so on and so forth. So when we cut it down to cynically look at the material layer and we we scoff at it. Well, this again is where why in a sense, I think it's psychologists who are now coming forward and saying, hey, wait a minute. You know, all this stuff about human sacrifice. This hasn't gone away. This is still here. And then you have Bret Weinstein coming along and saying, now, wait a minute. This is built in our DNA. In other words, and Peterson's main thing, which is that this is built in from below. We're not going to just push this stuff away because this is built into us. And what these stories express are things we don't know. We know them how we act. This is knowledge that is still trapped at the acting layer, but we haven't yet been able to release it at the layer of articulation. So again, what Peterson is trying to do in his biblical series is try to release it in terms of the layer of articulation. Just what I said before, the Drupinski. Yeah, that's his name with with Ben Shapiro talking about human sacrifice. Consummation. What is consummation? Well, what do you mean when you say you consummate a marriage? Yeah, that's consummating a marriage. It's bringing what you acted out relationally, ritualistically, cultically in the marriage ceremony. And now you do it physically. And so in the story of the Bible, the consummation is the second coming of Jesus. It is the fulfillment of Jesus' prayer. Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. It is as the prophet Jeremiah says that the knowledge of the Lord will be as the waters cover the sea. That no one will have to talk to his neighbor and say, who is the Lord? Because everyone will know him. This is represented time and time and time again in the prophets in the Old Testament. It's updated in the book of Revelation and again in apocalyptic format. Consummation is all of the layers of reality finally reaching that which God intended. Now, I listened to Matthew and Jonathan talk about time. Some really interesting ideas. I haven't gotten to that place in the book yet, but I'm really thinking about that idea that they had because it's a it's a very interesting thing because time is a very time in the Bible is a very funny thing as as Bart Ehrman recognized in his talk with Sam Harris. But consummation again, look at the work. I should I should look that up in my new book. Hang on. Thank you, Tyler. Consummation. This is a good book. Consume, see destroy. Consummation, completion, consummation, Latin consumatio, compounded with con together and summa, the top of the sum with sum, supmus, superlative of words whose whose comparative is super. This is interesting signifying the very top means the the summoning or winding of the whole putting a final period to any concern. Completion signifies either the act of completing or the complete or the state of being completed. The arrival at a conclusion is comprehended in both these terms, but they differ principally in application. Wishes are consummated. Plans are completed. We often flatter ourselves that the completion of all our plans will be the consummation of all our wishes and thus expose ourselves to grievous disappointment. As epithets consummate and complete admit to us to a similar distinction. Consummate is said of that which rises absolutely to the highest possible degree as consummate wisdom. Or consummate felicity. Complete is said to be complete, which fully. Answers the purpose. Consumption, see decay, age of decay, baby. Thank you, Tyler. Tyler said to me when he gave me the book after the meetup, he said, I really look forward to seeing how you use this. Well, I hope you see this, Tyler, because I learned something in that reading. The word consummation. And this is part of Peterson's point that because of my familiarity with the word in the context of Christian literature and Christian theology, I knew it was big. But in terms of reading the synonyms and looking at good old Mr. Krabs book, I have a bigger view of how big this word is. And so in a sense, consummation is connected with sacrifice. Jesus is pure and holy and we can take fire or ordeal, substitution and exaltation. And so this is where we see again in the passion where we have Jesus crucifixion and resurrection, his ascension, his second coming. This is consummation in the book of Revelation is in a sense consummation of it all. So there's the symbolism of sacrifice. And I hope it was helpful to you. I hope it helps you understand Jordan Peterson better. I hope it helps you understand the Christian story better and the Bible better and Christian theology better and maybe help us appreciate what people have been talking about for thousands and thousands of years.