https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=d5C-Hl8sDB4

 Welcome to the Frady and Paul show. Special guest this week, the magic man. The magic man, Charles J. The magic, getting down with it. We got in the studio and you know we get with it. The Charles J. Stork. Charles J. Stork. Frady's channel. Charles J. Stork. Charles J. Stork. That's where you want to get in. Instagram, YouTube. Let's talk a little bit about our thing we did in the studio. Oh yeah, we've been in the studio for like the last three weeks almost. Two weeks. Well two, three, whatever. Stop talking before we thank you all right. But yeah, we've been doing that for a little bit. We're trying to come out with some stuff for the fans as well. So we have one song called Christ in Them. I believe it's called Our Lord and Savior. Our Lord and Savior. You guys have seen some of the action here live. Yes, we have. What's the name of your YouTube channel, Charles? Mine's the Charles Jennings channel. Charles Jennings channel. I'm afraid there's not really a lot of churchy stuff on my channel, but usually a lot of R&B, pop, hip hop, me dancing, America's Got Talent auditions, and the voices. I'll put that link in the notes so people can find the channel. And then what I was going to ask you is remember when... You're waiting for the show to ask me? No. Is that kind of pressure for our audience? No, it's not that type of pressure. I am saying Charles is worried if we use those beats, if they're going to get back at us. We're not going to have... If the beats say they're free, we can use them, right? We're not going to have argument. We're not arguing. We're not arguing. I'm coming to an agreement. I don't see a lot of agreement coming from this conversation right here. Alright, dude. What are we going to talk about today? What's up at Logosports? These are doing really good. They beat the Blue Jays, and the Giants beat the Diamondbacks. And the basketball, Denver's still in it, Utah's still in it, Phoenix is still in it, and the Warriors are out of it for one year. I don't know how the Warriors got out of it, but they're out of it. And hey Fancy Nancy, how you doing? Fancy Nancy? In the comments, Fancy Nancy. Me and Charles. That's Mrs. Claus. I had a rapper when you were on the left, I'm going to... Oh my God, she was a rapper, and I actually wore a rap suit, and she actually did it very perfectly. Really? She was Mrs. Claus, and she was going to get those toys and like... Are there recordings of what you guys did on the one or two? Yes, but you know, some of this stuff is like, put them in like a storage room, and I got a lot of tapes, and I'm like, can we do any boombox with a cassette tape? Okay, old school, you kids don't know what I'm about to do, y'all just... y'all know what I'm about to pass. But I got a wrap-up in there, so it'll be okay. Including her, but I'm going to wrap it up as Mrs. Claus. And Mom, I would like you, one of these Sundays, if we write you some lyrics, do a rap with us, and sing a chorus, so we can do a song with me, you, and Charles, and... Oh no, but we need Philip too as Mr. Claus. Oh, so when Christmas comes, I think we should have a Christmas celebration at this church. Whoever wants to come to the service, they can come to see you preach, and then we, during praise time, me and Charles and my mom get down and get funky, and get down with it. It's funky funky. We usually have Christmas services, but we never had that aspect of a Christmas service. I think it'd be a bust. I think it'd be pretty outrageous. You're outrageous, so yeah, we're not really surprised by that. Okay. Alright, we got the money vision, the positive vision, and the power structure, and don't forget about Puggy Pug, because Puggy Pug ain't no joke. He's from the P, man. He's from my area? I don't know what Puggy Pug is, I'm sorry. I don't know either, okay. I feel better now. This is a good show, man. Alright, you can do some music, Fred. Yeah, I'll just give you Jesus. Okay, I don't sing. I excuse myself from the talent portion of the show. During the service, I can hear your voice distinctfully. I'm serious, it sounds good. I think it's because you're my tongue. That's the only reason it sounds good. No, I'm a good voice. You know how to sing. You were in the choir, right? No, I wasn't in the choir. I was not in the choir. You've got a good voice, Fred. Well, thank you Fred, I appreciate it. Anyway, all you need to do is say, give me Jesus. Just say, give me Jesus. If you notice something, put it in and sing it. Are you going to sing it or are you going to rap it? I'm going to rap it. You need to rap it. In the morning when I rise, in the morning when I rise, in the morning when I rise, give me Jesus, give me Jesus, give me Jesus. Don't you see? I said, give me Jesus. Like, one, two, three, give me Jesus. For you and me from the 916, for she get the E-40. Too short? What's going on? I think we got this for it. We got the battle ram to the top. Give me Jesus, you have all this world. Give me Jesus, give me Jesus. Please give me Jesus. Jesus, how deep our fathers' love for best be on our measure that he had his only son to make a righteous treasure. Our God is searing loss. Go ahead and tell me now what is going on, boss. Jesus, Jesus, he's the man. Jesus, Jesus, he's the man. He's got the plan. I didn't realize this was in front of me. Jesus, Jesus, he's the man. There we go. Jesus, Jesus, he's the man. Behold the man upon the cross, my sin upon all shoulders. A shame I hear, the mocking voice call out among all scoffers. It will soon that you of him come in there until it was accomplished. His dying breath was brought me in life. I know that he is finished and I know I'm right. Jesus, come on, talk. Jesus, come on, y'all. Jesus, what's up, Gordon? Jesus, oh, hallelujah, hallelujah. Jesus has come through. Hallelujah, hallelujah. Jesus has came through. Wah-koo-koo-koo. Wow, that was, I don't know if we've ever had quite something like that before on the show. I agree with that. We're going to get a lot of views. I think we're going to get a lot of views with something like that. And we need comments, too. And my email is Fred Schuller, 072 at gmail.com. Did you get a lot of emails last time? Yes, I got it. Did you? Good. We loved them. Good. We're doing good. I'm going to do one more song. No, I think that's enough. We've gone a while now. There you go. We've gone ten, I think we've gone to land the plane. There you go. No, I have to do one more. No, you don't. But before you do all that stuff, this one here is the Charles J. Storr on Teespring.com. The Charles J. Storr on Teespring.com. There you go. All right. I think it's time to land the plane. All right. I'll have a big cage. There you go. I'll mind you. All right. I've got a mind call because he knows it all. He doesn't know that you stand tall. You're pretty functional. All right. Except for about Michael Mouse. I'm going to show that. There you go. All right. Amen, Toots. Jesus. Amen, Toots. One, love. Amen, Hallelujah. Amen, Hallelujah. All right. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen.