https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=P5umFlzRHyI

 So I guess we're good. All right, well, let's open with a word of prayer. Lord, we thank you that we could be here together, and we thank you that we can continue to study the book of Romans, the apostle Paul, all that these things mean. And we pray, Lord, that you would guide our conversation and guide our study and help us to grow in knowledge and love of you. So hear our prayer now in the name of Jesus. Amen. All right. Well, we're going to study the book of Romans, and we haven't gotten there yet. Why are we talking about Paul, the Roman citizen? To know what history precedes the book of Romans. To know what history precedes the book of Romans. I was, I started a new book on Vatican One. We all hear about Vatican Two. Vatican One is a is an ecumenical Roman Catholic ecumenical council in the 19th century that set up a lot of things. And a lot of that history has to do with Rome. And the point is that when I say the word Rome, we have ideas and we think about things. And if that's true of us today, that was far more true of the people then. When we say Washington, D.C. today, lots of things come to mind. Things that impact our world, impact our lives. We spend a lot of time talking about Paul as a Jew. And I wanted to spend a few weeks talking about Paul as a Roman because it makes a lot of it makes a lot of sense. Okay, so a part of the reason I'm using this now is I can much more easily instead of moving to the whiteboard and trying to write on the whiteboard, I can write on my tablet. I can go to PowerPoint. This also gives Rick one thing to watch. So this I think will be an improvement. Rick and I are looking at maybe, you know, we've bought a lot of TVs, but actually maybe taking another TV and putting it up on the wall. And so we won't have to do quite so much rigmarole. Now I put this picture of. What does that picture say about Rome? Okay, many different aspects in its culture. What is what is this a picture of? Romulus and Remus being suckled by a wolf. And so part of when people thought about Rome, they thought about the wolf. Now, let's play around here a little bit. Whoops. We've talked quite a bit about. This word myth. Now I'm going to extend it because often if we use the word in another language, it sort of feels different if we talk about mythos. So this wolf was part of the mythos of Rome. What do I mean by that? The story. Perfect. The story of Rome. When people thought of Rome, they thought of Romulus and Remus and the she wolf. And when we think about the population in Judea and Palestine during the Gospels, this is very much an element. This is very much the picture of Rome they had. Why would they imagine Rome as a wolf? Powerful. Scavengers. We have this saying today, when the wolf is at the door, what do we mean by that? I mean, how many of you have had a wolf at your door? Edie grew up in Montana. You didn't have any wolves at your door even in Montana? No wolves. They're just starting to reintroduce wolves to places now. But for centuries and centuries, the statement the wolf at the door meant danger, threatening, wolf pack, predators. And so in Judea, when the Jews thought about Rome, they thought of a wolf. Now, last week, we talked about this image there. I know it's a little small on the screen. And that's the story of Aeneas. We mentioned that in many ways, there's not just one myth. There's Rome. Rome as wolf and Rome as, well, who was Aeneas? Where was he from? Troy. He's a refugee from Troy. He's a refugee from Troy. Now, last week, we also talked about the fact that I pulled up my famous relatives, these fellas, the Marx brothers, my famous relatives. I can't be related to Einstein. I can't be related to any of the huge cultural contributors from the Jews. I have to be related to Vaudeville and Slapstick and Harpo and Mark and Groucho. And actually, one of the Marx brothers always played the straight man, a very good looking actor. So what's happening? Why would Rome tell a story in which its descendants were heroic losers? Now, Donald Trump, I can talk more easily about Donald Trump now, that is, he's slowly receding into the past. Donald Trump used to like to brag. I never hit first, but if you hit me, I'm going to win the fight. He loved to brag. That actually was a Roman brag. The Romans loved to imagine themselves not as purely aggressors. Why? Why wouldn't you want to be purely an aggressor? It's negative. So back when you think about the first or the second Gulf War, or the first Gulf War, so what started that first Gulf War when George H.W. Bush was president? Do you remember? What did Saddam Hussein do that started the war? He invaded Kuwait. He took Kuwait. Then suddenly, oh, okay, now we have a provocation. And then America collected allies and went to war against Saddam Hussein. Go all the way back to the Vietnam War. There's the Gulf of Tonkin incident. Anybody remember that? Oh, what was, I mean, we saw increased, we saw this civil war going on in Vietnam. We were concerned about continued Soviet advancement and invasions. And the Gulf of Tonkin incident was what? Did the Vietnamese, were they really, was North Vietnam really quite so dumb as to attack the United States? But you create a provocation. And now we were attacked. Now we can get into the Vietnam War. The Romans did this kind of thing all the time. They didn't tend to be a nation that just went out and conquered. They became militarily superior and often in the situation, people would look to them for aid. Now let's go all the way back to the pilgrims on Plymouth Rock. The pilgrims come to America, and if you read any of that story, okay, well, we're just about at Thanksgiving. What happens at that first Thanksgiving? There you go. There's this big feast together with the Indians, and it's the symbol of wonderful commonality and brotherhood. Well, if you read the history, smallpox had gone through, and so a lot of the tribes were doing this. And the Indians were doing this. And the Indians were doing this. And the Indians were doing this. And the Indians were doing this. And if you read the history, smallpox had gone through, and so a lot of the tribes were decimated. The Indians were continually having struggles with each other. The pilgrims landed, and guess what? They didn't have food because the plants in America were different. The climate was different. Everything was different in America. And so one of the Indian tribes, in competition with other Indian tribes, decided these newcomers, they have some things we like. They definitely have some technology we want. They've got metalworking. They've got firearms. They've got some construction practices. But the thing is, we can wipe them out any time we want simply by no longer selling them food. And so actually what happens is a rather complex relationship between the pilgrims and the Indians, whereby the Indians would sell them food and sort of ally with them against their neighbors. And, oh, this was sort of a kind of a plus plus. And the Indians figured, if any time these people get out of hand, we can just stop sending them food and they're all going to starve. And if you read the accounts of those pilgrims, I mean, it was they were just dying, dying, dying all the time. Same as in Jamestown. I mean, the death toll of these people coming to America was horrendous. What the Indians couldn't comprehend was there was this huge world across the ocean that was going to keep sending people. And if they keep sending people, suddenly what the Indians didn't realize was at some point, if they keep sending people with all of their firearms and technology and manpower, we could lose control of this thing, which in fact they eventually did. Now, the Romans were kind of like that. And so people would strike a bargain in their internal struggles with the Romans. And then this is actually how the Romans took possession of Palestine, because they were local struggles. And then someone's like, I know how I'll get the best of my local adversary. I'll get the Romans on my side. But it's kind of like feeding the bear, because once you let the Romans in the door, you can't get them out. Not unlike what happened with the American Indians. If the American Indians had decided we're just going to hate these strangers and we're not going to tolerate them, world history would have been very different. But they saw the advantage of these strangers and thought, we'll keep feeding them. And if things get out of hand, we'll stop feeding them. And what they didn't understand was more and more people kept coming. And then slowly but surely, the Europeans took their agricultural methods over to the Americas and started establishing their own food production. And it just grew and grew and grew and grew. And the native population got weaker and weaker and weaker, often just even into the colonial period. The reason we call it the French and Indian War is because the British colonies and their Indian allies were fighting the French and their Indian allies. There were Indians on both sides. And that was pretty much true all throughout the history of the Americas, because some people would look at the mighty military power and say, We're fighting our neighbors over here. But if we get the Romans or the Europeans or the Americans on our side, we can clobber the neighbors. But what they didn't foresee was that the Americans and the Romans were going to come to stay. And this is part of how the Roman Empire took over the nation. And so it's very important to think about Rome in these two lights. On one hand, powerful, avaricious, devouring. On the other hand, refugees of noble, famous people who settle Rome. All right, let's go back to this paper that I handed out last week. It goes without saying that the story of Aeneas is as much of a myth as the story of Romulus. The Roman scholars puzzled. These are ancient Roman scholars. They puzzled over the relationship between these two founding legends. So ever since Darwin, over the last 150 years, has been a massive struggle in the church over how to reconcile science and the Genesis stories. Because we need to fit our world together. And so the Roman scholars were trying to figure out, is it Romulus and Remus? Or is it Aeneas? And so what they do is they take a story. They construct a story that fits both of them. If Romulus had founded Rome, how could Aeneas have done so? The biggest difficulty was that there was an uncomfortable gap between the 8th century BC date that the Romans assigned to the origin of their city and the 12th century BC date that they commonly gave to the fall of Troy, also taken as a historical event. The Romans believed in Troy. By the end of the first century, or by the first century, so this is about 100 years before Paul, some sort of coherence was reached by constructing a complicated family tree in which Aeneas and Romulus had the right dates. Aeneas became seen as the founder not of Rome but of a neighboring community. Ah! Lots of cleverness here. His son was said to have founded Alba Longa, the city from which Romulus and Remus were cast out before they founded Rome. And a shadowy and even Roman standards, flagrantly fictional dynasty of Alban kings, was constructed to bridge the gap between Ascanius and the magic date of 753 BC. This is the version that Livy, so he's an ancient Roman historian, this is the version that he embraced. And this is how you're going to take the two stories of Romulus and Remus and Aeneas and put them together. Now why are we talking about all of this history? We're getting to this next point, which is actually crucial for thinking about the early church. The central claim of the story of Aeneas is one that echoes, or rather exaggerates, the underlying theme of Romulus' asylum. This is a piece of the Romulus story that we didn't take time to read. Where Romulus welcomes all comers to his new city, the story of Aeneas goes further to claim that the Romans really were originally foreigners. It is a paradox of national identity, which stands in glaring contrast to the foundational myths of many ancient Greek cities, such as Athens, which saw their original population as springing miraculously from the very soil of their native land. Let's talk about a little bit of anthropology. If you visit the cliff dwellers in Colorado today, and you had visited them 30 years ago, you'll notice all the signs changed. Who were these cliff dwellers? Now 20 years ago you went there, you saw a word something like Anasazi. The Anasazi people built these cliff dwellings and then abandoned them and left. We don't really quite know why they abandoned these cliff dwellings. You go there today and the signs all say ancient Pueblan people. Why'd they change the name? Any ideas? So the dominant power in the American Southwest were the Navajo. The Navajo called themselves the Dine. And if you translate the Dine, I'm probably saying it horribly wrong, you know what the word means? The people. And you know the reason they changed all the signs? Because in the last 30 years someone tipped them off to the fact that the word that they used to identify the people who used to live in those cliff dwellings was a derogatory term used by the Navajo about those who aren't people. Because all over the world there's people and there's not people. And if you look through anthropology, you see all over the place there's people and there's not people. Well, what is, so you've got people and you've got not people. What are some of the other words we use for people and not people? Let's see, there are Romans. What's opposite of Romans? You know where the word barbarian comes from? You know where the word barbarian comes from? Barba in Latin means beard. If you were a civilized person, what did you do? Shave. The Romans, the way they shaved, the way they bathed, they would smear oil on their body and they would take knives and they would scrape themselves. So to be Roman, meant to be clean, it also meant to be quite hairless. Barbarians, well where would those barbarians have been coming from? Up north. Then you're getting back up into the Nordic, great Nordic empires. And you see those pictures of the Vikings and what do the Vikings always have? So you have Romans who are people and you have barbarians who are not people. Now in English we use the same word. You have Greeks and you have barbarians. Now you have Jews and then you have... Crippled times. So one group of people is civilized, people, our people, and then there's those others out there. Now if you look at the Bible, one way to read the Bible says, well how do we know who God's people are? They're part of our family. God's people are our family. Other people are not God's people. Now we just read about the Greeks. Now when we talk about Athens, people think democracy. Democrasy, the demos. But as historians are now pointing out increasingly, the Greeks really didn't believe in democracy. Why not? Not like we do. When we think about democracy, we have this... Let's think about ethno-nationalism and credo-nationalism. Any guesses what ethno-nationalism and credo-nationalism are? The Navajo Nation is an ethno-nationalism. What do I mean by that? When I say the word ethno, that's actually connected to... Ah. So to be a member of the Navajo Nation, what must you be? Navajo. Blood. America is credo-nationalism. To be an American, what must you do? I pledge allegiance to the flag. Okay, here's a question. Is the Christian church ethno or credo? Credo. Credo. Why is that important? Because they're not holding an ethno, they're holding credo. Ah. Now, there are little bits of this in the Old Testament. You can find often stories about... Jerusalem will be the highest mountain, and around this mountain, the peoples of the earth will gather. Sometimes it's... Oh, come on. Sometimes it's... a tree. And you'll find visions in the Old Testament of a tree, and birds are in the tree, and the birds are the nations. That everyone will gather to Israel, but, well, let's talk about... David. Well, David put the surrounding nations under subjugation. That was kind of the image of what the kingdom would be like. So there's always this tension in the Old Testament between the Jews as ethnic people, and the Jews as people of God. Is God really only love... Is God really only for the Jews? Now, when you get to Jesus, Jesus says some alarming things. So there's a story of a centurion. Okay. Who's the centurion? Who sent the centurion to the land? Rome. Rome is an example of Roman power. There's a centurion there, and the centurion has... Think about this. Now, our NIVs tend to be fairly sanitized, because the NIV will say, the Roman had a Jewish servant. Now, servant is politely ambiguous. The word in Greek is doulos, which usually means slave. The Roman had a Jewish slave. Now, when we hear that, how do we feel? Offended. Offended. No one should have slaves. The Roman centurion had a Jewish slave. Half the population of the Roman Empire were slaves. Now, slavery in America was a little different from slavery in Rome, but here you have someone living in, occupied God's country with one of the people of God, a slave who was sick. And the centurion sends a messenger to Jesus saying, my beloved slave is sick. Can you heal him? And Jesus says, okay, I'll come. Now, right away there's tension, because if we push this into our land, what might we want Jesus to say? Why don't you free your slave? Free him and I'll heal him. Free him and I'll heal him. Oh, that'd be a good one. Free him and I'll heal him. Jesus says, okay, I'll come. And then another messenger comes and says, what? Do you remember the story? You don't need to come, just say the word, because I, as a centurion, am under authority. And if I tell a soldier to go, he goes. And if I tell a soldier to do something, he does something. So you don't have to come here, but just say the word and he'll be healed. And Jesus pauses. The servant is healed, and Jesus makes a statement that offends his Jewish audience. What does Jesus say? I haven't found such faith in Israel. Now, if you think about my sermon last week, there's actually a lot going on in terms of what that centurion said, because that declaration of power that the centurion assumed Jesus had was greater than what would be assumed of most people, because if a holy man or someone comes to heal, the assumption is, well, they've got to touch them, they've got to be local. The implication of what the centurion said and did was Jesus is ruler of this world in a way that we're not accustomed to thinking about. But when Jesus declares the faith of the centurion, the wolf, his audience would be offended. No, no, no, Romans are wolves. And not only does Jesus talk about his faith, but Jesus says, I haven't seen such faith in Israel. So there's tension here. The demos of Athens, the people of Athens said, they didn't say it this way, we popped out of the ground like daisies. This is our home. We are native to this soil. We and the soil are connected. Now, today, with ideas about genetics, we would say, well, here's a question. Is there any such thing that the populations encountered by the Europeans when they sailed across the ocean, did Native Americans pop out of North American soil? How did they get here? Came over the land bridge. So now sometimes they clean it up and they say things like first nations or first ethne, which is a little bit more correct. All right. Let's go back to this. So demos, the Greeks believed we and the soil are one. You can't take us out of this land and we own this land. And here in Athens, in order to be a citizen of Athens, you must be from the soil of Athens. It is a paradox of national identity, which stands in glaring contrast to the foundational myths of many ancient Greek cities, such as Athens, which saw their original population as springing miraculously from the very soil of their native land. It's not uncommon in terms of people's beliefs. In fact, in one episode of the Aeneid, the hero visits the site of the future city of Rome and finds it already settled by primitive predecessors of the Romans. And who are they? They are a group of settlers under a certain King Evander, an exile from the land of Arcadia and the Greek Peloponnese. The message is clear. However far you go back, the inhabitants of Rome are always from somewhere else. Okay. Why is this important? How will this be important for the conflicts of the early church that we have been looking at in the 11 o'clock service? What do, well, here's the question. What does it take for God to make a holy people? Now there always was a way to make a Jew out of a non-Jew, right? Why was it important? So let's talk about circumcision a little bit. What's circumcision about symbolically? I mean, it's just not, I mean, the many cultures of the world, if you want to join that culture, you modify your body in some way. You can find many people in the world with tattoos and tattooed face, tattooed chest. You can find, you know, if you go to National Geographic, you can find neck extension through rings. You can find foot binding in China. Many people of the world modify the body. What does that do? National pride. Now somehow I have taken the story verse, all of our ideas of symbol and custom, and I have penetrated the physical world. And now and forevermore, you find this sometimes, people lately have been, instead of getting a wedding ring, what do they do where the wedding ring usually goes? They put a tattoo there. Why? It's forever. Ah. Or if they fall in love, they'll, you know, they'll tattoo their lover, their lover's name on their arm, and they'll say, look, it's forever. And. Sometimes they fall out of love and cover it with flowers. That's right. When they fall out of love, they cover it with a flower. Well, and the whole point of, well, you know, because, you know, it's an entire meme that, well, you know, ooh, I'm a married man traveling for business, and I'm on the airplane, and I see someone that looks attractive, and what? Well, then everybody's, you know, looking at the indentation, but that's the whole point of a tattoo. You permanently belong to someone. Now think about circumcision. And also, this gets really crazy, what percentage of the population gets circumcised? 50. 50, it's just the men. And it's attached to the penis, and so it's, you know, it's pretty substantial. Now the Jews were not the only people to practice circumcision, but in the broader Roman world, they were unusual for it. And again, in a world like that where one of the biggest differences between our world and their world is privacy. You know, if you're going to go to the baths there, you're showing it to everybody. So now there's this big debate. Paul, you know, we first have to understand who Paul is as a Jew. Paul is from the Roman world. Paul is both a Jew and a Roman. Now you can be hybrid people. We're used to hybrid people, right? African American, Jewish American. When we use those terms, what are we saying? There's your ethne and your credo. Notice what I just did? We're putting the two together. Okay. In the vision of the Old Testament, how was Israel going to conquer the Roman world? Well, they would, a Messiah, if you watch Dune, okay, so Dune is the new movie that's out. And it's a book I read, was written in the 60s. Very difficult book to make a movie about, but they've done a pretty good job, at least in the first installment. It's the story of a Messiah who is going to take over a centrally, uniquely important planet in a science fiction universe. And that boy is going to grow up to be a Messiah of the universe. And the way you do it is you conquer. We spoke last time about all of these, all of these Roman rules. The church takes on, well, when we say, if I say in America, King of Kings, who do people think about? Jesus. If I said in first century Rome, King of Kings, who do people think about? Caesar. If I say, Lord of all, today we think Jesus. They thought Caesar. I made the point in previous classes that all of this appropriation was done of Roman names. Now, the idea of what a Messiah would be, Jesus starts doing his ministry. Huge numbers of people follow him. Everyone gets excited. Could he be the Messiah? Could he be the Messiah? We say Jesus was the Messiah. Why didn't Jesus just stand up and say, I am the son of David. I am the Messiah. Come to save Israel. Now, we don't finish the sentence because when we think save, we think of a very different story. But when Israel is thinking about being saved, she's thinking about being saved from what? Being saved from the Romans. So when Jesus, if Jesus stood up and said, I'm the Messiah, what picture would everyone have in mind? First, we gather the people. Then we get some weapons. Then we start taking the strongholds. And if you go back in Jewish history, you find this was tried a number of times. In fact, 70 AD, when the Romans destroyed the temple, when the Romans destroyed the temple, they were making a, again, we think about because we're Americans. We think about the separation of politics and religion. Now, that's a product of thousands of years of development. That was not then. Why did the Romans in 70 AD destroy the temple? What was the point they were making? We are greater than the Jews. Now, one of the things that one of the ways that they imagined the world was. So that's one division. Let's have a division this way. You have the gods and you have the people or rather, let's say. The ethnic. Or the nations. Why when you, so when America invaded Iraq, there are all of these pictures about statues, right? What was that about? What were they statues of? Saddam Hussein. Why did they tear down statues of Saddam Hussein? Symbolic that he wasn't in power. A better question is why in a very Muslim society, actually Saddam was much more of a secular Muslim. Why did he put up statues of himself? That's a little risky in Islam. They're a very iconoclastic religion. They tore down those statues. So when the Romans come, so remember I talked before about how the Romans would conquer and how they got control of the promised land. The promise they were having internal divisions and rivalries and someone because Rome was getting closer and closer. Someone said, if you keep messing with me, I'm going to have the Romans clobber you. And eventually the Romans said, y'all don't know how to manage your country. We'll take it from here. But when they conquered in that way, guess what? They didn't touch the temple. Why? Little too touchy. The Jews were really touchy about their temple. But if you look at models of ancient Jerusalem, you have this big temple mound. You have a temple and right next to the temple is a guess what? A Roman fortress right next to the temple. So it's like you'll get your temple. You can run it in your own way. We won't bother you. But just so you know. And then you have an insurrection and the insurrection is successful enough that the major cities are now occupied and taken by the rebels. Now the Romans come down with their legions. Now they start crushing. And then when they take Jerusalem, why destroy the temple? That's what united the Jews. Why else? What are ethne related to? The people are the manifestations on earth as it is in heaven. What happens on earth? Well, still today with astrology you look in the skies and say, oh, the stars are moving around. That means that we're going to have a governor of California who is of Mexican ancestry. Because what's happening in the heavens is what happens in the earth. What the gods do is what happens here. So when the Romans destroy the temple, what are they saying to the Jews? Your gods are pitiful. Your gods are impotent. If any god worth his salt would protect his house. Because that's what temple is. It's his house. How strong can you be if we raid your god's house? And so they level it. And that's what they say to the Jews is you're no more a people because you don't have gods that are worth anything anymore. Okay? Now the Jews had been through this before with the Babylonians. And that's why you had synagogues. That's why they switched from altar to book. And here's the funny thing about a book. If let's say you have a copy of Mein Kampf and I decide that I don't like Mein Kampf because it's anti-Semitic and it's, you know, So I'm going to burn this copy of Mein Kampf. Here's a question. Have I burned a book? Oh, yes and no. I just burned a book. But what? There's lots more copies. And even if you destroy all the copies, where can the book be stored? Every book is sort of a dual thing. There's words on the page, but the book itself only represents the story, which can't really be killed. The Jews figure this out and they live this. So it's like you can burn our scrolls, but we've got it memorized. We'll just make more scrolls. You can't destroy a story. The age of decay can't kill a story. Stories are really powerful things. Okay. Where are we going with this? Circumcision. Oh. Paul is in Jerusalem. He's from the, he's one of dual realities. He's Roman and Jew. And these Jesus followers, they're talking about the resurrection. They're saying Jesus is the Messiah. But the Jews are scoffing at him because he's the worst possible Messiah. We like our Messiahs uncrucified. And that story of his resurrection, that's what we're talking about. That's just a cover story to cover up the messianic failures of someone who clearly didn't know how to run a revolution. Because the way the Jews were going to conquer looked like this. You had a Jewish tree and you had the ethne around the tree bowing down to it. That's how to have control of the world. And if you don't believe, look at the Romans. That's how they control the world. That's how everyone controls the world. Now, Paul begins by fighting the Christians. He doesn't believe it. So he's persecuting them. He's zealous for the Lord. That word's going to come up in the sermon today. He's zealous for the Lord, just like Elijah. And then when he's on his way to Damascus, what happens? Right. And where is Jesus? In the control room. In the control room. Delphine. Delphine has listened. He's in the control room. Jesus is saying, I'm not sitting on some throne out in Rome somewhere. I'm sitting in the throne of thrones in heaven above. Saul, Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? Who are you? I'm Jesus who you're persecuting. I am the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords. And I, in fact, am claiming all peoples. And so then Paul has to go figure things out. He's got to try and fit Jesus into his entire story of the Bible. And because, you know, how does this work? And then he starts getting it together and he gets known. And then the people that used to be Paul's friends, the Jewish men from the broader empire, have a fight, another fight in Jerusalem. It's the same fight as Paul, where they killed Stephen. And all of these people like them. People like Paul, people like Stephen, people like Philip. People who are citizens of the broader Roman Empire fan out and they're on native ground. And some of them go up to Antioch, which is the largest local city. It's sort of like, let's say, Los Angeles is to the west, third largest city in the Roman Empire. And they go to Antioch and they're talking to their Jews, their Jewish friends about the resurrection and Jesus. Some say yes and some say no. All these little disturbances like you see blown up large in the Book of Acts. And then someone starts talking to Gentiles. And some of those Gentiles say, if he really did come back from the dead. And if these stories about the faith of the centurion are really true, what if I start praying to him? What if we start worshiping him? And so this group of Gentiles in Antioch start worshiping Jesus. And if you read the Book of Acts, something happens in Antioch first that hadn't happened anywhere else. Not in Jerusalem, not in the Galilee. What happens first in Antioch? They're called Christians. Why is that important? What were they called before they were called Christians? They were called Jews. Because this is an internal squabble among the Jewish people. But now in Antioch, you have a Gentile church who is worshiping Jesus and reading the book that the Jews are reading and seeing Jesus in that book. And they're saying, Jesus is Lord. And the Jews in Jerusalem who believe in Jesus start hearing this. And they say, I'm not sure what we should do about this. So they say, Barnabas, you go up to Antioch and see what's going on. And Barnabas does. And he says, I know just the person. I know just the person who needs to be in this place and teach these people what it means to be a Christian. Someone who has the best education our people can offer and who has been radically transformed by a vision on the road to Damascus. And so Barnabas goes and gets Paul. And there in Antioch, you really have the beginning of the Gentile church. And it's the Church of Antioch that sends Paul out to these other places. But then you have the conflict. Hey, wait a minute. These people aren't circumcised. Do you have to be circumcised? What if you don't? What if? Now, a little bit later, Paul is going to talk about a circumcision of the heart. What does he mean? What is a circumcision of the heart? Okay. Above you have mind. A book. Well, let's say story. The book is the physical manifestation of the story. Do you notice the relationship between all these things? Where is circumcision? When Paul says heart, does he mean this little organ in my chest that's pounding? Circumcision of the heart. Oh, we're going to have to cut people open. You're going to have some Aztec thing going. No, that's not what he means. Circumcision of the heart. Changed mind, changed heart, changed spirit. Paul says Jews can continue to be circumcised. That's fine. Circumcision or no circumcision is nothing. Then the Galatians come along and say, you know, we're from all this mismatch of people in this cosmopolitan Roman Empire that has all people all over the place. But the Jews, they're God's chosen people. And if we really want to be the best Jews, what should we do? Let's get circumcised because then we'll be we'll have Christians who are circumcised and Christians who are not circumcised. We can be super Christians. The book of Galatians, Paul goes after them ruthlessly. He says, not having it. If you're tattooed or not tattooed, doesn't matter. If you're circumcised or circumcised, doesn't matter. Why? Because to be a Christian is not a matter of the flesh. It's not a matter of blood. It's not a matter of ancestry. Now, this was a hard sell for a lot of Jews. It wasn't as hard a sell for a lot of people in the cosmopolitan Roman Empire. Why? Because to be a Roman came from every which place. To be a Roman, unlike a Greek, unlike a Jew, wasn't really a matter of bloodline. Yeah, you might become a Jew if you become circumcised. But the point there was blood. The point there was ethnicity. And it's really hard in a culture like that to really sort of not have equality in Christ. Because, well, he's a member here, but he's not a real Jew. He only started being a Jew later. Now, I've got some Jewish blood in me. Didn't know that until 10 years ago. Does it make any difference in terms of my standing with Christ? No. Americans, for a long time, have practiced circumcision. Lately, not so much. I've told you the story of the young man who called the church and said, my girlfriend told me that I had to be circumcised to be a Christian, and I so wanted to be a troll. But I resisted, and I was a good pastor. No, you don't need to be circumcised to be a Christian. Now, what game his girlfriend was playing, I don't want to get into. But there's the point. Paul being a Roman was key about this spread of Christianity in the Roman world. Okay. We've talked enough about mythology. Next week, we're going to start getting into the text of the book. All right? Let's close in prayer. Lord, you didn't create one people from yourself via blood. We see that in the book of Revelation. Tribes and nations and peoples all become your people. We are yours in Christ, not from the blood of our ancestors, but from the blood of Jesus. And we see Paul as being integral in this transformation. And you used even things of Roman mythology to help your gospel spread among people who believed in it. Help us, Lord, to continue to value all the different ways that you bring the nations together. All the different ways that you sort through the accumulated culture of this world. Help us to know, Lord, that you are King of Kings and together from you, we are one family in Christ. Hear our prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. Amen.