https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=6qO6yLDTJ8Y

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Now today is actually Wednesday even though I'm planning on releasing this on Saturday. So this is super rough. It's usually by Wednesday. I don't even have a PowerPoint but because I'm doing a little bit of traveling at the end of this week, I had to accelerate the sermon process and do my exegetical work on do my sermon thinking on Tuesday and my PowerPoint on Tuesday and now my Rough Draft on Wednesday. So this sermon might change dramatically by Sunday. But anyway, here it is. People disagree and Christians disagree. You name it, people will disagree. Can be on COVID, can be on vaccinations, can be on politics, can be on religion. And of course everybody imagines that they're right because if they didn't think they were right, they would change their mind and then they'd think they're right. And well, as human beings, you need groups to survive. That's simply how we're made. And so how do you keep your group together? How do you process disagreement? How do you deal with conflict? Now last week, we began noticing the impact that the Apostle Paul and his work was having out in the world. Jewish synagogues were deeply divided about how to regard Jesus and the resurrection. And that division didn't go away. Jewish believers were deeply divided about what to do with the Mosaic Law as it had been used to differentiate them from paganism. Godfearers saw Jesus as the fulfillment of the twilight they experienced in the synagogue. And pagan Romans struggled to understand the power demonstrated as something different from the power demonstrated in paganism. And we talk, this is a slide I took directly out of last week's sermon. Now what comes up this week is one of the central boundary markers between what we sort of anachronistically look back as Judaism. And this then would become one of the dividing elements within the conversation about how what God was doing through Israel, how to regard the destruction of the temple that would come in 70 AD. This point of circumcision had become for the Jews the defining boundary marker between them and everyone else in the Roman world. A couple of weeks ago, we talked about the Church of Antioch. And this is the flashpoint where it happened. And this chapter, chapter 15, is in many ways the central chapter for the entire book of Acts. Upon this decision, almost everything hinges. Certain people came down from Judea to Antioch and were teaching the believers, unless you are circumcised according to the custom taught by Moses, you cannot be saved. There's a ton in that sentence. As the movement grew, these kinds of questions emerged. And as you see the development in the book of Acts, Peter, you have this conflict between the Hellenistic believers in Jerusalem and those who didn't believe. That's the conflict among the Jews. You had that persecution. You had Peter and Cornelius. You had all of these things that Luke is sort of leading up to this chapter with. And then the issue of circumcision comes because, again, in the synagogue, women could undergo a ceremonial washing and become members of the community. Men needed to be circumcised. And as we've seen, there are all these god-fears in these synagogues who had not gone under the ritual and, again, painful, physical, dangerous operation of circumcision in order to become full members of the synagogue community. So what's at stake here is a whole bunch of definitional things. It is a hugely big deal. Who's in, who's out? What does it mean to be in? What are the rules? Now, again, often when we talk today, people think, well, that's Judaism. And I want to bring back this point that I made earlier on. When Paul was on the road to Damascus, his views began to change. Now we often think of it as being converted from something called Judaism to something called Christianity, and in that his mature thought, he compared these two religions, explaining why the latter was preferable. But if we approach matters in this way, we will quite simply never understand either Saul of Tarsus or Paul the apostle, because this wasn't the frame they're thinking of. They're in the moment trying to work through the questions. What does it mean that Jesus rose from the dead? Those who believe in him, how do they form community? How does that community differ from the synagogue practices? How do Romans participate in that community? These are all the questions, and it's an enormous, an enormous, it's an enormous deal. So this is how you interacted with God and the world and the future. In Paul's day, religion consisted of God-related activities that, along with politics and community life, held a culture together, bound the members of the culture to its divinities and to one another. In the modern Western world, religion tends to mean God-related individual beliefs and practices that are supposedly separable from culture, politics, and community life. For Paul, religion was woven into all of life. For the Western world, it is separated from it. And so this issue of circumcision gets connected with everything that it means to be part of this community. Now it had the word saved there. Well, what do we mean by that? Again, we tend to read back with our categories, and I'm not complaining about those categories at all. I was noting those weren't the categories that they were bringing to it. Much of what they're considering is life and their inclusion in Israel. Now last week when Paul was in Lystra where they had that riot and he got stoned, this is the sermon he preached to the Gentiles. In the past, he let all nations go their own way. This is almost exactly what he says on Mars Hill in Athens in chapter 19. He has not left himself without testimony. He has shown kindness by giving you rain from heavens and crops in their seasons. He provides you with plenty of food and fills your hearts with joy. Now Paul is saying, now with Christ and the revelation of the resurrection, he's calling all people to come to himself. And they are to come to himself and participate in these communities. And again, you can see this as sort of a continual outgrowth of what was happening after the destruction of the first temple, the tradition of the synagogues. This is now the way believers begin to become transformed by the Holy Spirit into a new way of life, which will even in fact go beyond death through the resurrection into the age to come. When you're talking about saved, all of that stuff is being included in it. It's not simply after death. our life together, how we live now, how this continues through death, just as Jesus' way of living continued through his death. So we're going to finish up chapter 14. They preach the gospel in that city and when a large number of disciples, then they return to Lystra, Iconium and Antioch. That's the city and Antioch back up the way that they had came before. In other words, they went down and they're in the area and distances are long. You don't have jet travel. So they went up and they would go into those cities and they would meet with those who started to believe and they would teach and encourage them to continue in this way. Well, what exactly is the way? Well, it's probably something a lot like the synagogue, but bit by bit, it continues to sort of come together and transform and in increasing measure becomes something a little bit distinct from what it was before. And now you have this question though of, well, should the men be circumcised? Because this group came up to Antioch and said that and it was a completely understandable thing for them to believe because this was the differentiating aspect between them and all of the other non-Jews, the pagan population. We must go through many hardships to enter the kingdom of God, they said. Paul and Barnabas appointed elders for them in each church and with prayer and fasting committed them to the Lord in whom they had put their trust. After going through Pasidion, they came to Pamphylia and when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down to Atalia. From Atalia they sailed back to Antioch, that's Syrian Antioch where this whole thing started, where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work that they had now completed. So this is this first missionary journey that he goes on. They were commissioned, if you remember from a few chapters ago, they were commissioned by the church in Antioch. On arriving there, they gathered the church together and reported all that God had done through them and how he had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles. They stayed there a long time with the disciples. Now this passage comes in. A certain people came from Judea to Antioch and were teaching the believers, unless you are circumcised according to the custom taught by Moses, you cannot be saved. Now we don't know a lot about these early communities. As churches would grow, they would meet in homes and they would probably split up because you couldn't get everyone in a home once it got to a certain size. And there were these itinerant preachers who would come through and there would be prophets and preachers and they would give a word and they would give instruction. But not everyone was on the same page about everything. There are lots of different ideas floating around. And at some point, if they were going to consider themselves all one community, now part of those who believe in the resurrection of Jesus, they're going to have to get on the same page with respect to this absolutely defining element of the Jews in the midst of the pagan Roman Empire. This brought Paul and Barnabas into sharp dispute and debate with them. So now they've got to fight. So Paul and Barnabas were appointed, along with some other believers, to go to Jerusalem. Now pay attention to what's happening here. Because all along the way, we're going to be watching individuals with authority. Well, Paul and Barnabas, they seem to have authority. These people who came up from Judea, they seem to have authority. But how are we to regard these multiple authorities when they're speaking different things? It seems to be that the group appoints them to do things. So now we have individuals and we have groups operating together, both of those aspects to deal with this difference of theology. The church sent them on their way and as they traveled through Phoenicia and Samaria, they told how the Gentiles had been converted. Okay, so they very much have an agenda in this and they are planting the seed all along the way. And as you can imagine, probably a good many Jews are very skeptical about this, especially Jews who had lived in the broader Roman Empire because they had staked so much on circumcision. It was such a costly line of demarcation that this is the way we know we are Jews. This is the way we know we are on the right way to God. This is the way that we practice faithfulness to God. And by virtue of this, God will remember us and count us as his own. Circumcision was that important. But all these Gentiles are believing. Well, what do they mean they're believing? Well, they're having transformations of ideas. There's manifestations in the churches of power, the kind that we've been reading about. There's all this stuff happening that Paul and Barnabas and Peter in the house of Cornelius are saying, they haven't been circumcised, but we certainly must regard them as Christians. What are we to do about this? This news made all the believers very glad. When they came to Jerusalem, they were welcomed by the church and the apostles and the elders. Now you see a hierarchy there already because, well, they didn't decide, we're just going to figure this out in Antioch and everybody else can go jump in the sea. We should all be together. And in fact, there's sort of branches and a root. And Jerusalem is where the apostles are, where there's Peter, where there's James, that, well, we should listen to them. Remember, I said, there's sort of groups have authority and individuals have authority, but they're going to have to figure out how all of this works together. Then some of the believers who belong to the party of the Pharisees stood up and said, Gentiles must be circumcised and required to keep the law of Moses. Now, the Pharisees, and we've met them before, I've said many times that even though when we read the gospels, there's a lot of confrontation with the Pharisees. In many ways, the Pharisees of all the groups are closest to what Jesus believes. They're not hiding in caves like the Essenes are out in the desert. They're not knifing Romans like the zealots. They're not like the aristocracy that says, well, the best new way to live is the Roman way. So let's all get on board and go to the hippodrome and build Roman institutions. They're resisting Hellenization, but Jesus and the Pharisees, so in some ways they're so close, but yet their closeness adds some of the conflict. And so it's absolutely expected that a point like this, so the Pharisees have been conducting sort of a low level culture war all along to resist Hellenistic pagan influence. This is the main bulwark we've been using to identify and differentiate ourselves from the rest of the world that doesn't have the revelation of God, those Gentiles who have not been chosen and called by God. This is the heart in many ways of the disagreement and the difference. So the apostles and the elders met to consider the question. Now again, you have leaders, Peter, James, and you have groups, apostles, elders. These are the people that are listening to each other, talking about it, and trying to discern, okay, what is God doing? What is right? How are they going to make a decision like this? Well, the Gentile believers want to keep the narrative thread to the story of Israel and to Jesus because they're believing both that, well, in these Hebrew scriptures that many of them have been paying attention to in the synagogues and now the story of the resurrection, Jesus is the fulfillment of these scriptures. It's very important for them to keep all these pieces together. How did Jesus relate to Israel's story? Well, that's a big part of the teaching of the apostles, the kinds of things we're reading in the book of Acts, and then what you'll read in the other epistles out to churches. How they go back to the people who knew Jesus personally. And so, okay, go down to Jerusalem, talk to the people, let's get more information and let's figure this out. Very quickly you have this sense of authority. After much discussion, Peter got up and addressed them. Now, there's a lot of cultural layers here and, you know, I've worked with Korean groups and one of the things that you notice very quickly when you work with Korean groups, they come to decisions differently. And believe you me, Koreans can have great deal of difference of opinion between each other, but they tend not to fight publicly. They go behind closed doors, they have their battle, they come to their resolution and when they come out publicly, there it is. And it looks like, well, here we are. And they usually have the most important person voice what the group has decided. Is that what's happening here? To some degree, perhaps. Brothers, you know that some time ago, God made a choice among you that the Gentiles might hear from my lips the message of the gospel and believe. This is the story of Jesus' resurrection. God, who knows the heart, showed that he accepted them by giving the Holy Spirit to them. They saw the manifestation of the Holy Spirit in the house of Cornelius, something analogous or similar, at least relatable to what they had been seeing among the Jewish believers in Jerusalem. He did not discriminate between us and them, for he purified their hearts by faith. Oh, now you're getting new theology. He purified their hearts by faith, not by ceremony. And this is going to come through in the story of the church. Now then, why do you try to test God? Now he's pulling up Old Testament references. You'd better not test God. We know that from the Exodus wanderings. By putting on the necks of Gentiles a yoke that neither we nor our ancestors had been able to bear. He's reading the Old Testament and saying, we failed the covenant. We fail it regularly. Now God, through Jesus, has provided a new way through his Holy Spirit. No, we believe it is through the grace of our Lord Jesus that we are saved, that we are included in this new way of life, that we are empowered in this new way of life, that this new way of life continues through the grave into the resurrection, just as they are. So Peter says a big word of embrace. The whole assembly became silent as they listened to Barnabas and Paul. Now notice, Peter spoke first. Now lesser people of lesser status are going to be recorded. That's Paul and Barnabas. That might not appear to us, but it certainly was sort of the status pecking order for them. Paul and Barnabas told about the signs and the wonders that had gone on among the Gentiles through them. Now what we're seeing is sort of a multi-factor authentication process here. You have people who knew Jesus personally and bore witness to his words and deeds. They had authority. They paid attention to what God was doing in the churches. They looked around and they watched the behavior of other people. They saw the miracles. They saw changed lives. They saw behaviors. That counted as something. Are they in line with what God revealed in the past? Now they're going to have the questions of how about the continuity with all the way back to God's deliverance of Israel from Egypt all the way till now? Does this fit with the whole picture? Following Jewish tradition of the sacred text, James, the brother of Jesus, now stands up. When they finished, it sounds like they all sort of came to consensus. And now James, who is probably the most preeminent one in Jerusalem, stands up to basically summarize what they at all come to basically within their cultural mode of discussion. When they finished, James spoke up. Brothers, he said, listen to me. Simon has described to us how God first intervened to choose a people for his name from the Gentiles. You see him weaving this new thing into the story of the Old Testament. And that will be very much what the New Testament does. The words of the prophets are in agreement with this as it is written. In other words, they're seeing this as fulfillment of the Hebrew scriptures that they have received. They are looking to achieve continuity of what's happening now with what happened back as recorded in the Hebrew Bible. It is my judgment, therefore, again, it seems like the group has come to this. And so now he speaks for the group, this multi-factor authentication all coming together. That we should not make it difficult for the Gentiles who are turning to God. Instead, we should write to them, telling them to abstain from food polluted by idols, from sexual immorality, from the meat of strangled animals, and from blood. For the law of Moses has been preached in every city from earliest times and is read in the synagogues on every Sabbath. In other words, we're changing something here, but we can't change too much. What you'll notice here is that there is leadership. James is clearly a leader, but there's followership. There's the community working together. The decisions are made in a culturally appropriate way for how they make decisions. And well, now they'll see how the whole thing goes when they roll it out. Now these requirements have often sort of baffled people because people today might say, well, we don't seem to have all these requirements about blood. And so there's actually a lot going on there. Food sacrifice to idols and meat. Whoops, there's a typo. And meat and blood with blood. It would have made table fellowship between Jews and Gentiles very difficult. Not too many years ago, one of our church plants was renting a Jewish synagogue, which before the Jewish synagogue bought it, had been a Christian church. So the building had changed hands multiple times, but they were renting it. And basically what the Jewish community asked is that when they do food things on their facility, they stay strictly vegetarian. That avoided all of these questions about pork or meat with blood and how the meat was slaughtered. In other words, and so then when the church plan agreed, you know, when they came to agreement with release, the church plan agreed to keep all of their activities strictly vegetarian. That's what they did. But the fourth point, and so a lot of, there's a lot of in the commentaries, there's a lot of debate about, well, these were all ritual items, but what about this last point, sexual immorality, because as I had mentioned in my comments about Tom Holland's book, Dynasty, that was a big deal. And that was a big differentiator between the Jewish community and the broader Roman empire. And what we see happen is that questions about sexual immorality, the church will basically keep, if not intensify, a la the Sermon on the Mount, Jewish ideas regarding a sex life that's appropriate to the people of God. And so that creates a lot of debate. Is this a ritualistic requirement? Is this a moral requirement? So it's a very big deal that gets landed here. What comes is sort of a two-track system that we're going to see a little bit later in Paul. Paul has different expectations for Jewish believers in terms of how they express their Christian life to God from Gentile believers. And we're going to find moments where this comes to the fore. And in fact, later in the book of Acts, there's going to be moments when, well, Paul gets arrested precisely on these points. Then the apostles and elders with the whole church decided to choose some of their own men and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas. In other words, Paul and Barnabas, everybody sort of knows where they're at. And so Paul and Barnabas go back to Antioch and say, yeah, they all agree with us. Really? No, we're going to need some others to go. Some who are going to say, yep, it was a difficult decision, but they're going to be able to speak with authority that not that anybody imagined Paul and Barnabas were liars. But again, these are the kinds of things you do to keep a community together, especially with difficult and groundbreaking decisions like this one. They chose Judas called Barsebus and Silas, men who were leaders among the believers. With them, they sent the following letter. So not only did they send other individuals, they sent a letter. The apostles and elders, your brothers, notice we're in authority. We're also on the same level. You see, already in Christianity, this tension between hierarchy and unity or sameness is already being worked out in the practices of the church. We are in authority, but we are also like you. And this is very much what we see seated in Jesus, not just authority, not just sameness, but both intention to the Gentile believers in Antioch, Syria and Cilicia. In other words, these are all the places that the church has gone. We have heard that some went out from us without our authorization and disturbed you, troubling your minds by what they said. You know this is going to cause division because basically they're drawing a line and they had to draw a line. But as you well know, the working through of this line is going to take some time. So we all agreed to choose some men and send them to you with our dear friends, Barnabas and Paul, men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, we are sending Judas and Silas to confirm by word of mouth what we are writing. It seems good to the Holy Spirit and to us not to burden you with anything beyond the following requirements. You are to abstain from food sacrifice to idols, from blood, from the meat of strangled animals and from sexual immorality. You will do well to avoid these things. Farewell. Simple letter laying it out and this keeps the ball going down the field. So the men sent off and went to Antioch where they gathered the church together and delivered the letter. The people read it and were glad for its encouraging message. Judas and Silas, who themselves were prophets, said much to encourage and strengthen the believers. After spending some time there, they were sent off by the believers with a message of peace to return to those who had sent them. But Paul and Barnabas remained in Antioch where they had many others taught and preached the word of God. So in other words, for Antioch, situation is resolved. Gentiles need not be circumcised. We're going to continue to meet together, probably sort of synagogue-like perhaps. We don't really need to meet together. We're going to meet together, probably sort of synagogue-like perhaps. We don't really know. We imagine that things are probably continuing to be modified and Paul and Barnabas and the teachers, it's all sort of growing and being worked out as a community. Did this settle the matter? No. And yes, we're going to hear about it a lot as we continue on through Paul. The book of Galatians goes into this quite deeply. Other issues will come up and we're going to find them of 1 and 2 Corinthians. We'll find them in Romans. We'll find them in other places. But for Paul and Barnabas and many of the Gentile believers, they have a word of authority from the apostles in Jerusalem that this is the new rule. Now, like I said, yes and no. Some are going to like it. Some aren't. It's going to be a lot of years until it basically becomes the default. It sets, and we'll see this in controversies of our day. I could list many such things today that we continue to work through as a church. It sets a template for the church to continue to wade through difficult matters. If Pentecost was the birthday of the church, the Jerusalem Council was the beginning of broader church organization and community. We really see it beginning here and it's fundamental for how the church was going to grow and sustain itself and live together in the Roman Empire almost all the time amidst controversies and disagreements, some of them enormously serious. But what they patterned in Acts 15 was this multi-factor authentication. In the broadest terms, these same three patterns continue to hold today for the church. There's sort of an apostolic succession. How does this square with those who know the living memory of the church? There's the work of the Holy Spirit. How does it seem to be working out on the ground in the life of the church? There's the written testimony of the scriptures. How does it square and fit with what we find in the Bible? Today, we continue to make decisions with this multi-factor authentication. But this tension remains, the tension between individuals with authority like James and groups of believers that empower them and send them and act together. We find these tensions within church history all along. We find these tensions even in our own individual churches. The pastor says this, the church seems to believe this. How can we all work together? Another book to drop in your laps, as if I don't do enough of that, is I think an excellent book by Alastair McGrath called Heresy. And it doesn't sound like a very nice title for a Christian book. But what he shows is that in the first centuries of the Christian church, this seemed to be the process, often very difficult, of how the church figured out what to believe, what to do, how to live. And it very much follows these patterns of multi-factor authentication. Sometimes better, sometimes worse, the church works its way through the world and the church works its way through history. Most of what we believe is the product of these very long processes of working these things together. In Christianity, the God of creation is also the God of history. He lives and guides his church through history. We continue this work, that's what we do now. We work, we listen, we think, we read, we trust, we believe, we talk. We wait on the Lord as he moves through the leaders of the church, through the body of believers, through the testimony he gives us, through his word, and through watching what the Holy Spirit does around us to follow him and to continue the work that we talked about last week of bearing witness to him and watching him work through history to change the world, just as he did the empire.