https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4QyLXs_LNpU

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my Sunday sermon. Things might change between now and Sunday, you never know. Recently there was a report put out coming out of the UK on religious persecution. It was built on United Nations reports, media reports. The report essentially said that religious persecution is a reality for one-third of the world and the most persecuted group in the world are Christians. This is partially due, I'm sure, to the fact that Christianity is the largest religious community in the world, a defiable formal religious community in the world. But you'll find persecution of Christians in the Islamic world in China. Recently there was a bombing of a church in Sri Lanka. Religious violence in Nigeria and other places in Africa are fairly well known, sometimes horrendous numbers coming out of Nigeria. Central Asia, there's a lot of trouble and even in Latin America, which is a very Christian part of the world, there are places where Protestants and Catholics speak up for democracy and they face persecution. And so if you keep an eye on the newspaper you will find now and then stories about Christian persecution, persecution of people because they are Christians and and either state entities or terrorist entities wanting to intimidate or run Christians out with the use of violence. But even apart from government or terrorist persecution, I believe Christianity is a rather non-consumerist religion. In fact, often when I talk to people about Christianity, they're a little surprised because they they imagine that I should be trying to sell them something. But one way to look at the gospel is basically this, if you live like Jesus, you will die like Jesus and you will be raised like Jesus. But who wants to live like Jesus? He died when he was about 33 years old. He never got married. He didn't have too many possessions and he was killed by his, by the Romans in collaboration with his his own countrymen. And so who really wants to live like Jesus? And especially because who wants to die like Jesus? crucified, abandoned by his friends, mocked by his enemies, and then you say well, you'll be raised like Jesus, but a good number of people look at that and and don't feel that is necessarily compensation if they have doubts about the resurrection. You have to believe in the resurrection to imagine some consumerist payoff for this entire story. Well, the book of Revelation knows this. In fact, the book of Revelation is pretty much assumes that this dour view of Christianity is in fact the correct one. The book of Revelation has a has a fairly easy structure to follow. Chapter one is the image of the Son of Man that we talked about two Sundays ago. Chapters two through three are seven letters to seven churches and they aren't particularly laudatory or encouraging letters. Some of them are, but most of them are, are pretty strident in in the critiques of John and the spirit against these churches. Chapter four, as we saw last week, is this vision from the throne room and and you have this amazing vision of this figure on the throne in the in the center of heaven, but then there's a scroll and that scroll represents the unfolding of the story of the world and the scroll is sealed and there's this surprising call who can open the scroll and you would think that the one sitting on the throne could open the scroll, but then there appears this lion of Judah, this lamb who was slain and and that lamb is suddenly center on the throne and again, this is a dream and it's hard to figure out the the various aspects of the dream and and we learn that this this lion of Judah, this lamb who was slain, this one can open the scroll and then the seals are open and it's not very good news. I watched as the lamb opened the first of seven seals, then I heard one of four living creatures say in a voice like thunder, Come! and I looked and there before me was a white horse. Its rider held a bow and he was given a crown and he rode out as a conqueror bent on conquest. When the lamb opened the second scroll, I heard the second living creature say, Come! Then another horse came out, a fiery red one. Its rider was given power to make peace from the to take peace from the earth and to make people kill each other. To him was given a large sword. When the lamb opened the third scroll, I heard a third living creature say, Come! I looked and there before me was a black horse. Its rider was holding a pair of scales in his hand. Then I heard what sounded like a voice from among the four living creatures say, Two pounds of wheat for a day's wages, six pounds of barley for a day's wages and do not damage the oil and the wine. When the lamb opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of four living creatures say, Come! I looked and there before me was a pale horse. Its rider was named Death and Hades was following close behind him. They were given power over a fourth of the earth to kill by sword, famine and plague and by the wild beasts of the earth. When he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar a black horse. When he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slain because of the word of God and the testimony they had maintained. They called out in a loud voice, How long sovereign Lord, holy and true, until you judge the inhabitants of the earth and avenge our blood? Then each of them was given a white robe and they were told to wait a little longer until the full number of their fellow servants, their brothers and sisters, were killed, just as they had been. Wow, this is awfully dark. I watched as he opened the sixth seal. There was a great earthquake. The sun was turned black like sackcloth made of goat hair. The whole moon turned blood red and the stars in the sky fell to earth as figs dropped from a fig tree when shaken by a strong wind. The heavens receded like a scroll being rolled up and every mountain and island was removed from its place. Then the kings of the earth, the princes, the generals, the rich, the mighty, and everyone else, both slave and free, hid in caves among the rocks of the mountains. They called to the mountains and to the rocks, Fall on us and hide us from him who sits on the throne and from the wrath of the lamb. For the great day of their wrath has come and who can withstand it? After this I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding back the four winds of earth to prevent any wind from blowing on the land or on the sea or on any tree. I saw another angel coming up from the east, having the seal of the living god. He called out in a large voice, in a loud voice, to the four angels who had been given power to harm the earth and sea. Do not harm the land or the sea or the trees until we put a seal on the forehead of the servants of our god. Then I heard the number of those who were sealed, 144,000 from all the tribes of Israel, from the tribe of Judah, 12,000. And it goes through the tribes. And it's very interesting to notice that Judah comes first even though he's the fourth son. He takes preeminence in the story of Genesis and Benjamin comes last as the youngest son. And you'll notice that Joseph is not split into two tribes as with Israel, but is one tribe and Levi is counted as his own tribe. And so you get the number 144,000, which is 12 tribes times a thousand, number of greatness and completeness times another 12. And it mirrors in a sense the 24 elders. After this I looked and there before me was a great multitude that no one could count from every nation, tribe, people and language standing before the throne and before the lamb. And they were wearing white robes and they were holding palm branches in their hand. And you might notice that this is a there's a lot of repetition here from previous chapters, verse five. There's a lot of repetition here from previous chapters, verse five. The that when when the when the lamb appeared who had power to open the scroll and a song went up, you are worthy to take the scroll and to open its seals because you were slain and with your blood you purchased for God people from every tribe and language and people and nation. These are the people. And they're wearing white robes, just like the 24 elders surrounding the throne and just like the ones under the altar that cried out, how long sovereign Lord, holy and true until you judge the inhabitants of the earth, then each was given a white robe. And so the white robes here symbolize the purity given to them by God as those who had suffered, as those who had suffered like Jesus suffered. And they cried out in a loud voice, salvation belongs to our God who sits on the throne and to the lamb. All the angels were standing around the throne and around and around the elders and the four living creatures. And they fell down on their faces before the throne and worshiped God saying, Amen, praise and glory and wisdom and thanks and honor and power and strength be to our God forever and ever. Amen. Then one of the elders asked me, these in white robes, who are they and where did they come from? I answered, Sir, you know, and he said, they are those who came out of the great tribulation. They were washed. They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the lamb. And again, you can you can see the symbolism going here because obviously if you wash anything white in blood, it doesn't look white at all. They are white because of the powerful cleansing blood of the lamb, which is clearly the sacrifice of Jesus. Therefore, they are before the throne of God and serve him day and night in his temple. And he who sits on the throne will shelter them with his presence. Never again will they hunger. Never again will they thirst. The sun will not beat down on them, nor any scorching heat for the lamb at the center of the throne will be their shepherd. That's how the images move back and forth. He will lead them to springs of living water and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes. The 144,000 is clearly the church. But what is the church? It is an army and that fills people with fear because they imagine it's an army that will kill and take and plunder. But it's an army that sings and it's an army that sings even while it suffers. And we think about Paul in the Philippian jail. It's an army of hope, but it's not an army that crushes before it like the great beasts in Daniel 7. It's an army that conquers while bearing witness to the suffering of its master, the lamb that was slain. This army is a very strange army because it seems like when it loses, when it suffers, when it's persecuted, when it suffers in a particular way, that's how it wins, which is exactly what you notice from the crucifixion. Now, here's the thing about suffering. You will not escape suffering. It might come by persecution, by governments or terror, or it might come by common loss in the age of decay. One of the things that I see is that everybody suffers and sometimes they suffer in silly ways, but sometimes they suffer in serious ways. And it comes to all of us. And the only question is, what will you do with your sufferings? And the admonition here is to not waste your sufferings. Well, how do I not waste my sufferings? By not becoming bitter or whiny, but turn to God with them and bring them to God. And if you read the Psalms, in fact, you'll notice that the Psalms are one prayer to God of suffering after another. Pray through them. Because here's the thing that suffering will teach you. You will learn trust and faith, usually only through them. Now, it's fashionable in the secular West to de-emphasize the story arc beyond the grave, that the only thing that matters is here in our little lives, which isn't a very long time at all. But the Book of Revelation won't go there. That's part of the purpose of Apocalypse. Justice was won on Good Friday and Easter. But when we look at that, we think, how can a wrongly accused man who gets suffered, who suffers and is brutalized and mocked by his enemies and is abandoned by his friends, how can this be a story of justice? Well, it's a story of justice by seeing through to the end. And that's what the Book of Revelation shows. The secular sphere is too small a space to finally be served for justice to finally be served and resolved. I should change that pronoun. How should we then live? Endure suffering with hope. Encourage those who are wronged not to hit back. Vengeance is mine, says the Lord, and God says, Christians ought not to hit back. Christians trust that God will, in fact, make things right. Christianity always shines best through suffering. Do you believe it? Do you believe even when it costs you? Are you generous and anti-bitter when life is unfair towards you? Can you dispense generosity in an ungenerous world? One of my favorite illustrations of this, something that I've used before and some of you have heard, comes from one of my favorite books, Cory Ten Boom's The Hiding Place. And if you don't know anything about the story, it's the story of a Dutch family who hid Jews from the Nazis during the Second World War. They were discovered and arrested and sent to the camps themselves. Cory survived the camps, but her beloved sister, Betsy, did not. After the war, Cory became an itinerant preacher, talking about her experiences of the war and traveling throughout Europe and Germany and really all over the world. And she, of course, she was a Christian. She was a deeply committed Christian, and she talked about loss and sacrifice. And then it happened at one of her rallies. I continue to speak partly because of the home in Lumendal ran on contributions, partly because of the hunger for Betsy's story seemed to increase with time. I traveled all over Holland to other parts of Europe to the United States. But the place where the hunger was greatest was Germany. Germany was a land of ruin, cities of ashes and rubble, but more terrifying still, minds and hearts of ashes. Just across the border was to feel the great weight that hung over that land. It was at the church service in Munich that I saw him, a former SS man who had stood guard at the shower door in the processing center at Ravensbruck. He was the first of our actual jailers that I had seen since the time. And suddenly it was all there, the room of mocking men, heaps of clothing, Betsy's plain blanched face. He came up to me as the church was emptying, beaming and bowing. How grateful I am for your message, Fraulein, he says, to think, as you say, he has washed my sins away. Well, what could Corine do about this? Washed his sins away? He's a Nazi death camp guard for Pete's sake. He was responsible for her beloved sister's death. Why would he get white robes? His hand was thrust out to shake mine, and I, who preach so often to the people in Blumenthal, the need to forgive kept my hand at my side. Even as the angry, vengeful thoughts boiled through me, I saw the sin of them. Jesus had died for this man. Was I going to ask for more? Lord Jesus, I prayed, forgive me and help me to forgive him. I tried to smile. I struggled to raise my hand. I could not. I felt nothing, not the slightest spark of warmth or charity. And so again I breathed the silent prayer, Jesus, I cannot forgive him. Give your forgiveness. As I took his hand, the most incredible thing happened. From my shoulder along my arm and through my hand, a current seemed to pass through me to him, while into my heart sprang a love for this stranger that almost overwhelmed me. And so I discovered that it is not our own forgiveness any more than our own goodness that the world's healing hinges, but on his. When he tells us to love our enemies, he gives, along with the command, the love itself.