https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=SzjZ5Eg-h4U

 Hey Sacramento. And the world. Not just Sacramento, the whole world. 209, Madera, 559, 707, 415. And the world. UC Hammon, Country Grammar. Welcome to the Restoranian Fall Show. It is Fourth of July. Shhh. Yeah, Fourth of July. Our nation's birthday. And we had church today. Church from Fourth of July this year. To all the soldiers. And the ones that we've lost. And the ones that we've lost. My father, I love you, my father. He was a veteran. He was looking down at me. And he said, I'm proud of that kid. Yeah, he was a veteran. Yeah. In Vietnam. Vietnam. No. Korea. No. Pete's dad was Korean. Oh yeah. And your grandfather was Korean. Yeah. So anyhow. Okay, so local sports first. Freddie, what's your local sports? The cookery. This is my team. Kings 52. Brad Miller. I remember we used to play for the Kings. Brad Miller. Brad Miller's faithful fan here on the Freddie and Paul show. Yeah. Matter of fact, you gave me this. I did. You gave me this, Mr. Paul. I didn't give you that. I put my initials in it. And, okay. The cookers and the suns are in it. Okay. And the suns are ahead of it. Their schedule is better than theirs. Their record is better than theirs. And then it's the Atlanta and the Bucks. I want it to be the Bucks and the suns. I think it's the Bucks and the suns. And I want the suns to take the whole thing. You want the suns to take the whole thing. Because I had a friend that was the mayor at one time. Kevin Johnson. Kevin Johnson. Yeah, number seven. I made a picture of him, Paul. He put it up in his sandal. In his office. He was a very nice man. He gave me tickets to the game. Really. When I was supposed to be playing. Me and my dad went. I think my mom might have gone once or twice. Yeah. She loved it. She loved KJ. Every time she talked to KJ, she'd be laughing. Anyways. Sorry you're not here today, CJ. I guess you were busy. Making a new record or something. But it's okay. And, Paul. What I understand is. Why can't things be easy? Why does it have to be so hard? That's all I want to know. Didn't you learn that in Sunday school? Why things are so hard? Yeah, because things aren't. If it wasn't hard, it wouldn't be easy. What did Pastor Paul say this morning? That's true. If it wasn't hard, it wouldn't be easy. That's it. But. It also gives us more going to God when we came here. Paul, but I had a question. Why, when I wasn't taking my medicine, did I have to have a shot? Mom said they called her. No. My mom called them and said I didn't have my shot and I was chemically imbalanced. But that really shook me over. I know. I don't know why that shot in particular. But I'm sure you had to have it. It wouldn't give it to you if you hadn't needed it. It's OK. Don't have to worry about that shot. Oh, T Grizzly, I saw the video of T Grizzly. Did he? He still hasn't left a comment. I know. I'll write him and he can write me. OK. I think that's a good plan. But I opened up for him. I know. And I did four songs. Actually the DJ asked me to go up there. I didn't just go up there. He asked me to go up there. OK. So you opened for T Grizz? Yeah. OK. Anyway, so, Paul, what's new with you, man? What's up with coming? What can we look out for in your Jesus walk? OK. I don't know, Fred. I don't know how to answer that question, but it's a good question, Fred. I wanted to tell you, I'm sorry I was coffee-sused. I was smoking and I didn't do coffee in church, but I was drinking my water, my water, and it went down the wrong pipe. And I was wild. OK. That's fine. I've just looked I've fallen asleep during church before and that's not good. I've fallen asleep during church too. Just now when I'm preaching. When I fall asleep while preaching my own sermon, it's really gotta be bad. Like I was saying on the other one, you know, the other program, I can really distinctively hear your voice. I think you can do it solo. During church, he sings good. I asked him if he was in the choir and he said no. I'm not in the choir because I've got to rest. Do you know I had a B at Sac City College for the Gospel Choir? I believe you. I believe you got a good grade for that. I had a B. I believe it, Fred. You're a good singer. I believe it. I think you are a better rapper than a singer. But if I have somebody to harmonize with, like my mom or something, then I sound good. Or if I have Pete to harmonize with. Pete speaks good. If you come early enough to practice, you can always sing with the praise team. Time for the sermon report. I gotta leave at 7am in the morning? Yeah, well, yeah. Okay, now do the sermon. We got the sermon report. Nancy's sermon report. I'll brace myself. We are in with Apostle Paul. And Paul Paul kinda had heaven and earth come together. And that is kinda tough for me to understand. But what I did understand today in the sermon is people, money is not everything. Treat everybody as people as they are. Money black or purple, white or brown. Money is not good. It's more important to walk with God. Yeah, there you go. Walk with freedom. Yeah. Walk the Jesus walk. It's more important. Jesus man, Philip Bass told us about that one. Don't you, Philip Bass. You're interrupting your mother's sermon report. She didn't interrupt the sports report. Alright, go ahead, Mom. So, people strive to get money. Money, money. Money is thought. Oh, it might be mine. No? Not yours today, but it might be from another day. Yeah, it could be. It's in your head. There's a clip on it. Yes, but it's mine honestly. I can show you all where the next one, next Sunday. I'll show you. Better or we're taking it back. Oh, no. Thank you. Anyhow, being back to money. Yeah, it's not going to, money isn't going to get you to heaven. There's only one thing that can get you to heaven if you aren't a child of God. Is repent. You are a child of God. And if you're not a child of God, follow him and be a good listener and do what he says to you. And then treat others the way you want them to. All the money in the world. People think, well, I think I get the best doctors and all in all of this. There's many, many people that die and don't even know Jesus. But because they were striving for the money. And the money was before God. So. What do we have Rick? How many minutes? Nine minutes. Anyhow. I would like people to just calm down. Okay. And not strive for money. Oh, that's my goal. Alright. One love to that. Alright. Come on. Ready? Come out of sadness wherever you've been. Come broken hearted the rescue began. Come find your mercy oh sinner come home. Earth has no sorrow that can not be healed. Earth has no sorrow that can not be healed. Earth has no sorrow that heaven can't heal. So lay down your burdens. Lay down your shame. All who are broken lift up your faith. Oh wonder come home. You're not too far. So lay on your heart. Lay on your heart. Come as you are. Come as you are. There's hope for hopeless and all those who stay come sit at the table because best friends are always amazed. Come taste the grace. There's best from the weary because Fred Beas don't care and you best not become weary because God put me on deserts of grief if you don't understand you're out of reach. Come as you are. Come as you are. Oh tonight is the night that you come as you are. There's joy in the morning oh sin will be still. Earth has no sorrow that heaven can't heal. Earth has no sorrow that heaven can't heal. Come as you are. Come as you are. Come as you are. And I have the box. One love. One love.