https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JlnlZvHanho

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul Show! Welcome to the Freddie and Paul Show! We got fancy Nancy because we do it kinda rancy. Anyways, this is our prayer for the day. Dear God, know me to grow in my knowledge and appreciation of who you are. How well do you know God's character? How does it match your preparation of Jesus to you? Well, I think if you follow Jesus, you will be very happy that you follow Jesus because you will be doing what he is asked to do. Okay. And then in church you said, you could have a million dollars, but that might not make you happy. The Lord will make you happy over money. We can check the videotape on that. I think that's true. Go after the tapes. Okay. You're in a mess. You're vaccinated. Okay. Anyways, go ahead and on top. So what are we going to do today? Nancy, you got a sermon report. Freddie, you got local sports. I mean, if you're putting together the whole, I don't know, maybe Rick has weather. How's the weather, Rick? It's nice outside. Better than it's been. It's been warm. That's true. 103 the other day. So what's going on in the NBA playoffs, Fred? Okay, the Jazz are in it. The Phoenix Suns are in it. I want Phoenix to take it. The Lakers are in it, those three. And then in the Eastern it's the Brooklyn Nets. I'm trying to think. Do you know, Paul? I don't know. I'm not following. You know Rick who's left in the East? Brooklyn Nets. I'd have to ask Greg. Greg, you know this all, so props out to you. Props out to Greg. All right. I've really been looking on YouTube, and that person I told you about, that female, Tweetie Bird? Tweetie Bird? She is tight. And she has like a million views in two weeks. I have to look her up. I could not believe it. So props out to you, Tweetie Bird. Props out to you, Tweetie Bird. Thanks for watching the Freddie and Paul Show. We know you're faithful. Leave a comment down below. And my email is... No, no, don't give your email online. Oh, email's okay. All right, go ahead. They can't do nothing with my email. They send you an email. They do something with it. All right, never mind. Anyway, so... He's not a computer scientist. You can't... Is it true Paul? Is that computer working? Is that computer working? Yeah. Good, good. But I got to wait until I get Wi-Fi. But anyways, how do you get... Can they really do something? No, you can give your email. Everybody has my email already. Okay, then I'm going to give my email. My name is Frank Schuller, S-C-H-U-L-L-E-R-072 at gmail.com. Please message me if you're a producer or if you're into music, like doing Spotify and TuneCore. My friend Charlie J told me to ask about this. Me and Charles were in the studio one time and we made five songs. And then we made another five songs the second time over by Arden and Hal. And then we were done with that. So yeah, that worked out pretty cool. So yeah. And the A's won last night, Greg, and the Giants won. The Giants won. The Giants played the Rockies and the A's played the Angels. Mark Cole, he would like that. You were on Angels and now you're on Angels. Mark Cole was. And he is risen because Jesus Christ is risen. We shall praise him. His name, Allelu, Allelu. Okay. How about you, Nancy? What do you have? I have Stephen. Who's Stephen? He was stone. Oh. Yes. And basically. Stone in terms of like rocks. Yeah. Throwing rocks at him. Okay. And anyhow, the Sanhedrin, it was their fault too, wasn't it? That he was stone? Or am I wrong? Or am I wrong? No, that's what they decided to do to him. Yeah. Yeah. And he died. And he died basically with the same people that killed Jesus. Sort of, yeah. Yeah. So anyhow, he died. And basically. Watch that stick. After that. Well, the reason he died, maybe that's a good thing to say, is Stephen wanted to be a missionary and the whole world should know about Jesus. And him sitting at the right hand of God. And that's why the rocks got thrown. And. So anyhow. Anyhow, yeah. That's kind of the part that I never really could figure out how Stephen, why he got stoned. And so you gave a good explanation. Oh, thank you. David and Goliath too. Yeah, Goliath got stoned. Just one little one. But it was done well. That's a big number. Okay, well, that's a good report. Okay, I think that's good enough. I'm going to sing, Open the eyes of my heart. And then I'm going to rap, Open the eyes of my heart. You're not going to tell me what to do. Open the eyes of my heart, Lord. Open the eyes of my heart. I want to see you. I want to see you. To see you high and lifted up. Shining in the light of your glory. Pour out your power and love as we sing, Holy, Holy, Holy. Holy, Holy, Holy. Holy, Holy, Holy. Holy, Holy, Holy. I want to see you. Rap version. Open the eyes of my heart, Lord. Open the eyes of my heart. I want to see you. I want to see you. To see you high and lifted up. Shining in the light of your glory. Pour out your power and love as we sing, Holy, Holy, Holy. I said, Holy, Holy, Holy. I want to see you. I want to see you. Open up your eyes, Lord. Because I want to see you. I want to be like fish with a man and reel a man. Like Coogie Bird said, we got it going on, kid. What's happening? Good to go. Out of the SA seat. Really dope. Rhyming, never quitting. I'm on the mic. I am the hit, the best man at your wedding. When I'm on the microphone, I'm not even sweating. I'm coming up. I'm coming down. I'm coming all around. Because this is it, rap. Everybody knows who I be by the way I walk, by the way I talk, by the way I slide, and by the way I ride. Hey, Max. One, one, love. Amen. Amen.