https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OmXIy0uMq4s

 Hi, this is Paul. I probably would have liked this video to be longer than it's going to be, but I have about an hour to record it, and so these two weeks that basically are the school Christmas vacation. So my wife's off work, we've got family coming in and out, I have extra services to do, never quite have as much time to do other things in these two weeks, because at the same time I have at least as much work to do, if not a little bit more, and I want to take as much time as I can to be with my now young adult children who are in and out of the house this time of year, so that's sort of the way this goes. I would have liked to have played clips and everything for this video, but I don't think I'm gonna have the chance. But I, you know, what is, so what is my channel? Well my channel is sort of, at least the monologue videos, are what I'm thinking about for the last couple of days, and I just preached a sermon on the Jordan Hall common stuff, which I thought maybe I'd make a video of today, but then decided this one is more on be, more what I want to, more what I want to do. This is the line between Christians and atheists. In the video I just did last week, a commentary video on Tom Holland's interview, which I thought was really incredible, you know, he talks about he doesn't believe in, he doesn't believe in a God. Now again, pay attention to the details of that, doesn't believe in a God, or doesn't believe in God as such the way Christians do. Someone on Twitter just pointed me to Unsafe, so the Unsafe channel, I was on with them a little bit ago, Carrie Smith, and I forget the other guy's name, it's not there on the screen, they had James Lindsley on with it with a group of people for their own little Christmas party, and you know, there was a really interesting piece that starts about an hour, four minutes in, and goes for about ten minutes, where James Lindsley talks about his evolving relationship with Christianity and Christians, and where he remains an atheist, but he has a lot of respect for them, and really says quite a few pretty dramatic things, and maybe a little later on this week I'll have a little bit more time to, I'd probably like to do a little bit of commenting right on that little clip, because it's really an outstanding little clip. Very interesting, and so it's just such an interesting time where we find atheists, people who have identified as atheist, or even continue to identify as atheists from whatever background, increasingly cozy and familiar with Christians, and well, they might wind up in church now, and then they might even actively go to church, and then continue to consider themselves atheists for one reason or another, well, here they are, and you know, they're, you know, maybe at points a little embarrassed to try to explain it, but not embarrassed enough to avoid Christians, or stay out of church, or do anything like that, so what on earth is going on? And of course in the little corner of the internet that I've been working, you know, we've got a number of you who are in that category, and we've got Christians who are sort of deconstructing, but reconstructing into other things, maybe other denominations, or not reconstructing at all, but it's a very messy little estuary we've got going here right now, so this sort of brought me back to the firing line, you know, the big daddy of all this who kind of kicked off this, didn't kick off the whole movement, of course, because that had been happening without him, but became sort of the flare in the movement, which was of course Jordan Peterson, and his peculiar answer to the question of whether or not he believed in God, and that in some ways was sort of the vestige of a sort of Cold War language, because you have these people over here who believe in God, and these people who don't, and then you could make assumptions and expectations with respect to them, and that whole thing seems to be breaking down. What do we or they mean by believe, and what do they, we or they mean by God? It seems to be much more important questions than how they answer whether or not they believe in God, and of course the, what was one of the most fun moments was the rationality rules moment where he discovers that Jonathan Pigeot is a real Christian. It's like discovering Santa Claus, and there it was, because you're not one of those people who actually believe in a God. Yeah, I do as a matter of fact, and so what is that super thing that they have difficulty believing in, and quite likely Tom Holland and James Lindsay are in exactly the same boat, that well what's their conceptualization of God, and what's the conceptualization of belief that, you know, God is somehow a super thing, and the world is made up of mindless matter, and physical laws just are, and that's just the way the world is, and I just saw a video creep across my algorithm feed to the effect of, you know, physicists trying to get back to the steady state universe because they would just somehow feel a lot more comfortable if you could undermine the Big Bang or get in front of it, and of course this is tremendously ironic given all of the time that many of us have seen Christians try to undermine the Big Bang. What was going on in that fight? What was going on in that fight was really a fight over intentionality, and for many Christians they'd just be against the Big Bang, but what they were really for was intentionality, but they didn't have that language that a little bit more precise, perhaps esoteric, abstracted language, they just sort of knew where the tribal lines were and who the good guys were and who the bad guys were, and we see a lot of that going on, but it's really breaking down, and you know, the same has to do with the definition, the presumed definition of the word religion, that religion is what people do when they imagine a super being or super beings who hear your prayers, and this was very easy to discount via the culture as childish wishful thinking, but we're finding that entire line of argumentation sort of sported out by the new atheists around the time of the, you know, little after 9-11, we just find that sort of falling away as not really a serious way to address what's actually going on beneath the surface. I'd really love to, oh, I've got time, I can do this, hang on. Now I haven't checked the sound or anything, so it may go disastrously wrong, but Michael and Nate and Julian did a conversation on Rando's United on radical orthodoxy, now I know for a lot of you you're going to hear that and think, well, that's just a whole bunch of Christians talking, and they are a whole bunch of Christians talking, but these are some really thoughtful Christians that are, you know, have been on my channel and are on the Discord server and are really wonderful conversation partners because they're just having thoughtful, open, honest, very smart conversations about, well, how can we talk about reality? And Michael here who's been on my channel a number of times and has been on the Meaning Code channel a number of times, you know, Michael is just such a wonderful conversation partner and so such a clear thinker and so just such a wonderful guy. Here he talks a little bit about reflecting back on his deconstruction and his reconstruction. Let's see if the sound levels are okay. Nope, hang on, hang on, we gotta fix that. Let's see. Let's put it here. Okay, let's try again. Yeah, because what it's conceiving of essentially is this underlying unity within all the distinctions we're making, which to me makes a lot of sense. Like, it just, if these things were as disconnected as we sometimes presuppose in the modern vision, like it doesn't, it would be folly to me to, and that's one of the reasons when I deconstructed Away From Faith, I could never embrace any sort of, even though I lived in a materialist culture, I could never really embrace materialism because it just didn't make sense. And I really like this because he's, if you remember, if you go back to my first conversation with him, you know, his, he grew up in sort of a Pentecostal situation and just sort of wasn't buying it and deconstructed and, you know, left the faith and left the church and now is of course clawing his way back and figuring it out and putting it together. And, and as many people, you know, sort of grew up in a Christian bubble in a far bigger materialist world. And so first was sort of enamored by the materialist world and in the, let's see if I can just flip back there. I mentioned here in the slide, Dallas Willards, The Nature and Necessity of Worldviews by the Veritas Farm. I played that in a number of my videos a couple of years ago because Dallas Willard basically makes the point that a lot of the, a lot of the social, a lot of the worldview deconstruction and reconstruction is happening at a very subtle level, usually of social status. And well, it's people, the world sort of appeals to pride. Well, you're not one of those people who believes these things, are you? And then, you know, deep inside your elephant thinks, I'm going to lose herd status if I don't, if I don't keep up with the herd and believe what everybody else believes. And of course the PR agent on the elephant's back starts making up language and, oh, we got another one deconstructed. Oh, we got another one who's not going to church. Oh, we got, you know, and the clapping gods all cheer. But Michael here is sort of thinking about his, you know, the first draft worldview. What do I mean by first draft worldview? We all, we all absorb and inherit these ideas. And so, and we, our absorption is rather indiscriminate. And what we do over time is we try and piece these things together. And when we're in our, our child, when you know, when we're children, we sort of mirror our parents as we grow a little older, we start mirroring other lights and peers and teachers and thinkers, and we just keep processing these things. And then the older we get, the more that we process and the more that we see and, and the more that we try to produce in our minds, this map, which is coherent. And well, I think map is the right metaphor because we have this little tiny internal map that, that sort of tries to relate to the bigger world out there. And that's our worldview, but the world is big and complex and there's a lot of things going on. The levels that you, if you follow it to its logical conclusion, you, you end up deconstructing, you know, the logic of identity leads to post-mortality, which deconstructs logic itself, right? I mean, it all starts falling apart very quickly. And, and there's, there's, there's enough sense, there's enough beauty, there's enough something within, within this world that as long as you have a little bit of gratitude and humility, you, I think you, you, you, you, you have to, you have to, if you're honest, ask some serious questions about where that comes from. Right. I would say, and the only thing I would like to add to that is like, and that the entire project begins out of like a desire to create a space away from God. So of course that's where it, where it ends up. Now, now a space away from God. Now, now just pause and pay attention to that thinking. Now this is very Christian language, but pay attention to the spatiality of it. Now, again, if you would press, I mean, Nate is around the discord server and on the, in the channel comments a lot and nobody's going to not recognize how sharp this guy is and, and how well-rounded he is and how well read he is. You don't have to just look at the books in his background here. You can just read his comments and. Why does he use this language of space away from God? I mean, isn't, isn't that language just sort of bought into the space time, three dimensionality, modernist world? Well, in some ways it is, but also the pre-modern and the ancient world uses the same. And why do we use this now? Again, some smart cognitive scientists might come around and say, well, exaptation, of course we're using metaphor from our daily lives to try to address super sensory things. We don't have any other language. And this is a huge point that CS Lewis makes in his book, miracles and his chapter on, on horrid red things. This is a huge point that we have to contend with, but it's, it's one that isn't. And so smart atheists who are listening to this just begin to scoff because, well, isn't every place space around God? But then again, if you've been immersed in Christian theology, especially if you grew up in it, there's these weird little questions that arise when you're growing up as a Christian. And, you know, a bunch of them are the village atheist questions like, you know, who did Cain marry? Did Cain marry his sister? And, you know, all these kinds of questions. But if you, if you get into other questions, if you were raised or catechized by, by Christianity and someone says, well, God is everywhere. Well, then when Jesus came, God came down to earth. You say, wait a minute, I thought he was already here. Well, he was. Well, what do you mean? How can Jesus be God? And if God is everywhere, then you begin to notice that if you try to push this kind of language beyond what its user intends, the analogies just break down. And, and of course that's not unusual with analogy or metaphor. They, they all break down because we're just trying to compare two things and, and we're trying to extract a little something in particular from the thing. We're trying to extract a relationship, how relevantly realized relationship in order to, to get at what, what, what, what, what exactly are we talking about and where are we going with this? Like it's like, so that, and it gave us a lot of power to act within the world. Do you think modernity began with that motivation? And, and now even with this little conversation here, well, how could modernity have a motivation? You're talking as if it's a person. Yeah, we're always talking as if it's a person. Well, why would we do that? Because again, part of, part of what happens in modernity is that there are, there are no people beyond us, no people above us, but, but now modernity has a motivation. Well, Paul, you're just pushing the metaphor until it breaks. Yeah, I am. You see my point about metaphor. We all do it. We can't help but do it. It's, it's pot. It's just part of the, the way we use language. I think it, I think, I think it began with a motivation to like, no, I don't think that it did not begin without a motivation. I think it was like sort of an, it was definitely an accident. I don't, I don't think that you can, I think that it definitely came from a motivation to like, to gain power over the natural world. I would say that's fair. I think, I think it began in theology with a, with the desire to understand God. And of course, these two aren't exclusive. Do we want to gain power over the natural world? Yeah, the natural world is scary and brutal, red in tooth and clawed. It takes us out all the time. So let's gain power over this virus and get some vaccines out and, you know, whatever, or the flood or, or sunscreen or, but, but then now Michael's point is also critically important. And make, and make his transcendent nature more explicitly understood. That's definitely true. And that's definitely where, where radical orthodoxy places the roots of it is definitely in like that, uh, that post Aquinas scholasticism for sure. But that, but that goes alongside with the, that, that you can't separate that from the impulse, the early impulse toward doing natural science too though, cause those things were linked. I mean, it's not, they weren't just doing theology. So I think that, so what you're saying is definitely true, but I think it's also linked to this, like desire to gain dominion over nature too, in addition to like trying to maybe understand, maybe, maybe an impulse to understand God in a way that puts God within human control. So they're both, they're both sent in both. That's our oldest impulse. They're both linked to an, an, uh, an impulse. And what on earth do we mean by God and how far away of is God from nature in that and, and, and, I mean, it just continues to proliferate. Word, human domination and control, which is why they go astray ultimately. And I'm not saying that they were necessarily consciously like conceived in that way, but there is that underlying sense of that. Okay. I have a question. And Julie's going to take them off in another direction, but, uh, love that love, love what they're doing. And so, you know, I love that little bit of conversation because it, there's in some ways the 11th century to the 21st century, just a tiny little slice of it abstracted, made into tiny little metaphors. It's right. It's right there in some ways, but so let's, let's, let's get back to the question. Well, how, how are we managing this? Well, we're, we're holding these world was what I mean holding, I'm using another, we're grasping. Okay. And if you can't watch John Verveckis awakening from the meeting crisis without understanding the expectation and the grasping and all of that language. And we've got parabolic thinking. I think about Mary, Mary Cohen's idea of parabolic thinking. We've got all these tiny little parables and, and we've got this, um, you know, we've got, um, we've got common sense here. Well, what is common sense? All these little, a stitch in time saves nine. And, and we just have this tiny little story in this, this, this thing that, especially in, in Benjamin Franklin's days, something that would be very obvious and deep to everyone in the village. And then we've got, um, we've got, we'll bring in Neil Postman in some ways, like Jordan Peterson, where this whole channel began, Neil Postman. And you would have this, you'd say this little parable and, well, then everybody in the, everybody in the town would say, yes, that's right. And that's how parables worked because the parable basically carried the argument and everybody understood the parable to be true. And once you connected the in real life story to the parable, everyone would just agree. And of course we're bumping into that with, you know, all of the drama around the election in the United States was the election free and fair. And, and Eric Weinstein in his latest portal doesn't interview anyone, but you know, Eric has, reads a couple of his little essays that he wrote and they're very interesting essays. He makes an argument that the, the election was not free and fair, but for none of the reasons that a lot of people are arguing, it wasn't free or fair. It wasn't that there was massive voter fraud. It was, and then Eric looks at much more structural issues. And of course it's Eric Weinstein. So it's very smart and rather esoteric and it's very Eric Weinstein like, but what are we doing here? We're trying to get a handle on this world, which again, I've made the point that even, even the little world that is in my little messy office at the corner of Florin road in Sacramento, California is way too complex for my little brain to handle. Now I've got it fairly well mapped and I've got the books well mapped and my office is quite well mapped in my mind. And even in the messiness, if I need something, I think in the midst of the messiness sort of exactly where to go, there's a member of my church that's the retired chief hydrologist of the state of California and his office in downtown was legendary because there were just these stacks of loose leaf paper all over the room and people would come in and they'd ask him for something. He'd make kind of a funny face and he'd look at one of those particular piles and we'd go down just so far and sort of pull the paper out of it. I mean, we have astounding mapping capacities and that's what we're trying to do in this. So now again, I'm pointing to I think a critical chapter in C.S. Lewis's Miracles, Horrid Red Things. You can find different versions of this in other places, the C.S. Lewis doodles. One of the things that Lewis quite obviously did if you read a book like Miracles is that many of the chapters in the book were essays and that wound them their ways out into other publications and they were often tailored a little bit and a little bit different in terms of the introduction and stuff. But in this chapter, he makes the point, well the whole chapter comes from a little girl talking about poison because in her mind she imagined what poison is, is it has horrid red things in it and you know she had had some experience where she had connected poison with horrid red things and Lewis makes the point that poison and her picture in her mind of horrid red things really doesn't have a lot of basis in what we might look at as scientific truth, but if you were to go into her house and ask her what's poison, the little girl would likely be a very good guide. If you'd go to her house and you'd start eating something, if the little girl would say don't eat that, that's poison, well you'd probably better listen to the little girl because even though her idea of horrid red things might not relate to what a chemist would look at as poison, it's a low resolution enough picture and her picture of her home is probably good enough, yet those things come together and provide a livable, now we're sort of into Jordan Peterson pragmatism to a degree, a livable way to live in the home and now it would be sort of the really smart 12 year old atheist that would you know maybe look at a bottle of rat poison and it's all white powder and the little girl would say don't eat that, it's full of horrid red things and the little smart atheist would say it is not and go on to eat the rat poison. The fetist might say might believe the little girl and say well it's a little doubtful about the horrid red things but she is a, you see this in the Chronicles of Narnia, the lion, the witch, and the wardrobe. Lucy goes through the wardrobe and of course nobody believes her and of course the professor says well do you know your sister to be a liar? Well no, Edmund's much more of a liar than Lucy. Well why don't you believe Lucy rather than Edmund? That kind of knowledge is actually really important and so the atheist, the smart 14 year old atheist who chows down on the rat powder is gonna die because he wouldn't listen to the little girl that had some picture thinking about horrid red things because this is sort of the way we work with how do we hold our world views. We tend to hold them in pictures, pictures which are accepted from the world around us and C.S. Lewis makes that point in that chapter about thrones and ascension and of course this is all of the sort of questions that drew me to C.S. Lewis's book Miracles and drew me to Jordan Peterson because we have these two worlds that are divorced and I still am not terribly clear but wasn't clear when I started this on okay what exactly are these worlds and how are they mapped and how do we put them together? So we use images of sorts and metaphors that are made from the sensory world. Via exaptation we extrapolate into the super century. This is where John Vervecki in my conversation with J.P. Marceau talked about hyper things and that sent Paul and Leitner off to make a podcast and you can find he did a podcast on hyper things which I thought was was really very helpful and so but it's very interesting that the the people who named it hyper things we still got more exaptation. We can't seem to get around these things. Well why? Why are we so hung up on particles? Well I think it's because particles are sort of like physical things that we can grasp and we can hold and we can manipulate. We're just so good at grasping and holding and manipulating creating things like straws where I can you know suck my ice tea up out of the bottom and bring it into my mouth to refresh and sustain me. This is what we're good at. This is why we love particles and it's why these certain images remain with us and why we we like them so much. Now so lately I've been doing a lot of thinking about Descartes and substance dualism and God bless YouTube for all sorts of really interesting videos that I can just grab onto and learn about it and so here Qualia Soup what a name for a YouTube channel 154,000 subs you know philosophy YouTube must be loving some Qualia Soup as a video about substance dualism and and now part of what I think late modern naturalism or materialism or physicalism really attempts to address is this sort of the sort of the pickle that Descartes put us into with his two substances. Well what on earth does he mean by two substances? Well and this is where I think a lot of a lot of atheism sort of defaults to is well how can we have one world that makes sense all the way up? That's sort of what we're trying to do and that's sort of what Jordan Peterson is trying to do and that's why images of Tower of Babel sort of sort of come to mind. We're looking for a physical substance that can go all the way up and and all the way down and so Cartesian dualism sort of had two substances you had physical substances and so those are things which now this is where we sort of get into my group A and my group B. Physical substances are are these substances in the physical world and physical is really the most important world there physical substances. Then we have the world there physical substances then we have this guy says abnormal physical substances for for Descartes it was much more mind and and so that's where you had the mind body problem in in Cartesian dualism. Now physical substance matter of the world and you know this we sort of grasp this stuff you know we have a story that we believe with the with respect to how the world auto arranged itself into being into the kind of world we find today including us and now what's so amazing is that this story is taken on faith. Pull someone from the street who's an ardent anti-theist atheist and say well it's all been explained how we got here today by and then the big e word comes in by evolution evolution explains it and then you've got a really inconvenient guy like James tour he's he's fun to watch. I crack up every time I watch the guy because you know he he's one of these dreaded evangelical Christians who at the same time is a world-class scientist and some of the really important science and he just basically calls bullshit on a bunch of this stuff and says hey I know the I know the biochemistry you tell me how how life comes how organic matter gets started from inorganic you show me that line you show that process you build a you build a laboratory and you do it but no cheating and and so James tour is he's got his own youtube channel now he's got he's not he's not necessarily the greatest he's not necessarily the greatest interviewer in there but neither is Jordan Peterson to get interviewed by Jordan Peterson might as well be a monologue video half the time but but James tour I mean if you listen to some of his other lectures he's just basically saying you know show me the math you don't have it I know you don't have it I can't do it either and I'm smarter than you that's basically what he keeps saying and and people sort of just kind of blow them off and walk away but this shows that you know faith in evolution is just as much faith as faith in anything else well why well we believe in these processes well have you seen them with your own eyes and maybe you say you've done them all but and I would have to believe you because I'm not about to because I don't have you know 30 years of my life or 40 or 50 or 60 years of my life to develop the scientific expertise to personally retrace the steps we we have to take it on authority and again I'm not this isn't an anti-evolution screed you know that's not where I'm at on my channel I remember when I had an early conversation with Adam Friended he asked me do you believe in evolution it was kind of like do you believe in God it's basically the questions are parallel and I said I don't really know enough science to answer that question I'll say I believe the world is a product of processes what does that mean well it's me the world is a product of processes well how are those processes I haven't had a biology class since high school and that was at Christian school so you're gonna have to give me a break and you say well Vander Clay you should go back and get some more biology it's like hey I'm in my late 50s I only got so many years on this earth left and as much fun as it would be I doubt I'll be doing it taking college biology all right so I'm gonna have to take things on faith by listening to credible people and that's why I'm not a particular skeptic in evolution but I'm not a particular proponent of it either I just don't know enough about it and then someone will say oh you should talk to yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah if you saw the number of people that Paul can we really have a conversation yeah I got to just kind of fit it into all the rest of the conversations I would love to and you know basically when I see you in the age to come when we've been there 10,000 years bright shining as the sun we've no less days to have a conversation than when we first begun so nobody I want it now yeah I know I'm sorry it's you know join the rest of us in time space who have limited resources so anyway back to the conversation substance dualism that's that's a real issue and it's sort of where a lot of my thinking has gone and partly because of the the verveky the verveky JP Marceau conversation because John verveky made this point about directions well how how do thoughts move my hands and are my thoughts really sort of subject to the same physical laws and if they are what does that mean about rationality about moving my hands and some of you would say you have no rationality about moving your hands or your lips and I would laugh at that because I generally probably agree with you more than I should so and then I found this delightful video by a Sally Latham who I don't know what's going on if she's a college professor or if she's a TA but she's got all these little videos answering questions about philosophy and I don't know she's really seemed to do a good job do I have time to play this hey it's my channel I'll play it if I want to let's see how it goes your method of doubt and in that method of doubt he doubts everything he possibly can which includes his body up until that point she's talking about Descartes here he had to believe that it was his body that was certain he said that okay it's my mind that's uncertain my mind is like some kind of wind flame or vapor I don't really know what it is I don't know how to explain it but bodies I know about them I can see them I can touch them they're the things that are certain but the method of doubt flips it so the method of doubt means that the body is uncertain and because of the evil demon even because of the dreaming argument he can doubt his body but he can't doubt his mind the cogito so that positive solution to the method of doubt is the idea that the mind is easier to know than the body it's the mind that's certain and the body that's uncertain so what he used to think was essential were bodily functions you know I have to eat I have to sleep I have to breathe if I don't I'll cease to exist but now he sees these things as not essential so the body is not essential to him whereas the mind is if he ceased to think he would cease to exist so we have this flipping of what's important and what's essential which is is quite important to understand the other thing that's really important to understand is what a substance is so substance dualism proposed by Plato proposed by Descartes proposed by Richard Swinburne is the idea and her volume is a little low so just trying to raise it but I can't do that I don't have time to raise it so I'll just play this now because she's just getting to the meaty part right here mind is an o proposed by Descartes proposed by Richard Swinburne is the idea that the mind is an ontologically distinct substance so the mind is not reducible to the body or any part of it exists as a substance in its own right so to understand what a substance is a substance is the bearer of properties it can survive a change in those properties and but it itself does not need those properties to to exist so if you think about the difference between substance and property red is a property it has to be attached to a substance and it cannot exist without that substance if you try to conceive of red independently of any other thing you can't do it for example like rounds you have to have a round something it can't exist in its own in its own sense so roundness is a property not a substance so what we're going to get to with substance dualism is the idea that mind is this ontologically distinct substance it can exist independently and it doesn't need it's a bearer of properties but it's not itself a property so for Descartes for Plato for Swinburne you've got the thinker which is the substance and the thoughts which are the properties so the thinker is the permanent thing and thoughts change they come and they go and the thinker owns these properties which are the thoughts and can survive a change and then we know our thoughts are changing all the time and yet it is this it is something that survives all of that and I won't be discussing Plato here because obviously it's just purely Descartes and Richard Swinburne's worth a look if you have the time shameless plug here but if you want to read about Richard Swinburne's substance dualism check out my article in philosophy now Swinburne's separations you can just go online and and get that as one of your four free articles a month I think and ridiculously complicated I don't think I understand it anymore but substance dualism is it's hugely unpopular now in academic philosophy so I think according to Richard Swinburne you know about one percent two percent of academic philosophers are substance dualists but I guarantee that at some point you've probably thought like a substance dualist so if you believe that the mind could survive bodily death that there was something that was not reducible to your body so when you know a loved one or a pet ceased to physically exist if you believe they carried on somehow then you were thinking like a substance dualist that the mind can exist independently of the body and is a substance in its own right so what we've got with these separate substances is Descartes says the mind is a thinking on extended substance it it it takes up no space it's not made of matter whereas the body is brute it's not intelligent so if something's a brute we tend to think of it as unintelligent you know just kind of passive and physical and bodies take up space so they're extended and they're made of matter and they're also the bodies are divisible and the mind is indivisible which will become important shortly so that's that's known as Descartes real distinction between mind and body and he's a radical substance dualist so the mind can exist completely independently of the body he's also an interactionist so mind and body have this two-way interaction mentally but mental events affect physical physical effects mental that is the the issues of interaction i think deserve a separate video if you were to need that just pop it in the comments now i'll just see what i can do and but for now what i want to focus on are the arguments for why the mind is this separate substance okay and she goes on from there so it's it's it's it's a very informative video i thought it was i thought it was very well done now she'll go on to say in that video and as many other videos on youtube will go on to tell you about there's all sorts of trouble that arises with this with this Cartesian substance dualism a lot of skepticism about these this non-physical substance about this mind and even though we all experience mind we experience consciousness and mind and consciousness and soul they're not all the same thing but it's all out there and and to have this just sort of floating out there is problematic and this is where the um the substance dualism from qualia soup gets really interesting because if you listen to his complaints about this they're all wielding complaints and they're all complaints about us and well we we have problems with this basically because we can't account for it we can't seem to control it and partly because i think india doesn't go into this with the with the we're looking at it with the scientific image and most of these things are all manifest image type issues and so the the troubles the troubles just the troubles just proliferate now i think if you look at what michael was saying in the randos video and when i think about my conversations with many who have deconstructed the issues basically go around well i can't i can't believe christianity because of in some ways christianity has become this separate substance that that spiritual like so it sort of goes like this when you when you begin to read the bible as a as someone immersed in the materialist a physicalist world that well angels well why what are angels well are angels made of anything no their spirit okay and and i think what what sort of pops up in our mind is this a dualism of sorts that i don't think completely maps onto decart's dualism but but it definitely is a dualism because then we have physical things and you hear this all the time in church i mean so so many of my observations just come from doing basic church work and and listening to answers in sunday school or just from church members now i think a lot of these answers weren't talked to people but again we live in the midst of this world and we construct this map this route this first draft map in our minds and so then it's well there's physical things and there are spiritual things and so then the question is what's the relationship between these physical things and these spiritual things well i don't know but there's two of them there's physical things and there's spiritual things and so spiritual things are better and it's like gnosticism is haunting us what is the relationship between the physical and the spiritual and you know when i get into school spirit and a lot of the conversations about spiritual things on my channel a big part of my agenda is well let's let's let's up the resolution on this a little bit let's see if we can talk a little bit more intelligently about the relationship between spirit and matter and of course if you go into playdo into aristotle into you know cart decart and many different places i also watched a good video by jordan b cooper and jordan b cooper i noticed his name comes up now and then and at some point i subscribed to his channel but i hadn't watched any of his videos or at least not many of his videos he seems to be a a christian maybe of lutheran background just my um my protestant spidey senses listening to him so he sounds get some lutheranism going on there but talking about he had a really good video on on substance dualism and laid some of that out love to play it too if i didn't have just 17 minutes until a family phone call so i gotta keep moving where was i oh yeah spiritual versus material and again i get that i get that answer so often and part of the problem is in church once you say these things everyone just nods their head and says yes that's so say we all and it's like okay so say we all but what do y'all mean by that which do you think you have just so said it and so that's where i always annoy people in sunday school class one of my church members she's actually deacon she's a very very devoted church member she says i understood this bible passage until i came to sunday school and you made it all muddy for me yeah i did didn't i because you thought you understood it by reading the new living translation and all that did was serve you up some some pre-chewed baby food and i'm not the baby food kind of you know spooning pastor you're looking for and i'd have a bigger church and a bigger youtube channel if i were because i want to know well what what what do you mean when you say that word spiritual and for that matter what do you mean when you say the word matter because the particulate stuff is going away boys and girls and i know we like it because we can grasp it but we were we got a meaning crisis here so back to horrid red things and a really important passage in louis's miracles and horrid red things when he talks about this literal versus metaphorical which which is getting at spiritual versus material as well but but of course the the exaptation which we are using in our minds is is all in this too because it's in our minds we have this mapping which is of course a mental mapping of the physical world but a mental mapping of the spiritual world via the physical that's what we're doing when we're mapping this stuff and so here's the quote mr barfield has shown as regards to the history of language that words did not start by referring merely to physical objects and then get extended by metaphor to refer to emotions mental states and the like now again if you're a modernist you simply presume that that would have been the process by which this would have happened but no nobody you know 5 000 years ago you didn't find any modernists everyone was doing this to the best of our knowledge why and barfield of course was the guy who exposed this and said hey if you read these things how sure are you when you read play dough that you really know what he's talking about or the bible and of course for protestants that really scares us so mr barfield has shown as regards to the history of language that words did not refer did not start by referring merely to physical objects and then get extended to metaphor to refers to refer to emotions mental states and the like on the contrary what we now call the literal and metaphorical meanings have both been engaged and again watch any celebrity video who is trying to trying to do an anti-theist job against christianity and you will find that little word literal used again and again and again and again and they simply don't take this paragraph into account and they don't take this reality into account and ancient people were not literalists that's the problem does it mean that they didn't report what they saw no they reported what they saw and and the reports got carried down through and all of those things too but they were not literalists they weren't metaphoricalists because the distinction wasn't quite clear then in the same way it is quite erroneous to think that man started with a material god or heaven and gradually spiritualized them he could not have started with something material for the material as we understand it comes to be realized only by contrast to the immaterial and the two sides of the contrast grow at the same speed now that's critical there because what there's what what what emerges is a duality that comes to us over time now i know some of you think luke that all dualities are evil dualities are not necessarily evil some dualities are very helpful if you want to do some things we started with something which was neither and both as long as we are trying to read back into that ancient unity either the one or the other of the two opposites which have since been analyzed out of it we shall misread all early literature and ignore many states of consciousness which we ourselves still from time to time experience the point is crucial not only for the present discussion but for any sound literary criticism or philosophy and of course lewis was an oxford professor of literature and he also had a degree in philosophy and so that's why it's important because this basic ancient unity which we no longer innocently hold or actually there's three things it's not just that we broke them apart we both broke them apart but in certain times we visit the archaic and experience the ancient unity but we we don't know that we're doing it because in many ways our maps are smarter than we are and so even as we take time to explore our maps we bump into curiosities such as spiritual material and then school spirit well school spirit is sort of that ancient mapping well do i have a better understanding of what spirituality is yeah from school spirit that seems so secular yeah it's gonna have to be on both sides if you want to understand the division and how and why we separated it out now in my looking at qualia soup you know there's just a ton of self-forgetful wielding and this is of course where jonathan peugeot shines because not only are we pattern seeing patterns we are patterns trying to wield patterns and to employ a little bit of post modern post modern cynicism and suspicion why is it that we particle eyes all of this stuff so repeatedly it's because we want to wield it and and the things that we can know by science are limited well what do you mean by that well consider a consider a difficult relationship in your life consider that person you're trying to wield them aren't you i'm just trying to understand them yeah so you can wield them i get it trust me that's you know as a pastor you live with this because you would imagine people come to you looking for answers from the catechism that's about 10 to 20 percent of what people come to me for at least in in real life church work what do they mostly come to me to to do what to complain to complain and to speak their anxieties why because the world is hard to wield and you want to know the hardest thing to wield in this world other people and part of the reason part of the bargain with with with humanism is that the oldest way of wielding people was to kill them because after you kill them they conveniently go into the grave and shut up that's why you kill people because they're hard to wield once you have real laws and rules and norms and world views that say they shouldn't really kill them suddenly people are much harder to deal with because you can't kill them we are patterns wielding patterns and and we've got the meaning crisis two step which is well the physical world is less substanceful than at than we imagined it to be all this particle magical particle thinking and you say well no magical particles no it's magical thinking about particles but we have more physical worldness to us than we like to admit now we like to look for that physical worldness in others because we hope to wield them but then when someone does the same thing on us we're a little bit offended no i'm not subject to all of that psychology and sociology and and all of that propaganda not me yeah right so and in many ways i think this is this is exactly what causes the meaning crisis that we we discover that wow the the physicalness of the world is so weird that it kind of defies us but there's a lot more physicalness in my mind than i thought and and so in many ways this cartesian substance dualism is going away and and that's not necessarily bad news for christians and you know i i find a lot of christians being really anxious about people who don't believe in god as if they're hard to come by or they make bad neighbors now i'm a christian minister and i'm really happy when people listen to my channel and they send me an email and they say i'm going to church because of you i celebrate that i make no bones about my agenda here i want to turn y'all into christians if i can but i'm also a calvinist and it's so funny listen to james linsley talk about that and so where as much as i'd love to wield you and wield you into church i can't and i know i can't why because i've got this pesky theological upbringing that says it's the holy spirit that does that wielding you vander clay are insufficient to wield others into the church and into their heavenly home where does that leave me i think it leaves me basically jesus saying what did i tell you to do uh you told me to love your love the lord your god with all your hearts old mind and strengthen your neighbor as yourself yeah start there okay so stop trying to wield people maybe start trying to love them because loving and wielding is not the same thing and and you know the christian house is plenty messy as it is and and the assumed implicit cartesian dualist system is already breaking down and will likely continue to break down now the difficulty is that makes people anxious because nobody likes being poked in their axiom so i have only six minutes left i gotta keep this moving christian profession remains significant but we all know the fudginess between professed belief and constant and consistent christian consistent behavior if we didn't we wouldn't be yelling at christian hypocrites and you wouldn't have pastors preaching sermons and telling christians to believe more but all of this stuff is breaking down and i don't think we should be pessimistic about it i think some of this cartesian dualism has led to a lot of kind of low resolution christian picture thinking that leads to sunday school answers that don't particularly map well onto the bible and don't really map well onto people's lives now that leads to a lot of messiness and some deconstruction but i think also some reconstruction as as we're seeing in this little corner of the internet so i am now out of time but i am glad i made this video and if this video was helpful to you leave a comment or subscribe i've been watching a lot of youtube lately and you know the first the first thing out of people's mouth is um subscribe put on notifications support me on patreon and i always find that annoying which is why i don't like talking about those kinds of things but they are out there and i don't know i don't know so yeah and if you want to straighten out my philosophy i'm sure there's plenty that needs straightening out go ahead and um it's just difficult to wield people just like it's difficult to colonize them so i hope i have more chance to make videos this week i have one more conversation in the cam that i'll release sometime this week and it's a good one it's a it's a move it's a deeply meaningful one and if the um conversation with brett anderson kind of annoyed some of you professing christians out there you'll really like the next one so anyway thanks for watching and i will yep i will see you next time lord willing