https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=nezN0yEvAC4

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. How you doing Fred? I got good news. What's that good news? The Kings beat the San Antonio Spurs. Woo! I got 20 points. Really? No joke. So they're doing a lot better. Alright, good for the Kings. We got the Kings jacket on here. Yeah, my Kings beating me but I don't have that on because I got to show my dome ready to roam. Ready to come up like a new catone another rapture another rapture stepping hard like this and this is my boy Paul and he don't cry because you know why? Because he has his own tie. But my condolences for your 49ers. It's okay. It's okay. They made it to the finals and like yeah you're right Phil. Like you said 50 years waiting they win a Super Bowl. They have my home's Hill. I can't remember all of them because that's not my team. But look out for the Kings next year. They might not make the finals this year of course but we look optimistic for next year. Alright, alright. It's always next season. Barnes Harrison Barnes had 30 points and Bagley had 28 points. So Mark, so Mark what do you think of the Super Bowl? Super Bowl is a great game. I was hoping 49ers could pull it off though because of the two hometown kids that play on the Niners. So I was rooting for them. Oh right on. Armstand and Wetherspoon. Oh okay Mark right on. I thought it was a great game though. Yeah it was good. Hey mom, how you doing? Anyways, oh so we got to find out for my audition. I auditioned last week for America's Got Talent. We submitted Freddy's. We put the audition on the channel. So I have comments if you want to locate them and tell them we will do good and give them your comments. Oh we have 448 views. Yeah your audition video was very popular. So I think they might like it. One guy said this is not an audition. He was in the finals so he's my fan. He's your fan. And Adam is cool for making me that beat. I'll be working on that soon. So America's Got Talent, if you think I got what it takes, I think I got what it takes. Audition in order, Prosper, total velocity of the second hand motion and all that good stuff. So okay I got to do a wrap and then we'll be done. Alright, I liked it when Phil rapped the other week. That was fun. Yeah I'll do this little light of mine. This little light of mine, I'm gonna let it shine. This little light of mine, I'm gonna let it shine. This little light of mine, I'm gonna let it shine. From here to Sacramento to LA because I pray. Everywhere I go, I'm gonna let it shine. Everywhere I go, I'm gonna let it shine. Everywhere I go, I'm gonna let it shine. America's Got Talent, you know you got the rhyme, don't you see? Jesus, Jesus, he's the king of all kings. Jesus, Jesus, do you know what I mean? Peace. Alright. Alright. One love. That's kind of funny.