https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Xgdvv18Oge0

 Hi, this is Paul. There were a couple of really good videos that came across my way that I wanted to give some attention to. One was from Paul Antleitner. I think I got his name right. I was on his channel not too long ago. He did a very interesting interview with Clay Rutledge and as when I took this still only 45 people had seen it. I thought it was a really good interview and an important interview. Another one that was on Ancient Faith, the Ancient Faith channel, which is something of the Orthodox Church, had Dr. Nathan Jacobs and his work on it. Let's first take a look at the Clay Rutledge video and learn some things from there. Part of the main point here is that when people give up their traditional faith, they don't usually get rational, which is of course what the celebrity atheists are always proposing, they get something else. Let's have a listen to how it goes. When people leave these traditional religious frameworks, where do they go to have their ultimate sense of meaning and purpose fulfilled? Could we say that there's almost like alternative secular religious experiences? Because it seems like people, that psychological, deep biological need doesn't just go away. Where do they find fulfillment or looking for fulfillment if they're leaving these traditional religions? That's actually a big area of my research. I had a grant to study. I spent several years studying this and it resulted in my latest book, Supernatural, which is very much about all these issues. And you're right, people don't, the need doesn't go away. It gets channeled into other ventures. Some of them are also supernatural. But there are things like belief in ghosts and astrology, all those beliefs at the same time that the religions in decline, as you noted, all these other beliefs in the paranormal and in non-traditional supernatural beliefs are all on the rise. So the argument that I've seen some secular advocates and some new atheists make that people, if you could just get people away from religion, they'll just become these like totally secular, rational, empirical creatures. As far as I can tell, has virtually zero evidence in support of it. The irony of those arguments is they're not rational. They're not empirical. And for two reasons. One, the human brain hasn't changed, as you noted. So it's not like in the last 100 years or 50 years or 200 years, all of a sudden we're different organisms. So their view that people are kind of born atheists and if religion is just bad cultural programming, just doesn't support it by neuroscience, by evolutionary science, by developmental psychology. You've done some specific experiments on this to demonstrate this, right? Yeah, so it's yeah, I have. So we've got, you know, a number of studies showing that if people are not religious, if people identify as atheists, their need for meaning for them, it doesn't predict religion. It predicts belief in the paranormal. It predicts these other things. And there's also a good reason to believe it's not just these kinds of things like astrology and healing crystals and Wicca and all those things are up. I mean, the number of people, the Wicca population, you know, the witchcraft population is dramatically increasing, particularly in the most secular parts of the United States. Now, what's really interesting to me about this observation is that this actually happened in the 19th century, too. If you look at the end of the 19th century when the particular style of modernism really reached its height, spiritualism, seances, all of this stuff, you know, there was a real flourishing, there's a real flourishing of of cults that formed. And so, you know, what he's what he's talking about, this is this has happened before. As is interest in UFOs and all these things. But it's not just that there seems to be reason to suspect that people are also turning politics into kind of a religious system. Into kind of a religious like movement. I think a lot of, you know, the the progressive, you know, kind of what some people call the woke culture, particularly among affluent whites, seems to be religious like and the reason. And this I found ironic in my. You know, in my attention in my talk with James Lindsay, I had never thought of the idea that the split in in sort of in the atheist movement that, you know, the irony was that the the converts to atheism by this by the celebrity atheists who were very much were acting like evangelists, their converts became enamored with the woke religion. And so this is in a strange sense for some of them, a heresy within their own camp, just like the way it's affecting Christianity right now. It's a heresy within the Christian camp. I say that is because I don't want to conflate it with a more practical, you know, kind of urban social justice sort of concerns that, you know, a lot of which seem to be grounded in, you know, you know, regardless of people's political opinions and solutions, a lot of it seems to be grounded in real concerns about about issues, injustices and prejudice. Right. But there is an elite form of it that is interestingly, largely white. People with who come from more prosperous economic backgrounds who are secular. And so they've turned it into a kind of a religious like movement that often ironically doesn't really have a lot of focus on helping the poor and vulnerable. It has more to do with policing speech and policing thought, you know, kind of, you know, signaling virtues, signaling virtues. And so I think that, you know, I'm not trying to pick on those people so much, but I do think a lot of that is that they're like trying to figure out how do they how do they matter? Like, and how do they how do they have any skin in the game and the culture wars and how do they make a you know, how do they people want to feel like they're in some sort of epic struggle for the people? And so I think that's a very interesting point on how the people are trying to make a struggle for goodness, for moral virtue. And so if you take away the kind of traditional religious. Now, remember that because I'm going to make a point at the end of this video that essentially the it's the movification with Americans are living their life as in a movie. And this is this is part of my critique of some of Peterson's stuff that that meaning is kind of this internal gyroscope that's supposed to point you in the right direction. But but meaning is also sort of a hunger that will feast on just about anything. And so his point here, which is a point that I've made before in my videos, that there's a in woke religion, there's a meaning hunger that's getting manifest in that way to beliefs. People aren't just going to opt out of the endeavor. They're going to try to find that whether it's you know, whether it's in politics or whether it's in you know, these kind of more mysterious, like nontraditional paranormal supernatural stuff. But the interesting thing about that, though I don't have a lot of evidence with the political stuff, the interesting thing about the paranormal stuff, which I you know, I did a bunch of research on for this for this for this book, is it doesn't seem to work. So appears to be driven by a need for meaning. But it doesn't actually seem to provide people with one. So that's what our data suggests. How do you evaluate that? So we actually look at so we have we have questionnaires that distinguish how much you're concerned about meaning and looking for meaning from how much you actually feel like you have meaning. And so we can do surveys where we measure those things. We measure people's different types of beliefs, and then we can create like statistical models to see what predicts what. And so it is the case that people who are higher in the need for meaning are more likely to be religious if they're theists and people who are higher in the need for meaning are more likely to believe in the paranormal if they're atheists. But then if you look at the other side, it side of it and say, OK, does believing in the paranormal is that actually correlated with having a sense of meaning? And it isn't. In fact, it's often inversely correlated. So it's often the case that people the more people believe in the paranormal, the less meaning they have. So it seems like it's driven by the same need, the same existential need. But it doesn't seem to do a good job of fulfilling it. Just like you might say, if you're hungry, you could eat something healthy. You could eat a salad or you could eat a candy bar. And both of them are driven by the need, you know, your basic caloric needs. And they both might kind of serve some. They both might kind of like help you like feel like you're getting something. But one, you know, one's empty calories. I mean, maybe that's not the greatest. No, that's helpful. That's helpful. But one doesn't seem to be a sustainable source of nutrition. One doesn't also seem to provide any sort of cohesive meta narrative. You know, so if you do this sort of a la carte spirituality or DIY spirituality where, you know, the philosopher Charles Taylor in work that I frequently refer to a secular age identified that, you know, that humans throughout time seem to have this need to see meaning in the imminent, in the imminent world. But also they have this innate sense for transcendence for things that God number one and God number two. And this is part of the reason that Paul picked up on my God number one and God number two idea, a sense of meaning that goes beyond the the imminent frame is what he called it. And it's interesting because I see, you know, over the course of let's say since the Enlightenment, you know, I've identified and adapted these six essential meaning making questions people need answers for to give them this sort of cohesive narrative that informs their life and gives them a sense of purpose questions like what is ultimate reality? You know, so what's the foundational layer of reality? And it's interesting because Paul and I have a have a similar approach to this. He talks with people and deals with people. And so you have these these questions that you tend to look at and have this in my what's, you know, the words that fudge religion, you know, what what are these, what are these basic things that map out your world? And it's really how you answer these basic questions that you get this your sense of meaning and mission in the world. What's the necessary thing by which all contingency drives their being? What's the nature of reality? Is it just a material world? Is it material and somehow spiritual? Is it, you know, material and we have a sort of consciousness that participates in some sort of higher consciousness that isn't reducible? What's what does it mean to be human? What happens to someone when they die? Is there a right and wrong? Now pay attention to that to that one. What happens to people when they die? Because that one is actually going to come up towards the end of this video. What's the sixth one? I'm drawing a blank. Anyways, I find it interesting that I think it seems to me that the predominant meta narrative in our new sort of secular Western world is this naturalist philosophical naturalism, philosophical materialism. And you probably well aware of that, especially when you get into academic disciplines to be secular. The neutral standpoint means to assume this sort of philosophical framework. But I think the thing that from my standpoint, and again, I'm not approaching this necessarily from the same discipline, but again, like we talked about earlier, it seems like they're all interrelated. The problem appears that the answers that this framework provides people tells them things that, for example, like ultimate reality is simply the physical universe and nothing more. The nature of that reality is chaotic and random. Humans are nothing more than privileged apes that have randomly got here. When you die, that's all there is for you. Human history isn't going anywhere. And there is no ultimate right or wrong ethical system for reality. Now, what he's laying out here is the worldview of the celebrity atheist. And this has been at least incarnated in the academy as the default position. But what Rutledge is making the point is that, and as the next guy I'm going to talk, I'm going to play, is making the point is that the nuns and the duns have moved beyond this. This is not really the world they inhabit. The celebrity atheists have tried to consolidate people in that world. But people naturally are escaping because I think they don't like the meaning of the food that's being served in that. That seems to be the answers they're getting, which even the 20th century existentialist guys like Camus, for example, were wrestling with, well, how do we have this? The logical consequence of this framework seems to be nihilism. But we can't be nihilistic, can we? I mean, there's no off switch to just shut it off and go, well, and people try. They try through various ways. I think what I found so interesting about I read that one of those specific papers that you had written about the link between those who were not religious. But you had, I like the term, I want to make sure I get this term right, experimentally manipulated them to think about deep questions of meaning. I like that phrase that you were experimentally manipulating them to get them to think about things like death, the seeming insignificance of humanity within the expanse of the cosmos. And what you did when you got people thinking about that stuff was you demonstrated that it increased their openness to the possibility of what you and your co-authors labeled the supernatural, the magical or the extraterrestrial. And this is similar to C.S. Lewis's point in the Screwtape Letters where Lewis makes the point that, at least, and Lewis, of course, was writing in a secular age as well. But the one devil says to the other, just keep people busy with amusements. Keep them, they didn't have Netflix then, but keep them watching Netflix. Keep them playing video games. Keep them in the tiny little amusements of their jobs so that you don't want them thinking about death. And if you look at our culture, there's a reason why we don't think about death and we hide it and we cover it up and we push it back. We really don't want people to think about death because right when you look at death, you're going to have to wrestle with some questions. Which I might just say it opened them up to transcendence. I'm curious about this research because it made me think of philosopher Soren Kierkegaard who's considered the father of existentialism. He argued that to be an authentic self, you had to have the synthesis of the finite and the infinite. And in order to have that, we had to come face to face with despair. We had to come face to face with the absurdity of finitude. And even face the, for him as a theist, he acknowledged we had to come face to face with the ambiguity of the existence of God as we look at the imminent world. It would appear from your research that in some paradoxical way that coming face to face with feeling like the imminent world doesn't provide satisfactory meaning. That that alone doesn't answer people's deepest longings for meaning. I'm going to stop them here. Watch the whole video. I think Paul does really good work. So I'm going to move on to this next Dr. Nathan Jacobs. And this was on Ancient Faith, the Ancient Faith channel. And this had, I looked at it again today, it had about 500 views. Another video that doesn't have many views. Now, Nathan Jacobs did a movie that you can find on Amazon Prime called Becoming Truly Human. And he talks about this and he'll set up the movie here. And this whole video too, I highly recommend it. The whole thing is worth watching. Now, I want to start by dispelling certain misconceptions about the nuns. A common reaction to the decline in religion, and it's a reaction that comes from both atheists and theists, is that there's this war of ideas going on, right? We have the new atheists and they're going after religion. And you have the Christian apologists, you know, defending religion. And this culture war is breaking out and the rise of the nuns demonstrates that the atheists are winning, right? That is a common reaction that you can see in the cheers of triumph from the new atheists and from the nail biting of the theists. But there's a problem with this reading of the stats. It's not true. Which is basically the point that the last guy made. The main problem with it. I mentioned in pre-production of Becoming Truly Human, I interviewed 50 plus nuns, only two self-identified as atheists. Now, I would say that I've talked to probably a lot more people and I'm not surprised by those numbers at all. And even those did not do so without qualification, I lean atheist. So 90 percent of the people that I surveyed approximately believed in a higher power, God, something like that. So and that was far from their only spiritual belief, which we'll talk about here tonight. Just as many professed a belief in karma or fate, most consider themselves to be spiritual beings and more than 90 percent believe in ghosts and other spirits, angels and demons. Even the atheists, incidentally, I say more than 90 percent, because even the atheists who would say, no, I don't believe in God, science, science, science, my apartment is a ghost. We'll return to that because I think there's something important there. And again, I my experience as a pastor and just talking to people. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But let's this be anecdotal. Pew has reported the same findings, more or less. Only 13 percent of nuns identify as atheists in the Pew statistics. So pretty close to the same thing that I found in my sample. In 2017, The New York Times released an article, which I love the title of don't believe in God. How about UFOs? And the point of the article was to say if what you think is going on with this movement away from religion is that people are becoming atheistic materialist, then you don't understand who these people are. They are more likely than not. Statistically speaking, to believe in ghosts, UFOs, Bigfoot, the US, the US is more likely than not. They believe in ghosts, UFOs, Bigfoot, right, and any number of things. What's interesting is that they're more likely than Christians probably to believe in these things. That's fascinating, especially given the narrative that Christians believe in make up, made up stuff that faith is this belief in things that aren't real. Well, then you would assume that Christians would believe in their Christian stuff and all this stuff. When what you find is that when people give up their traditional religion, they continue to believe in stuff, but they continue to believe in more and more different stuff. And, you know, it's fascinating, fascinating thing. So if the atheists are not winning, what on earth is happening? Why is this going on? I'll offer my diagnosis. I think neither the atheists nor the Christians are winning the debate. Instead, both sides have lost the audience. Now, why? And I think that's the key takeaway. Both sides have lost the audience. Modernity has moved on. This is why I'm eating while I'm doing a video, which is probably a bad thing. But the point that I make often that that modernity really died at the beginning of the 20th century, 100 years ago, and it's continuing to recede. Something else is taking its place. And the point that I've made that often this kind of this epic battle between celebrity atheists and Christian apologists, the audience has moved on. It's like, yeah, OK, have that debate. But that's that's I don't believe either of you. Why have the nuns checked out of that debate? I did an article for the Journal of Open Theology. And in that article, I trace the discussions in modernity about divine revelation, right? How God reveals himself and what it means to talk about divine revelation. And one of the things that I found fascinating when doing that research and working on that article was that everything that you find in Locke and Hume and Hobbes and Fichte, Spinoza, they are the same arguments that you hear today. There's quite truly nothing new under the sun in terms of that discussion. And so in many ways, when you listen to the new atheists and you listen to the Christian apologists, you're listening to a modernist debate. All right. They are through and through modernists. And the problem is that the nuns are not children of the Enlightenment, which means they completely disconnect with both sides of the discussion. You're listening to a modernist debate. All right. They are through and through modernists. And the problem is that the nuns are not children of the Enlightenment. You're listening to a modernist debate. All right. They are through and through modernists. And the problem is that the nuns are not children of the Enlightenment. There you go. There you go. There you go. I don't need to play it again. I played it three times so you wouldn't miss it. Which means they completely disconnect with both sides of the discussion. And I think that's what's going on. So what does this mean that they're not children of the Enlightenment? Sometimes post-Enlightenment, right, post-modernity can be taken to signal there's no such thing as truth, right, moral and moral and metaphysical relativism. This is not what I found with the nuns. The nuns, in my assessment, place greater trust in intuitions, what I'll call intuitions, than in reason. So it's not that... Now, I'd be curious to know what he means by reason. I suspect he means by reason what the celebrity atheists mean by reason. But... They've abandoned reason. It's not that they've abandoned truth. But it's that they're more driven by certain types of intuitions, moral intuitions, spiritual intuitions, aesthetic intuitions. And for my part, I think this is actually a positive shift, a useful shift. And I'll explain why. To initiate this, let me start by drawing on C.S. Lewis's The Problem of Pain. So C.S. Lewis and The Problem of Pain, in the opening of that book, the introduction, Lewis begins by saying, he offers a critique of the proofs for the existence of God, right? We offer these proofs and all we really demonstrate is how weak our proofs are. He opens with a quote from Pascho. And one of the things that's interesting that I think nobody really points out about what Lewis says here is he never actually identifies any logical problem with the proofs. He never says they don't work, never says they're fallacious, nothing problematic about them. His critique is just that the proofs have very little to do with how people became religious in the first place. That's his criticism. It's not a logical problem. It's an existential one. Now, Lewis goes on to offer in his introduction to The Problem of Pain a genealogy of religion. How did people become religious? And he talks about these three stages that religion develops through and in Christianity one more. Now, I'm going to pause the video here because I want to actually take a deeper dive into The Problem of Pain, which is a book by Lewis. And of course, he just mentioned that quote from Pascho that no proof really works. And why works doesn't mean that it's not necessarily philosophically cogent, but that it's not existentially cogent, that people don't really believe in God because of proofs. We don't really work our way up to God by proving him. And Lewis knows this because he, again, left the faith as a young man, as a 13 or a 14-year-old. And young atheist Lewis argument begins now from an argument of senseless waste. And he says, if I look at the universe, there's just all of this waste. There's all of this space without life in it. And there's all of these years with seemingly meaningless death in it. And so his conclusion, like many young atheists or old atheists, is that there just can't really be a God. Because if there was a God managing this story, now pay attention to how I'm constructing this because this is actually going to be how Americans think. If I were to construct a story, I wouldn't construct a universe full of all of this empty space. I would have, maybe I'd have the world in the middle of it and then maybe spheres going out. So I'd have the world in the middle of it and spheres going up. But now in this big universe, well, there's way too much space. And I wouldn't construct a story there. And I wouldn't have this long evolutionary path for the making of these creatures who are going to be in the center of the story because all of that death and suffering, well, that just seems like an extravagant waste. That just seems like a horrible waste. And if I were going to construct a story, I would construct it like I like the stories I see. That's how I would construct the story. And again, so it's quite fascinating. I pull up the problem of pain here in Logos. It's quite fascinating the way he begins. Again, here's first Pascal's quote. Not many years ago when I was an atheist, if anyone asked me, why do you not believe in God? My reply would have been something like, look at the universe we live in. By far the greater part of it consists of empty space, completely dark and unimaginably cold. The bodies which move in this space are so few and so small in comparison with the space itself that even if every one of them were known to be crowded as full as it could hold with perfectly happy creatures, it would still be difficult to believe that life and happiness were more than just a byproduct of the power that made the universe. As it is, however, scientists think that it's likely that very few of the sons of space, perhaps none of them exist, perhaps none of them except our own, have planets. Well, now they know that there are more planets actually. And in our own system, it's improbable that any planet except Earth sustains it. And Earth herself existed without life for millions of years and may exist for millions of more. More when life has left her. And what is it like while it lasts? It is so arranged that all the forms of it can live only by preying on one another. In the lower forms, this process entails only death. But in the higher, there appears to be a new quality called consciousness, which enables it to be attended with pain. Creatures cause pain by being born and live by inflicting pain, and in pain they mostly die. And in the most complex of all creatures, man, yet another quality appears, which we call reason, whereby he is enabled to foresee his own pain, which henceforth is preceded with acute mental suffering and to foresee his own death while keenly desiring permanence. It also enables men, by a hundred ingenious contrivances, to inflict a great deal more pain than they otherwise would have done on one another or on any irrational creature. The pain they, the pain, the power they have exploited to the full. Their history is largely a record of crime, war, disease, and terror with such sufficient happiness interposed to give them, while at last, an agonizing apprehension of losing it. And when it is lost, the poignant misery of remembering. Even now and then, they improve their condition a little, and what we call civilization appears, but all civilization passes away. And even while they remain, inflict peculiar sufferings of their own, probably sufficient to outweigh that alleviations they may have brought for the normal pains of man. That our civilization has done so, no one will dispute, that it will pass away like all of its predecessors is surely probable. Even if it should not, what then? The race is doomed. Every race that comes into being in any part of the universe is doomed, for the universe they tell us is running down and will someday be a uniform infinity of homogeneous matter at low temperature. All story will come to nothing. All life will turn out, will turn out in the end to have been transitory and senseless contortion upon the idiotic face of infinite matter. If you ask me to believe that this is the work of a benevolent and omnipotent spirit, I reply that all of the evidence points in the opposite direction. Either there is no spirit behind the universe, or else a spirit indifferent to good or evil, or else an evil spirit. And I'll give you a sense of Lewis's power as a writer, and actually these kinds of arguments have been posed throughout the history of the world. How could a good God have made this universe? And this is what he comes to. But then he also comes to the next point, which is if the universe is so bad, why would anybody have ever come up with the idea and have propagated it enormously and have had that idea be enormously successful that it was the product of a good creature? Now it seems to me that this is something that the celebrity atheists struggle to explain because the only way they can really make their formulation work is if they participate in what Lewis calls chronological snobbery and basically say, Well, everybody was an idiot in the past days and they just believed in superstition, but now we have reason and we're far smarter than them. The difficulty that you have with that is that there are many smart people in the world. And in fact, Thomas Nagle makes the same point in his book, Mind and Consciousness, where he says the difficulty that he has is that there are many smart people who seem to believe and there are many smart people who don't seem to believe. So Lewis comes and says, Well, you know, this, I can't imagine looking at the universe as it is where anyone would come about with the idea that, well, you know, the universe is good. Well, maybe we're just making that story up because we want to feel better about the universe. And maybe we just decide that facts be damned and will cling to our belief in goodness above all else. Oh, OK. But why would it be propagated so much unless, you know, we could talk to Adam, unless, unless in fact, Adam Friended of Think Club, unless, of course, well, maybe believing that the universe is good offers an evolutionary competition, a competitive advantage over tribes that didn't believe that the world was good, which seems kind of funny because, again, if the world really is, as Lewis's first paragraph describes, I wouldn't imagine that the universe is good. I would imagine that imagining the universe would be good would give you any competitive advantage. You'd probably just be better being ruthless. And in fact, it wasn't in this piece, but in another piece, someone, someone pointed to Watership Down, which is a story about, you know, about rabbits and how rabbits with rabbits with stories were somehow. I should probably pull up that article. Here it is a wonderful piece on mere orthodoxy about Stanley Harawas. He talks about liberalism. In one of his better known essays, Harawas shows how a book ostensibly about rabbits, Richard Adams Watership Down, is also an insightful work on political theory. The children's fantasy novel centers on several rabbit warns, including Cowslip's Warn and the titular Watership Down. Adams' rabbits live and thrive through the telling of stories, especially about the creation of rabbits, their enemies and the rabbit hero. El Arara, El Arara, El Araria is the manifestation of everything that rabbits must become, cunning, but also collaborative and hospitable in order to survive their faster, stronger, deadlier predators. However, in Cowslip's Warn, the rabbits have stopped telling each other stories without the tale of, without the tale of while and banding together against their predators. Each rabbit comes only to its own self-interest and that halfheartedly. These rabbits find that by ignoring the stories of their hero, death will become a tolerable inevitability. And, you know, you read this, you think, well, talking about the celebrity atheists, you want them to be heroes, but there's no, there's no story upon which to build your heroism. And so this goes into Lewis's point that, well, you know, where was, where, where are these, where are these problems coming from? There's one question which I never dreamed of raising. I never noticed how the very strength and faculty of the pessimist case at once provides us with a problem. If the universe is so bad and even half so bad, how on earth did human beings ever come to attribute it to the activities of a wise and good creator? Not all did, certainly. But why on earth did that idea become so popular, in fact so popular, as to have it dominate Christianity, Islam, and Judaism? Men are fools, perhaps, but hardly so foolish as that. The direct inference from black to white, from evil flower to virtuous root, from sensible work to workmen infinitely wise staggers belief. The spectacle of the universe is revealed by experience can never have been the ground of religion. It must have been something in spite of which religion acquired from a different source, which held it. And then he goes into that quite a bit. And then we'll get to the next point, which is, well, then he gets into this other question of the numinous. Why did ancients come up with the idea of spirits at all? And again, if you take the, and this is sort of Jordan Peterson's point, if you take the anthropology that celebrity atheists propose, why would we imagine such crazy things as spirits in the first place? Isn't it obvious that there's no man in the sky? That's what the celebrity atheists keep pointing out. Isn't it obvious that there are no creatures that are somehow controlling it, creatures we can somehow negotiate with? I mean, it would certainly become obvious that if this religion doesn't work, then why would it have gotten started in the first place? Why would people have started to not just play around with it, but in the case of most ancient civilizations, to build enormous monuments and temples to it? You know, the first mystery that the obvious waste theory stumbles on is the near universal sense of the numinous in humanity and its ubiquity and religion, which itself has become ubiquitous. At all times, then, an inference from the course of events in this world to the goodness and wisdom of the Creator would have been equally preposterous, and it was never made. Religion had a different origin. In other words, people didn't somehow discern religion from their phenomenology. Lewis asserts there's another faculty that is actually at play. Religion has a different origin. In what follows to be understood that I am not primarily arguing against the truth of Christianity, but describing its origin, a task in my view necessary if we would have put the problem of pain in its right setting. In all developed religions, we find three strands or elements, and in it Christianity one more. The first of them is what Professor Otto calls the experience of the numinous. Those who have not met this term may be introduced to it by the following device. Suppose you were told there's a tiger in the next room. You would know that you were in danger and probably feel fear. But if you were told there's a ghost in the next room and believe it, you would feel indeed what is often called fear, but at a different kind. In fact, my wife and I were down in Coronado and we went to the great Coronado in Hotel El Dorado and we went on a ghost tour. And there are a number of other people on this ghost tour because people are fascinated with the ghost stories in this old hotel. And in fact, you can Google it on the Internet and find out which rooms, rooms that are generally booked far in advance, that people make reservations for on the chance that they might meet the ghost. But on one hand, we're afraid, but on the other hand, we're intrigued. And Lewis is saying this is different from the fear and intrigue we have with, let's say, keeping tigers or doing extreme sports. There's another faculty that is involved. And this is what Professor Otto calls the numinous. It would be based not on the knowledge of danger, for no one is primarily afraid of what a ghost may do to him, but of the mere fact that there is a ghost. It is the uncanny rather than the dangerous. And the special kind of fear excised is what we call dread. Capital D from Lewis. With the uncanny capital U, what has reached the fringes of the numinous capital N? Now, I suppose you were simply you were told simply there is a mighty spirit in the room and believed it. Your feelings would then be even less like the mere fear of danger. But the disturbance would be profound. You would feel wonder and certain shrinking, a sense of inadequacy to cope with such a visitation or a prostration before it, an emotion which might be expressed in Shakespeare's words, under it my genius is rebuked. This feeling may be described as awe and the object, the object which excites it is the numinous. Now. And I would assert that you get this sense in terms of ghosts. But again, one of my favorite places in the world is Yosemite National Park. And if you want to see the numinous in action, stop in the park and wait over by Bridal Veil Falls in the summertime for huge buses to come full of Asian and European tourists. And the bus will open and out you will see people and they will look up and they will see Bridal Veil Falls and they see El Capitan. And they have spent a considerable amount of money and traveled a great distance to come and see these sites. And many of these Europeans will have actually rented RVs and you will see these rental RVs all over the place. And they are there on a tour of the numinous. They somehow feel something. And Lewis is quite right that the belief in spirits comes from the faculty of the numinous, not from any of these other stories. This faculty of the numinous seems universal among human beings. And it's a faculty which in some ways is perhaps similar to sight or sound or hearing or smell. Phenomenologically, it's something that we experience directly. And we're going to get into a little bit of Alvin Plantinga and we're going to call it basic. That somehow we have this faculty of the numinous and that religion has its source in the faculty of the numinous, not in some combination of the other senses plus reason or superstition or irrationality or whatever the celebrity atheists want to call it. Now Lewis is in fact leaning on a book by Rudolf Otto. Now there's another very interesting book about Lewis. There are many, many books about C.S. Lewis, by the way. This book is on C.S. Lewis's book list. And the subtitle of the book is The Ten Books that Influenced Him Most. And it's quite a fine little book. And in this book, he deals with the ten books and he explains the ten books. So you don't even have to really read the ten books to have him draw the connections between what's in the ten books and how it impacted Lewis's life. According to Otto, the numinous is the feeling that overcomes the mind when the individual is submerged or overwhelmed by its nothingness. We sense this when we look up in the stars. We feel this when we go into Yosemite Valley. It seems connected in some ways to beauty, but not exactly that. It's not really our aesthetic. It's not really our aesthetic faculty. It seems to be what takes us when perhaps you've had a baby and you hold that baby in your arms and suddenly you feel way, way too small and inadequate to care for that little life. This feeling in turn is always accompanied by a sense of complete dependency on the divine. However, this feeling of dependence is not merely a natural feeling of dependence. It is such as insufficiently resulting from a difficult circumstance. Rather, it is a deep existential sense of dependence, like the dependence Abraham felt when he pled with God for the men of Sodom. Behold now I, who am but dust and ash, have taken have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord. This is this is what people felt when they saw an angel. It wasn't mere fear. It was something very different. Otto called this kind of dependency the creature feeling. And in fact, I would assert that the the larger some of the threats that come to our lives, certainly there's fear in that. But there's also this creature feeling. And it has to do with this knowing that we're going to die. Now, of course, rationally, we all know that we're going to die. And if something happens, we may fear death. And so it's not the moment when someone pulls a gun on you. It's more the moment when you're sitting back and you're looking at your child and or you're looking at something else that you care deeply about. And you realize you might not be there. And you ponder the end of your story. And Lewis calls this the shame of being mortal. Whether Lewis's shame is directly influences influenced by Otto's creature feeling is unclear, especially since one could easily feel see such a feeling in Platonic Eros, which he talks about a little bit earlier, which speaks of poverty, for example. Nevertheless, the possibility remains that may be probable if the biblical accounts of the numinous that Lewis gives in the chapter one of the problem of pain are any indicator. Be that as it may, while the new numinous is broadly identified with creature feelings or shame, Otto claimed that this can be divided into two key elements. The feeling of mysterium tremendum, which do a Google search on that. It's very interesting and fascination. And that's exactly what you have with ghost stories. On one hand, we're fascinated by it. On the other hand, we're undone by it. And so people go to the El Dorado Coronado Hotel and they have a little ghost tour. And on one hand, you're deadly afraid you might see a ghost. On the other hand, you actually paid money to go on the ghost tour in order to see a ghost. Now, that's not the case of being thrown into a tiger's pen. There's something different going on. It's the uncanny. It's the numinous. It's the separate faculty. Not eyes and ears and reason, but what we travel all across the world to, to see the Grand Canyon or Yosemite National Park or some other great site. It's I just posted on Twitter this long line of people going up to visit to visit to conquer the top of Everest. Yeah, it drives us. It's real. For the sake of systemization, I will begin with this with mysterious tremendous and then move on to fascination. And he does. Now, that's the first thing that Lewis points to. So we have our faculties that we have sight and sound and smell and hearing and taste and touch. And Lewis basically says we have this other faculty, which it's sort of a fact he doesn't use that word, but this this our ability to sense the numinous. And now he's going to go on to another one, which is our ability to detect morality. So he goes to the numinous here a little bit. Let's see. This makes for bad YouTube. OK, the numinous is not the same as being morally good. It's not the same as being morally good, because when you go to Yosemite, in fact, you go and it's just the numinous. It's just awe. You go and you're looking for the ghost at the hotel. And, you know, it's this isn't about good and evil at all, frankly. It's it's it's exciting. It's scary. It's it's dread. It's it's it's desire. It's all of those things, but it's not about good or evil. The numinous is not the same as morally good. And a man overwhelmed with awe is likely, if left to himself, to think the numinous object beyond good and evil. Now we're going to bring up psychedelics at some point. But but pay attention to how often when it comes to psychedelics, that's exactly what people say. Well, it was beyond good and evil. And exactly what people are seeking when they're looking for a psychedelic trip, a good psychedelic trip, is they are looking for the numinous. This brings us to the second strand or element in religion. So it's just not the numinous that brings in religion. All the human beings that history has ever acknowledged some kind has heard of. All the human beings that history has heard of acknowledge some kind of morality. That is, they feel they feel toward certain proposed actions, the experience expressed by the words I ought or I ought not. Now, of course, Jonathan Haidt has been working on this in terms of these moral taste buds. And in fact, I would argue that what Jonathan Haidt is trying to do is discern this moral faculty that we have, which would be, again, something similar to the numinal faculty that we possess. These are things that we have. We can sense the numinous and we can sense the moral. We have these faculties. So we might say we have numinous taste buds and we have moral taste buds. These experiences resemble awe and one respect, namely they cannot be logically deduced from the environment. You can't get to an ought from an is. They cannot be logically deduced from the environment and physical evidence of the man who undergoes them. You can shuffle I want or I am forced or I am well advised or I dare not, as long as you please without getting out of them the slightest hint of I ought and ought not. And once again, attempts to resolve the moral experience into something else always presuppose the very thing they are trying to explain, as when a famous psychoanalyst deduced it from prehistoric parasite. If parasite produces a sense of guilt, what is because? That is because men felt that they ought not to have committed it. If they did not feel so, it could produce no sense of guilt. Morality, like numinous awe, is a jump. In it, man goes beyond anything that can be given in the facts of experience. And it has one characteristic to be remarkable, too remarkable to be ignored. The moralities accepted among men may differ, though not at bottom so widely as often claimed, but they all agree in prescribing a behavior which their adherents fail to practice. All men alike stand condemned, not by alien codes of ethics, but by their own, and all men therefore are conscious of guilt. The second element in religion is the consciousness not merely of a moral law, but of a moral law at once approved and disobeyed. This consciousness is neither a logical nor an illogical inference from the facts of experience. If we did not bring it to our experience, we could not find it there. It is either an inexplicable illusion, which no one wants to say because no one wants to ponder moral relativism, or else a revelation. And again, if you go back and you take a look at the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris conversations, there it all is, there it all is, this moral sense. You're not going to get an ought from an is, but where does it come from? Well, where does the numinous come from? Well, maybe we have a faculty by which we experience the numinous, just like we have faculties of eyes by which we experience the visible. Maybe we have a faculty about morality. In fact, I think that's what Jonathan Haidt is trying to discern. Well, what is this faculty which it's not sight, we don't see ought, we don't hear ought, we don't smell ought, we don't taste ought, we don't touch ought, but somehow we know it. It's a sort of revelation. Oh, I think I just read that. I shouldn't pick on poor Brett, but you know, every time I hear him say, well, he's going to simply transcend his programming after I spend hours of really quite brilliant stuff listening to him explain how I behave because of my programming, I'm sure he's a good man. I'm sure he's a good husband. He seemed to be doing just fine. But I bet you his wife has a long list of complaints that Brett breaks his own moral codes. It could be small things. Maybe he leaves socks on the floor. Maybe he doesn't do the dishes enough. Maybe he doesn't pick up after himself. And when confronted by it, he would readily acknowledge that all of these things are moral failings of his. He doesn't change the law. But they're there. He doesn't simply transcend them because he wants to. He'll feel guilty about them because he has broken them. His wife tries to enforce them on him, but she doesn't want to nag. And his arguments for improving himself are certainly sincere. But the strangest thing, and again, I love this part in the Problems of Pain, is that Lewis says, here's our moral faculty. And the reason that we can actually consider it such is that we all come up with this moral law. And it's not just a set of rules that we come up with in order to, you know, as the postmodernists might say, to advantage ourselves, because we break them. If I was going to come up with a moral law to advantage myself, I would eliminate a whole bunch of things that I break, and I would make the law fit exactly how I live. But you know what? Not everyone would accept it. And this is where, again, Lewis's observation says, we have this moral law, and we all kind of know what it is, and we all break it. But there are differences between people, and we talk about those differences. But there's a great deal of commonality. Surely, and maybe I should have my conversation with Adam about this objective morality, is it objective? I would never use that word because of the difficulties with the monarchical vision. But it's not exactly that we see it. We sense it with another moral faculty, but just like our eyes can deceive us, and there can be optical illusions, our moral faculties are also not infallible. And I think this is an important point to make, especially to Americans who believe that their individual moral faculties are infallible. And to that I laugh. Now, these are not new thoughts, because actually, John Calvin talked about the census divinitatis, which the reformed epistemology will build on. These are non-rational. They're not rational. My eyesight isn't rational. My hearing isn't rational. My taste isn't rational. My sense of touch isn't rational. None of these faculties are rational, and neither are they infallible. But they're there, and none of us deny that they are there. And so what he's saying is that we have this sense of the numinous and the sense of morality, and that these are probably best described as faculties which we possess. We can't, and scientists are trying to figure out how to account for them, and the difficulty that they have is that, well, they want to try to account for them outside of consciousness. Well, good luck. Even with consciousness. Where do they come from? We don't know. And so they're best described as faculties. And this is where you get this sense of reformed epistemology, which my teachers at Calvin College schooled me in back in the day, and I'm looking for it on the books over at the other side of the office. But you can look that up on Wikipedia and learn about Alvin Plantinga and Nicholas Waltersdorf and all the good work that they did. Now, what's interesting is that, sort of like our sight and our smell and our touch, you can reliably provoke experiences of the numinous with drugs. And in fact, I've heard tell of drugs that you can give people in ways that you can manipulate people to make people feel more, make people feel more moral or immoral. And so it's quite interesting, and maybe I'll not play it just in the interest of time, but I played this clip from Jordan Peterson at the beginning of his talk with Roger Scrutin, where he talks about these, well, I'll not play it. It's one of my favorite Peterson clips. So here we go. Let's play it. ...with you. So the transcendent is the fact insofar as it's that which transcends our ignorance, but you can also think about it technically. So, and I think we know enough about how the brain works now, so that not that we know much, so that useful things can be said about that. You tend to represent the world in the simplest manner that you possibly can that works for what you're doing. Now we're using our senses, our faculties of sight and sound and touch and all of that. But again, as I've made, the points I've made before, our eyes don't actually produce for us themselves this manifest image that we have around us. It's our eyes and our brain. In fact, our eyes are darting around, and if you just had, let's say, a live feed of our eyes, that would be incoherent. You might see these live feeds from the eyes of flies and the others. What we're living in actually is this low-resolution world of memory that Peterson is talking about. And so you don't actually see the world. You see sufficiently useful low-resolution representations of the world. And if they work, then that's fine. There's no need to adjust them, and they're relatively easy to remember and to manipulate. But now and then you have a misapprehension about someone, let's say, and you have a conversation with them, and the conversation goes sideways. And what that means is that the thing that you thought you were conversing with is not the thing that you're conversing with. And that manifests itself in error. So error is the place where the transcendent reveals itself. And what is actually revealing itself is the reality that's outside and underneath your perceptions. And so what you see in the world, in some sense, is a set of animated cartoons. And a lot of that is actually a consequence of you seeing nothing but your memory, because your brain is organized so that instead of going through all of the difficulty of having to look at the thing in itself, you look at what you assume to be there. And if you can get away with that, so much the better. But the thing in itself is always much richer than your apprehension of it, which is partly why you make mistakes, but also partly why you can continue to garner wisdom in the world. There's always more there than meets the eye. And God only knows how much more there is there than meets the eye. And you can show this even in the religious sense to some degree, because you could say that there's an element to the transcendent that instills people with a sense of religious significance. The numinous. You can do that by immediately, scientifically, by feeding people chemicals, for example, that disrupt the inhibition of perception by memory. In other words, blur some faculties, other faculties emerge. Again, I have a good friend who was blind and, you know, he'd talk about his eyesight would come and go. And he'd talk about how his experience of the world would change. Now, he didn't necessarily hear better and that his his ears were working better, but he began to shift the distribution of his senses in order to manage this image of the world that he had out there. And so if you go back to my video I had with with Dr. Jim, you know, what do these what do these chemicals do? Well, they they inhibit and they disrupt the normal pattern of the senses that we have going. And well, these other senses come to the fore. Well, what does that mean? And then we begin to realize that, well, if it's the case that that we have multiple senses beyond just the the five that we know of, if we have the faculty for the numinous and the faculty for the moral, wouldn't it stand to reason that other cultures and other people at other times, in fact, manage their faculties differently than we do? That in fact they and you'll read about this, read Jared Diamond or read read other secular authors who will talk about this, that in fact the they they meet other people and these other people are claiming other things and other maybe their their sense of the numinous. They simply pay more attention to it. What might that mean? How might that change their view of the world? And then that puts them in a place where the transcendent tends to reveal itself, sometimes an overwhelming force. So this is not some fiction that this exists. It's the what's transcendent is more real than the reality that you perceive. Well, let's pick let's pick up on that because the and then they go from there. That's the clip I wanted to play. Now, Lewis then goes to the third strangeness, which is that in fact these moral demands come together and they come together in this thing called Christianity. The moral experience and the numinous experience are so far from being the same that they may exist for quite long periods without establishing a mutual contact. But in many forms of paganism, the worship of gods and the ethical discussions of the philosophers have very little to do with each other. The third stage in religious development arises when men identify them, when the numinous power to which they feel awe is made is made the guardian of morality by which they feel obligation. Once again, this may seem to you very natural. What can be more natural than a savage haunted at once by awe and by guilt to think of the power which awes him is also the authority which condemns his guilt. And it is indeed natural to humanity, but it's not very but it's not in the least obvious. The actual behavior of that universe which the numinous haunts bears no resemblance to the behavior which morality demands of us. One seems wasteful, ruthless and unjust. The other endowed and joins us to the opposite qualities. In other words, Lewis begins by looking up at the scars and saying, well, they're pretty little blinking lights, but what a waste that the source of this creation is is hopelessly wasteful. And then he has this other faculty which is morality. And in fact, the complaint against God from the little 14 year old Lewis was in fact the conflict between these two things that the numinous. Well, that faculty was working and wow, look at all of this. And then the moral. Well, the moral tends to get towards you mean you would have millions of years of death and selection in order to come up with human beings. So on one hand, the numinous is fascinated and you hear that from atheists to say, look at the wonder of the huge amount of the universe. On the other hand, the moral faculty is engaged and they come to blows. And that's why Lewis says at the beginning, it's not so clear that people would come up with a belief in an all good, all powerful God. These two faculties are in fact, they seem to be in conflict on this very point. Except, of course, when they come together. The one seems wasteful, ruthless and unjust and the other enjoys us in the opposite direction. Nor can the identification of the two explain as wish fulfillment, for it fulfills no one's wishes. And this is, of course, the crazy argument against Freud's or religion is just what we wish for. And that's exactly the point of atheist Lewis. I wish for the movie I imagine the universe I want. That's what I wish for. That's not what we find. If I'm going to make up a God, I'm going to make up a God in a lamp that I can rub and poof at will come and grant all my wishes. That seems to be what I want to wish for. We desire. We desire nothing less than to see the law whose naked authority is already in the hands of the world. We desire nothing less than to see the law whose naked authority is already unsupportable, armed with the incalculable claims of the numinous. Of all the jumps that humanity takes in its religious history, this is certainly the most surprising. It is not unnatural that many sections of the human race refuse it. Not moral religion, not and non-religious morality exists and still exists. You see it all the time. You look at people who are spiritual but not religious. Very quickly, you know, they're giving up all of this dogma that they thought was restricting them in order to pursue the numinous. But they also develop a morality and often, well, if you're going to make up your own religion, if you're making up your own morality, it kind of, you know, draw the lines clear. But then others come along and say, really, aren't you just kind of making that up? What's interesting is that actually this bears out in history. One of the interesting discoveries I made back in 2017 reading Jonathan Walton's Ancient Near East Thought in the Old Testament, where he's just got tons and tons of material from other Ancient Near East oracles, is he notes that there's a difference between Ancient Near East oracles and Israelite oracles. Israelite indictment oracles are far more common than Ancient Near East oracles. The Israelite prophets were moralists and they're always giving moralistic oracles. The numinous is always screaming, this God of the Old Testament is angry, and he's not happy with what Israel is doing. Israelite oracles often call for covenant faithfulness, and Ancient Near East oracles most often call for ritual faithfulness. And this is interesting because the God of the Hebrews, well, they're not feeding him. He has the cows on a thousand hillsides. He doesn't need to be fed. But in many of the Egyptian oracles and other Ancient Near East oracles, they're just calling people to the temple to, you know, pay their tithes and bring their offerings and bring their money. And someone might think, well, isn't that what the priests are doing? And then you might ask, well, why are the Hebrew oracles complaining about stuff that's making other people wealthy? Why should they be concerned for the poor? Romans weren't all that time, always terribly necessarily concerned for the poor. The Greeks weren't that concerned for the poor. Well, there was some of that, but the poor, they deserved to be poor because, well, this business about human equality, that hadn't come around. And, you know, people are born to different stations. Read Plato's Republic. You have the golds and the silvers and the bronze and the irons and the clay. You've got them all there. Israel prophets are covenant enforcers. They're enforcing people's behaviors, not merely rituals. I desire, how many times in the Old Testament, I desire obedience, not sacrifice. You didn't hear that from the other Ancient Near East oracles. Judgment in Ancient Near East prophecy is nearly non-existent. In Ancient Near East prophecy, divine support is often most in focus. In Israelite prophecy, divine disfavor is mostly often in focus. God's going to crush his chosen people. Well, chosen for what? Chosen for crushing? Choose someone else, please. Ancient Near East prophecy is often major in ritual prescription. Israelite prophecies hold covenant accountability rather than ritual accountability. And the prescription covenant faithfulness is the presumable remedy. Clean up your moral lives and the numinous will be happy. This is strange. It's not unique to Israel, but it comes through in Israel stronger than you can find it anyplace else. And then why on earth would we still be doing Israelite, Israelite morality and not Egyptian? Now the fourth strand or element is a historical event. There was born a man among the Jews whose claim to be or to be the son of or to be one with the something which is at once the awful hunter of nature and the giver of the moral law. This claim is so shocking, a paradox and even a horror which we may easily be lulled into taking it too lightly that only two views of which later he'd add a third of which man are possible. Either he is a raving lunatic or an unusually abominable type or else he was and is precisely what he said. There is no middle way. If the records make the first hypothesis unacceptable, you must submit to the second. And if you do that, all else which is claimed by Christians becomes credible. That this man having been killed yet alive and that at his death and some manner incomprehensible to human thought has affected a real change in our relations to the awful and righteous Lord and a change in our favor. To ask whether the universe as we see it looks more like the work of a wise and good creator or the work of chance and difference or malevolence is to admit from the outset all the relevant factors in the religious problem. Christianity is not the conclusion of a philosophical debate on the origins of the universe. It is a catastrophic historical event following on the long spiritual preparation of humanity which I have described. It is not a system into which we have to fit the awkward fact of pain. It is itself one of the awkward facts which have to be fitted into any system we make. In a sense, it creates rather than solves the problem of pain. For pain would be no problem unless side by side with our daily existence of this painful world we have received what we think is good assurance that ultimate reality is righteous and loving. Now let's get back to the nuns. Okay, so this argument I find to actually be very timely. And the reason I think it's very timely is because the nuns are not against reason. They're just more interested in intuitions. And the sorts of intuitions they're interested in are spiritual intuitions, moral intuitions, and aesthetic intuitions. And I think there's something commendable about that. We are not just a mind, right? This is an... Now I would say, I would correct him here and say we are not just our senses and reason attached to it. We have these faculties and in fact people may deny we have these faculties and then betray their words by their very actions in terms of both morality and the numinous. An error of the rationalists to think that reason can offer everything about reality that we ought to know. Morality begins with intuitions, not reason. And Lewis is right. Religion begins with intuitions or experiences, not reason. Now of course intuitions without reason, unhinged from reason, is dangerous. Unexamined morality can lead to immorality, right? Unexamined spiritual intuitions leads to paganism or the occult. And in fact if you look at what reason does, people have noted for a long time that you can use your reason to overpower the results of your numinal faculty or your morality faculty. And in fact sometimes the most rational people are the ones with the best arguments against what everyone knows to be immoral. So reason does need to be engaged in the process, yet the turn from this purely empiricist rationalist framework is something that is intuition driven is actually a healthy thing I would say. So where have the intuitions led the nuns? Where have they been led? Answering this question is the remainder of this talk. But first I want to offer a qualification, one that I've already hinted at, there is no singular nun worldview, right? Just because two people disassociate from religion doesn't mean that somehow they all believe they both. I don't think he's doing the movie making on this shot. It's like, okay, we get this shot, but why linger here? I believe the same thing. Nonetheless, there are very interesting common patterns, right? Dominant patterns within their thought. And I want to focus on four tonight, okay? Which we'll set the backdrop for tomorrow. So let's begin with this one. The common belief in karma or faith, believe it or not, that shows up all the time. Again, even in the atheist, it's really weird. But now what is... And I would argue every time you hear someone say karma, pay attention. I hear it all the time and people all across the board. What do they mean when you have a religiously unaffiliated person, right, a nun say, I believe in karma or I believe in faith? Let's start with just the term karma. Of course, Hinduism has the entire doctrine that the soul is caught in this cycle of birth and death and rebirth, samsara. And karma is, of course, the sort of causal laws, right? And I agree with them 100%. I hear people use the word karma. And then sometimes I'll mention this Dutch soccer coach who once said in public, well, children that are born with birth defects are just receiving from their past life what they did for the errors that they committed in their past lives. People were horrified. And it's like, yeah, you have a different karma than really what you were born with. And it's like, yeah, you have a different karma than really where the word came from. Principle governing that cycle. So present sufferings are explained by evils of the past and present evils will be punished in future lives and vice versa regarding the good. Now, this is entirely unlikely. I mean, this is not what the nuns mean. I mean, and I'll tell you why. In my interviews, first of all, the nuns never once mentioned a belief in reincarnation. Although I do hear people sometimes postulate about it, but I don't really see them taking it seriously. That makes it very unlikely that what they mean by karma is the traditional Hindu doctrine of karma. In fact, most admitted to being unsure about what happens after death. And we'll talk about that a little later tonight. So instead, what it seems that the nuns mean when they say they believe in karma or fate is that they think, put colloquially, things happen for a reason. What goes around comes around. Right. Something like that. And they've picked up on this term karma as a sort of social signifier to say, oh, yeah, that's that's what that means. But now here's here's where an interesting tension emerges in the worldview of many nuns. Rather than telling you what it is, I want to show you a clip and see if you can identify what the tension is. So this would be the clip labeled Karma. The problem of evil was hugely important to how I thought about God and how I navigated a lot of these questions. Now, this is him. He's in his own movie because this is who he was. The problem of evil being that if God is all good, right, if he's all good, he should want to prevent evil. And if he's all powerful, he should be able to. Right. But there's evil. Eric, you were somebody who had a lot of questions. What were some of the particular questions that really troubled you? My big one was the question of suffering. Why is there suffering in the world? We had a God that was all powerful, but didn't ever seem to do anything. You know, it seemed like he just didn't seem to care. Both of my dad's brothers died within like a five, 10 year span of each other. My first uncle died in like an apartment fire where he just like fell asleep and his cigarette just caught the apartment on fire and he just died. Now, remember Lewis's opening argument about this world. It's just wasteful. I mean, it's just mindlessly wasteful. This is, this is, again, you know, this is the, this is the world that Lewis as an atheist saw and said, how could there be a God right there at the beginning of the problem of pain? And his sleep because he wasn't aware of it. And then my other uncle had cancer, I think, and he died like a year and a half ago or so. Like when both of my dad's brothers died, my dad cried and he never does. And it was just like really heartbreaking for me to watch him. I don't know, I would just have at least like conversations with my mom about like, well, why if he's so all powerful, why can't he solve like suffering or hunger or world peace or like he's supposed to be just this omnipotent being and every there's like tragedy and crime that happens on a daily basis. And it's like, it's sad. Like, I don't even like watching the news anymore because all of it is just crime. And she, she's just like, well, it's in his plan. You gotta trust it. And I'm like, well, why? And she just. Notice the generational divide. Like she never gave me a definite answer because I mean, nobody knows, but it kind of just made me like. Her mom's not leaving the faith. Why is she? Start thinking about all other things that. Is her mom dumb? Goes along with. She wouldn't say her mom is dumb. Being faithful and having faith in somebody that you can't really talk to or see. I believe that there's a higher power. I mean, I don't necessarily think it's like God, like one old man that just controls everything. Notice the language. I think in a way the, the arguments of the celebrity atheists have had their impact, but it didn't lead to the outcomes that they imagined it would. Everything, but I, I mean, I believe in like karma, fate, like things happen for a reason. So did you catch the tension in the worldview? Anybody? Feel clear and bold enough to suggest what they what what the tension is there. Yeah. Okay. Yes, that would be the tension. So on the one hand, you'll see in these interviews. I began to lose faith when this thing happened and I started asking why did God allow that? And somebody would say, well, God, let's things happen for a reason. And then when they circle around to the current beliefs, I definitely believe in karma and fate. Things happen for a reason. Now, what are we to make of that? What are we to make of that tension? Right. The uncharitable reading of this is that it's just a bold face contradiction. It's a product of sloppy thinking. They're idiots. Right. Things like that. That would be the uncharitable reading. I think there's a better explanation. God is personal and karma is not. I think that's your better explanation. That's important right there. The main of karma explanation. God is personal and karma is not. If you've heard one theme throughout a lot of my sermons, it was exactly that. That a long time ago when I listened to people, I figured out people would rather have an impersonal universe than a personal one because it somehow it felt better that random chance would have killed their uncle with a cigarette butt than a God asleep at the switch. Why do we have that idea? I also noticed that there's something to our advantage. If the world is impersonal, it means that we who are personal, we who exhibit will, we who can use reason, we who have intelligence and have intent, we can marshal our forces to ride in and stop the chaos. We can colonize the chaos. But then of course you have problems with the other half of it, which is everything happens for a reason. You really can't hold both, but people do. And again, if you look at, for example, a book I mention often, Soul Searching by Christian Smith and the books that are downstream from him because there are a number of them. He did some follow-up books or some other authors who wrote about it. Americans don't care. Morality is self-evident. They're using their faculty. They'd rather not apply reason to it, but that makes it hard. So commonalities. There's a common belief in karma or fate. Things happen for a reason. God is personal and karma is not. If God is watching and he could have stepped in, why didn't he? We can't trust him, which is, by the way, the same issue of Genesis 3. With karma, there is no person to blame. And somehow I feel better about that, even though the uncle still dies in the fire. Now we're going to get more into evil and duty. I think that's your better explanation. The main objection is that God was watching. He could have stepped in and he didn't. When you say karma, there is no person to blame. No one was watching. No one could have stepped in. No one should have stepped in because it's an impersonal force. In other words, the objection is not that the events in our world, it's not that the events in our world can't be part of a larger mosaic of meaning. As we'll see, they clearly think that is, right? That is the karma doctrine as they understand it, right? That the events of our world are part of this larger mosaic of meaning. The problem they see is that no person should ever let evil go unchallenged if he can stop it. And that's what they see God as, someone who lets evil go unchallenged. Who could stop it? There it is. Go unchallenged if he can stop it. And that's what they see God as, someone who lets evil go unchallenged. Who could stop it? Now right away, you have what we looked at. We're going to get to this in a minute. What we looked at in terms of Lewis. That, well, we're back to the question of, well, the world is all full of this loss. And then we have our morality. And a person, which we know can colonize, can act. Why doesn't God act? Now everything happens for a reason, but it's an impersonal reason that's sort of built into the world. Which also, in a sense, makes you really responsible. Which is what karma does. And I often find that this is something that when people talk about karma, they usually have karma and then they also have some self-interested bias. Because I'm a good person. And it's usually the people that, because of what they've done, and you can get into Jordan Peterson and his talk about post-traumatic stress, because of what they have done, suddenly they're not a good person anymore. Now they have a problem. Now in fact they have a big problem. Because if karma is presupposed and they are not a good person, notice all the good person language that's all over the place, then they have a problem. Let's go back to this. So in this doctrine of karma, what is being affirmed? What is positively affirmed by the nuns? The conviction is that the world is meaningful. And this conviction has two components that are interesting to it. The first is that we are all connected. This comes up again and again. It's a rejection of some sort of rugged individualism that says I am an island. Meaning, in terms of a meaningful world, is not actually necessarily my story. The meaning is something larger than that. We are part of this larger complex, this fully integrated story. And what we do sends ripples from ourselves into the cosmos and what others do and have done send ripples back toward us. And there is a conviction that that is not chaos, but it is somehow purposeful. Has anyone here seen the film Life Itself? No? Okay. Well, this is our next clip. I want to show you the trailer for this film because very few films, this is the best picture I have ever seen of what the nuns believe on this topic. And I will say, speaking as a filmmaker and as an artist, it is beautiful. It is a beautiful thing. I hope one day I can make something as beautiful as this. It is an incredible work of art. It is an incredible work of art by people. And its picture of the nuns' worldview is a compelling one. You can see why someone would be persuaded by it. Now, I do need to give the caveat. There is one point in that film where one of the most shocking things I have ever seen in a film happens and I stood there, drop jaw, looking at the screen for a solid two minutes before I recovered. So, you know, with that warning, it is not for the faint of heart, but nonetheless, that is actually not gratuitous. That is important to what the film is trying to do, but nonetheless, it is not for the faint of heart. So can we pull up the Life Itself trailer and give you a glimpse of this? Now, after him saying something like that, I was going to watch the movie. So I watched the movie. Everything he said was right. But the trailer, I didn't think, really gives you a sense of really what is going on in the movie. And so in an effort to not have my video pulled down by the owners of this movie, I did what is legal, which is I had my cell phone camera, actually, while I think I held the cat, while I sort of took a little bit of video over what is really, there's no spoilers in here necessarily, but over what is really the thesis statement of the movie. So I will, the sound is horrible. Like whenever I take a cell phone video of my television, the sound is usually horrible. So I'm just going to read the subtitles. So if you're just listening, you'll hear the subtitles. It's basically the woman runs into the college frat house and she's going to tell her boyfriend exactly what she's going to write her senior thesis on. Let's have... She graduated top of her class with an English Lit. Yeah, she wrote her thesis on the unreliable narrator. What's that? My thesis. Hey guys, what's up? Unreliable narrators are considered a device, right? They don't answer and they get a lot of literary analysis because it's a gimmick, it's a trick. I mean, Canterbury Tales gets a shout out because you know it's good. But then typically it's used for popcorn crime movies and thriller movies like Agatha Christie, unusual suspects and so on. But I'm going to argue that every narrator is by definition unreliable, because when you get to the story, there's always an essence between the story itself and the telling of said story, right? And therefore every story that has ever been told has an unreliable narrator. The only truly reliable narrator would be someone hypothetically telling a story that unfolds before our very eyes, which is obviously impossible. So what does that tell us? The only truly reliable narrator is life itself. But life itself is also a completely unreliable narrator, because it is constantly misdirecting and misleading us and taking us on this journey where it is literally impossible to predict and where it's going next. And this is my thesis. Life is the ultimate unreliable narrator. What do you think? Oh yeah. It'll make more sense when I write it. Love you. Bye guys. And off she runs. I love you, he says. It's a good movie. You should watch it. The world is meaningful. Life itself. The title of the movie is disavows in the thematic statement of the same movie, which is quite ironic. Life itself is the unreliable narrator. And the movie is an unreliable narrator. But it's amazingly good. And this is exactly the worldview of the nuns. Nathan Jacobs hits it. Bang, there it is. But the revelation of the movie wasn't written by chaos. It wasn't written by anything impersonal. The movie was written by people, by a person, and narrated. And in itself, it's unreliable. But the person wrote the intricate storylines that brought them to a meaningful and satisfying outcome, because of course, it's an American film. Justice will be done, but justice has to be impersonal, as we imagine. Which is an amazing thing given the fact that, as I've noted many times before, if you read, I've got just a certain number of books down here, if you read Miroslav's Wolf, Exclusive and Embrace, Miroslav Volf is working through what happened in the breakup of Yugoslavia. And if it's just materiality, lots of people get away with it. Stalin got away with it. Hitler got away with it. Mao got away with it. Can you tell me that somehow Hitler's suicide in a bunker in Berlin, even if he escaped to South America, somehow was his death made up for the millions of death he caused? How about Stalin? How about Mao? How about, how about, you know, they get away with it. People get away with it all the time. How is that, where is your karma? I mean, it's not a reasonable worldview, but again, Nathan Jacobs is not saying this is reasonable. He's saying this is what's working in us. It's God's duty to reveal himself to us. He goes into that a little bit later. And we are, we are in a sense the consumer who judges. Well, I don't find your justification, Lord, all that compelling. Does God care? See, part of the problem we have is, is egalitarianism. The real questions are about the afterlife because that's uncertain. Hitler got away with it. Stalin got away with it. Mao got away with it. Castro got away with it. A lot of them get away with it. So some observations. Celebrity atheists have been prophets of unbelief and they've been successful, but they've been less successful evangelists of their gospel. They've articulated the zeitgeist and promoted it, but they haven't harvested it well or much. For Americans, life is an American movie and you would imagine that Americans now spending more and more time in front of American movies. Well, of course life is like an American movie because the media is projecting life back to them and they're believing what they're seeing. Justice is done in American movies even if the characters themselves don't benefit. Is that enough for you? There's a theoretical vindication, but those who do evil don't necessarily suffer in any kind of correspondence to the amount of suffering that they caused. Isn't that the injustice we talk about when Hitler, Stalin and Mao all got away with it? Americans can't seem to see beyond the ending credits and that really disturbs them. And he goes on to that and if you watch by all means watch the rest of that video and I'll put the link below. Americans just now have longer movies. We have mini-series and they go on and on and on and on because we don't want the movie to end and in some sense that's our afterlife. But we worry for ourselves because we know, yeah, life itself is also a completely unreliable narrator. And how on earth will justice be done if life is really just an American movie? Now, 50 years ago, evangelism explosion was the cutting edge of Christian evangelical evangelistic strategy. You would go door to door and you'd knock on somebody's door and you'd say something like, what would you tell Jesus to let him into your heaven? And the assumption was, and actually in the next video that he gets into, he will take apart substitutionary atonement because it was premised on Americans feeling impending judgment. That premise is gone. This belief has receded culturally except for people who feel cultural guilt or know their lives to be unworkable. So here's the irony with karma. It's all these people that on one hand say, I'm a good person and I believe in karma. And they say that easily because they think they deserve the better end of the stick. Now along comes woke religion. That is going to mess this up because then you can read Wilfred McClay's piece on guilt because, well, you used to think you were a good person because you're nice to your neighbor. Well, now you have to be woke because you have to somehow accept your privilege to somehow deal with the guilt of all the slavery that maybe not even your ancestors caused, but you by being white and downstream in America are now guilty of. And so, well, I better support, I better support reparations or I better do whatever I can because I got to stay on the good person side of things. And now I've got all this woke religion reinforcing the guilt and how really can this guilt be gotten rid of? It's interesting that Jordan Peterson invites people to take responsibility, which isn't far from reallowing guilt back in. And then there's the attack on substitutionary atonement. Now in part two, at the Midwest OCA clergy convocation where Nathan Jacobs taught, he takes apart substitutionary atonement. Someone sent me a tweet about this and I said, substitutionary atonement isn't the only atonement theory. In fact, there's no real atonement theory given in the New Testament. You have these elements in these images and throughout Christian theology, Christians have come up with these basically images of atonement and substitutionary atonement is one of them. Well, if substitutionary atonement basically assumes the prevalence of guilt in the culture when that guilt is gone, substitutionary atonement doesn't really work that well. So it didn't change the basic script of Christianity in America, but when the emergent movement came through the church, it split. You had the young restless and reformed and they doubled down on substitutionary atonement. I remember all the way back in seminary in the 80s, one of my seminary colleagues saying to me, you know, the problem with this world is that Christians talk about too much love. They don't talk about enough guilt. And I thought, hmm, that's interesting, because love really is at the top of the hierarchy with Christianity. So you're just kind of upset that basically what we were able to presume earlier in Western Christendom, because there's plenty of it in Roman Catholicism, is no longer there. So our tricks don't work anymore. The progressive evangelicals came and went for the cashless prosperity juicy gospel where, well, now it's justicy. Well, now suddenly you've got all of those dynamics that I just referred to. In fact, what you'll find is that Christianity goes all kinds of different places. And here this one website says, well, here's all these different gospels, forgiveness only. So be forgiven. Well, what does it create? Following Jesus is optional, sanctified passivity. From the left, old and new, help the needy. What does it create? An accommodation to culture. Because there you have, I like lots of the numinous, but, you know, I'm going to keep my moral law social obligation, but not personal obligation. Prosperity gospel, consumer gospel, gospel of the right, be right. What does it create? Religious swagger. Follow me. What does it create? Activist followers, followers intent on learning to live as Jesus lived. And people kind of filter into one of these six things. So it's all a mess. What people are doing is looking for the real movie. They're haunted by nihilism. They're plagued by trust issues. No wonder people are consuming Netflix and American movies at an insane rate. It's their religion and you have to keep the movie playing to keep believing it. Can't trust God. Can't trust institutions. Have only the small footprint of their little lives to make their decisions upon. And then when they get old and they have to start thinking about what happens with life after death, suddenly, oh, boy, this was not something they were prepared for. They want a big narrative they can trust because life itself is a completely unreliable narrator. There we are. What do you believe? Why do you believe it? What are you going to do about it?