https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OSex6z2hlns

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show this is episode 42 42 42 and it's it's New Year's Eve and tomorrow is New Year's so thoughts for the new year Freddie and Nancy good help and a new place to live and a new place to live okay okay I understand that Freddie Freddie needs a new place wants a new place to live so if anybody out there knows anything for 650 a month I'll be glad they put it out take showers and I'll bathe my hygiene will be good and I won't smell because I want to be a perfectionist and I love Jesus Christ okay and I'm a man of my word so we will see. Okay all right good how about you Nancy thoughts for the new year? Yeah but our church here will, Living Stones will have a good year and we will get more peace and harmony yeah and that we will be able to minister to more people and get them to come to this church. We are a loving church we love everybody. We have a way you want to be treated. Right. Be pure, grateful, loyal, industrious and cheerful as Paul would say the Cadet Codes. I loved cadets I liked going to Rippon and do the Pinedogs Derby I remember that and I liked doing the soap box cars and I liked seeing all my relatives in Rippon. Hi Rippon I hope you guys are doing good. Okay that's mom's sister home. She grew up in Rippon. I had my grandpa and I had my grandma and on my dad's side I had I had Jenny Schuller and Fred Schuller. Like me Fred his name was Fred. You're Fred the third right? Yes that's correct and I miss dad but I know he's in a better place so we're okay and I will see him again in this lifetime. I mean in another lifetime. That's right. Unless God comes already. Right. Again. That's right. But anyways. Good. Yeah the Kings they lost to the Phoenix Suns but that's all right. They played tonight they play they play Charlotte. Okay. So we will see. Okay. And I wanted to sing Go Tata on the Mountain. Okay. Oh yeah. Do you have the music? No I got the music. Yeah he's got the music. Okay I'll help you. Oh no no. Is he going to sing too? Yeah do it. Yeah because I have to get the tune for him but wait a minute I don't know why. Oh I don't know he carries the tune pretty well. No let me just do it. I'll do it. No I want to have it. I want to sing it. Okay let's go. Alright. Go tell it on the mountain, over the hills and everywhere. Go tell it on the mountain that Jesus Christ is born. I'm gonna do one verse. Okay. While shepherds kept their watching or silent flocks by night, behold throughout the heavens they're shown a holy light. Go tell it on the mountain, over the hills and everywhere. Go tell it on the mountain that Jesus Christ is born. Alright. We can do this more often. We harmonize too. We might want her in the choir. I know she's a little bit older but she's not that old. She can come to the choir. We'll harmonize together and the congregation can oversee when we're done. Oh oh oh I forgot to say thank you for the $20 that you sent me in the mail. I really appreciate that. No I'm serious the fan did that. They wanted me to be blessed. That was awesome. Okay so. Have a happy new year. Happy new year. Hold on. And may God bless you this next year. Okay I'm gonna do one rap about go tell it on the mountain. I'm gonna sing it real quick. I know but I gotta rap it. I gotta rap it. Okay go ahead and rap it. Go tell it on the mountain, over the hills and everywhere. Go tell it on the mountain that Jesus Christ is born. While shepherds kept their watching and silent flocks by night. Behold throughout the heavens thrown holy a new light. Go tell it on the mountain. Go tell it on the mountain, over the hills and everywhere. Go tell it on the mountain that Jesus Christ is born. Peace out. One love Sacramento and all that's listening. One love. Tune into the Freddie Show every Sunday or whenever you want to. And this is the best after in the world. Freddie and Paul Show. I said the Freddie and Paul Show. And mom comes in sometimes too. And everybody have a happy new year and go Kings. Look at the crown. I'm rolling top like a disco crown. Alright.