https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8O-5IhZeFdk

 Hi, this is Paul. This is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current draft of my sermon. Would you bring a small child to the Getty? I've done that. The Getty is a terrific museum in Southern California. That's one of my favorite places to go. And if you bring a small child there, be prepared for a short stay. Because although you may walk by a masterpiece, your child might not enjoy it. One of the things I really enjoy doing when I go to the Getty is watching other people look at the glory, watching them ponder it, watching them work it through in their minds, watching them try to figure out what it means and what it says to them and what it could be. Now this painting is a is a Renaissance painting of Pluto, the god of the underworld, seizing the young proserpony, the daughter of the corn goddess Ceres, ready to carry her down to his kingdom on horse-drawn chariots. And actually this picture is... I should put some of those pictures in. What's so amazing is you can stand here and you can just look at the detail and appreciate the backstory and someone who knows art history can go even further and deeper into it and understand it at levels that I can't. There is glory in this picture and the reason we know there's glory is well, look how we treat it. We put it in an art museum and millions of people throughout the year come and look at it and ponder it and can't distill it into words, yet they know that there is something glorious about it. Well, how do we know this? Well, what if I brought my dog to the Getty? Would my dog notice the picture? I don't think the Getty would let me bring my dog. Why? Because the dog, well, if I put this on the ground, the dog would chew on it and trample it and dirty it and soil it. My dog has no sense of glory. He's a dog. Now, I forgive this of my dog because he's a dog and I forgive this of my young children because they've not yet had chance to learn. But what's going on in this place? Why do we stop and ponder and value something that my dog sees no value in it? Are we crazy or is my dog? Now today we have a story and it's an interesting story because it's told by Nebuchadnezzar the great king of Babylon right here in Daniel 4 and that causes a lot of conversation, but let's just read the story and see what we think of it. King Nebuchadnezzar to all peoples and nations of every language living on the whole world. May all prosperity be yours. It is my pleasure to recount the signs and the marvels which the Most High God has worked for me. How great are his signs and his marvels overwhelming? His sovereignty is an everlasting kingdom. His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom. His sovereignty stands to all generations. Now, why is this pagan king saying things like this? I Nebuchadnezzar was living peacefully at home in the luxury of my palace as I lay in my bed. I saw a dream which terrified me and fantasies and visions which came into my head dismayed me. So I issued an order summoning into my presence all the wise men of Babylon to make known to me the interpretation of the dream. Then the magicians, exorcists, Chaldeans, and diviners came in and in their presence I related my dream, but they could not interpret it. And yet another came into my presence, Daniel, who is called Belteshazzar after the name of my God. A man possessed by the Spirit of the Holy Gods. To him too, I related the dream. Belteshazzar, chief of magicians, whom I myself know to be possessed of the Spirit of the Holy Gods. Is that how a good, is that how a good, a good Hebrew would sound? And who no secret baffles listened to the vision I saw in a dream and tell me its interpretation. Here is the vision which I came, which came into my head as I was lying upon my bed. As I was looking, I saw a tree of great height at the center of the earth. The tree grew and became strong, reaching to the top of the sky and visible to the earth's farthest bounds. Its foliage was lovely and its fruit abundant and it yielded food for all. Beneath it the wild beasts found shelter, the birds lodged in its branches and from all and from it all living creatures fed. Now, this is very interesting because in many mythologies and in some other places of the Bible, you have this image of the world tree. The Bible and many other cultures imagine that life the way it should be is always the connection of heaven and earth. And so here you have this world tree and again a tree, you have earth, you have heaven, in a sense a tree connects them. You can find this in other fairy tales such as Jack and the Beanstalk where, where you climb the beanstalk up to heaven and you find it in Jacob's Ladder. But here we have a tree and it's in a sense it's the world tree and all the animals live there within the tree and within this hierarchy. Everything, everything, this is life the way it should be. Here's another vision which came into my head as I was lying upon my bed. As I watched there was a watcher, a holy one coming down from heavens. Now you can read about these watchers in various ancient Near East writings. Often they're evil, but they're, they're, they're creatures of heaven. They're messengers and they come down. He cried aloud and said, Hew down the tree, lop off the branches, strip away the foliage, scatter the fruit. Let the wild beasts flee from its shelter and the birds from its branches, but leave the stump with its roots in the ground. So tether with an iron ring, let him eat his fill of the lush grass. And you see very quickly in this dream, what was a tree is now a hymn. Let him be drenched with the dew of heaven and share the lot of the beasts in their pasture. Let his mind cease to be a man's mind, and let him be given the mind of a beast. Let seven times pass over him. The issue has been determined by the watchers and the sentence pronounced by the holy ones. Thereby the living will know that the most high is sovereign in the kingdom of men. He gives the kingdom to whom he will and he may set it, set over it, the humblest of mankind. And you hear the song of Hannah from the book of Samuel and you hear Mary's song from the book of John. And you hear Mary's song from the book of Luke and this repeated refrain from the Old Testament that the Lord raises up the humble and brings down the lowly. And you have echoes of the Tower of Babel when they're trying to build a tower up to the sky and God confuses the languages and frustrates it. And Nebuchadnezzar, which is in his mind, life the way it should be, he becomes the great tree that connects heaven and earth. Cut it down and destroy Shalom and destroy well-being because there is a fatal flaw in his kingdom. This is the dream which I, King Nebuchadnezzar, have dreamt. Now, Belteshazzar, one who has been renamed by me, one who has been enslaved by me, tell me its interpretation. For though all the wise men of my kingdom are unable to tell me what it means, you can tell me since the spirit of the Holy Gods is within you. That's natural theology happening right there. Daniel, who was called Belteshazzar, was dumbfounded for a moment, dismayed by his thoughts. But the king said, Do not let the dream and its interpretation dismay you. Belteshazzar answered, My Lord, if only the dream were for those who hate you and its interpretation for your enemies. The tree which you saw grow became strong, reaching with its top to the sky, invisible to the earth's farthest bounds. Its foliage, lovely, and its fruit abundant, a tree which yielded food for all, beneath which the wild beasts dwelt and in whose branches the birds lodged. That tree, O king, is you. You have grown and become strong. The power has grown and reaches the sky. Your sovereignty stretches to the ends of the earth. Also, O king, you saw a watcher, a holy one coming down from heaven and saying, Hew down the tree and destroy it, but leave its stump with its roots in the ground. So tether with an iron ring, let him eat his fill with the lush grass, let him be drenched with the dew of heaven, and share the lot of the beasts until seven times pass over him. This is the interpretation, O king. It is a decree from the Most High, which touches my Lord the King. You would be banished from the society of men. You will have to live with the wild beasts. You will feed on grass like oxen, and you will be drenched with the dew of heaven. Seven times will pass over you until you have learned that the Most High is sovereign over the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomever he will. The command was given to leave the stump of the tree with its roots. By this you may know from the time you acknowledge the sovereignty of heaven, your rule will endure. Be advised by me, O king, redeem your sins by charity and your iniquities by generosity to the wretched. So may you long enjoy peace of mind. Now what's happening here is general revelation. What Daniel is asserting is something that would be known to nearly any culture and language in the world. It's common obligation. You see it played out in almost every religion and every culture. It's to acknowledge the giftedness of any good you've received, and to pay it forward to those who have received less than you. And in a sense, in many ways, in many cultures, this is how you rebalance the world. If you have a lot, give to those who have few. And again, you won't just find this in Christianity. You'll find this in Native American spirituality. You'll find it in Eastern religions. You'll find it in religions all over the world. By general revelation, this should be seen, and in fact has been seen and recognized by people throughout history, throughout the world. But we suppress this. We struggle with this. We don't get this. We don't fulfill this easily. We take steps at it, but we stumble upon it. The Apostle Paul in the Book of Romans says this, Notice it's both visible, but it can be seen. That's what Paul is saying here. Have been clearly seen. It's been witnessed to in religions across the world in their moral codes. Being understood from what has been seen so people are without excuse. For although they knew God, they neither glorified him as God, nor gave thanks to him. There's the low bar. Their thinking became futile, and their foolish hearts were darkened. Well, how? How does that happen? Although they claim to be wise, they became fools and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images made to look like mortal human beings and birds and animals and reptiles. Here you see the stories of Daniel packaged into this one quotation. Now JRR Tolkien made the point of calling us sub-creators. Why? Because all of the stuff we use to create with is given to us. We didn't make the world. We didn't. We are barely responsible for the training we have received in the technology and the arts that we've received from past generations. These are all things gifted to us. And what will we do with them? And you'll notice that right there in the Ten Commandments, God places himself above these things and says, You don't make an image of me from anything that you find in the heavens above or the earth below or the waters under the earth. You cannot represent me in anything that I have made. And in that way, someone who says makes glorious makes glorious birthday cakes shouldn't be represented as a cake because the baker is the cake maker, not merely another cake. So why can't we see glory? How do we lose it? And what do we do with it when we see it? You see, this business of glory is a difficult thing because what glory should do is actually connect us with above as we receive with gratitude that which we've been given and then having been given that to then give to others. That should be the natural play of glory. But this is what it looks like when we don't. All this, befell King Nebuchadnezzar at the end of 12 months, the king was walking on the roof of the Royal Palace of Babylon and he exclaimed, Is not this Babylon the great, which I have built as a royal residence by my own mighty power and for the honor of your honor of the honor of my majesty is full of himself. The boastful chef ruins the meal. The boastful baker ruins the cake ruins the glory of the cake for those who eat. The words were still on his lips when a voice came down from heaven. To you King Nebuchadnezzar the word is spoken. The kingdom has passed from you. You are banished from the society of men and you shall live with the wild beasts. You shall feed on grass like oxen and seven times will pass over you until you have learned that the Most High is sovereign over the kingdom of men and gives it to whomever he will. Nebuchadnezzar, you didn't give yourself the kingdom. God gave you the capacity for doing everything that you've done, good and evil. At that very moment this judgment came upon Nebuchadnezzar and he was banished from society of men and he ate grass like oxen. His body was drenched with the dew of heaven until his hair grew long like goat's hair and his nails like eagle's talons. And this is this is William Blake's haunting haunting image of Nebuchadnezzar. You see his strength. You see his power. But look at his face. He's reduced. He's diminished. He's fearful. It's the opposite of glory. He can't see it. He's become like an animal but not in a glorious way. He's become blind to glory. Once we see ourselves as the source of glory we can no longer see above ourselves. The tree is cut down. The only world we see is below us. We can only look down. As and we become merely an animal. There is no glory in people that can be seen. Only opportunities for use. There is no glory in nature. Only opportunities for our use. We become our appetites. Nothing more. When we see nothing above and everyone else is seen as below we act like animals even if we are not reduced to it physically. As in this dream. Well how does a dream work? It's apocalyptic. It's revealed. In dramatic form the truth of our decisions is starkly portrayed in images we can't forget. Glory that is seen through is merely as mere power is corrupted into cynicism and people seen through become tools of our appetites. Glory laid in treasures before us appear to us as it would a dog. The story of Nebuchadnezzar is our story. At the end of the appointed time Nebuchadnezzar, I Nebuchadnezzar raised my eyes to heaven. See? He can once again look up. I should add that. Grace was given to raise his eyes to see above himself even before he did it. What does that mean? Can we even take credit for our ability to see glory? At that very time I returned to my right mind and my majesty and royal splendor were restored to me for the glory of my kingdom. My courtiers and my nobles sought audience of me. I was established in my kingdom and my power was greatly increased. Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and exalt and glorify the king of heaven. For all his acts are right and his ways are just and those whose conduct is arrogant he can bring low. And they all do go low. Is this a conversion story? Now there's a word missing in Daniel 4 that is pretty important to be seen as missing. And the word is the name of the Lord. This is all general revelation here and it's kept within those boundaries. He talks about God plenty and the most high God but he speaks of God as a pagan. Why is God invisible? Why can although being invisible God's glory clearly be seen? So there's a real irony here. We seek to displace the most high. We wish to imagine ourselves as being the source of the stuff of glory which we can't be. And we wish to be seen as the source of the stuff of glory which we aren't. And which he who is doesn't directly do. You see the boastful baker diminishes the glory of the eating of his cake. And God knows this but we stumble. Now God holds the world that doesn't know him to a low bar standard and you read that in Romans 1. Now we have a twisted capacity. We have a capacity to see glory but our twisted hearts attempt to appropriate it and make it our own in an illicit way. The boastful chef ruins the meal. What do we do to ourselves when we cannot make proper attribution to the source of the glory we garden? Now what do gardeners do? Gardeners take plants that they have not created and take elements of that and make them into turn them to glory. You take these tiny little wild things, grapes, and you make them bigger and you work them and you make them into certain kinds of grapes and you make them into wine. And you create glory from them. But you create the glory that is present within the stuff. This was our first job. But you see we can't handle glory. We make grapes into wine but this wine comes to rule over us. Now how can wine rule over us? Because our appetites rule over us because we become but animals. Now you might have noticed I went straight from misery to gratitude. Well why? Well did we skip deliverance? Well by general revelation we owe gratitude. But we are blind to glory and deaf to its music. That's not exactly right. Let me change that. By general revelation we owe gratitude. We are subject to glory and by grasping it with greedy hearts we become its slave through our appetites. Our original sin is our suspicion that God is our enemy and looking to scam us. And so what we say to God is we want your stuff. We want your glory but we don't want you. And by turning our backs on him and elevating ourselves we imagine we will write this. But we turn ourselves into beasts. We can only look down. Well how should we respond? Therefore if you have any encouragement from being united with Christ, if any comfort from his love, if any common sharing in the spirit, if any tenderness and compassion, then make my joy complete by being like-minded, having the same love being one in spirit and in mind. Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit, rather in humility value others above yourselves. Not looking to your own interests but each of you to the interests of the others. But how can we do this? How can we trust? You see we must see the deliverance and that's why Paul locates it in Christ. By this we learn that God is not just another petty tyrant, the kind we see at the top of our hierarchies, the kind we see destroying the earth until they destroy themselves, which they always do. How can we see the genuine article? In your relationships with one another have the same mindset as Christ Jesus, who being in very nature God did not consider equality with God as something to be used to his own advantage. Jesus is the better King than Nebuchadnezzar. Rather he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant being made in human likeness and being found in appearance as a man. He humbled himself by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross. This is the contrast with Nebuchadnezzar. Therefore God exalted him to the highest place and gave him the name that is above every name that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth. And every tongue acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. Can you see that in him? Can you see the glory? Can you understand it?