https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=fE5-lRqAKV4

 Well, over to the Freddie and Paul show. We've got to get the old cell phone straight in the car here. He's showing you a hand print. I've got to lean down a little bit. How you doing, Fred? Mark of the good man, because he showed his hand. Paul showed his hand. Nice. Good one, Fred. Good one, Fred. How you doing? You want to gloat about those 49ers? Oh, nine and four and oh since 91. Four and oh, pretty impressive. I don't I didn't hear anybody really looking at the 49ers to do so well. Did I tell you they were going to be good earlier? You always. Yeah, but you always tell me they're going to be good. And you always say the Raiders are going to be talking as a fan. Yeah. You're not talking. Yeah, I'm not a bandwagon man. Not a bandwagon man. Yeah. True fan. Faithful and true every year. Green Bay beat Dallas. Green Bay beat Dallas. I can't like Dallas because Dallas and 49ers are rivals. OK. The only reason why I like Green Bay is they're a good team. They got a good coach and they got a good quarterback, Aaron Rodgers. And they got Freeman. Or did he get traded? Antonio Freeman. Oh, OK. Anyways, can you name some other players on Green Bay? On Green Bay? I can't right now. Oh, how is Julio Jones doing? Julio Jones, Reggie has Julio Jones. Julio Jones is doing OK. He's a great. He's a really good player. So he usually puts he usually does well. So he's doing all right. I think Atlanta's kind of missed this year. Guess what? What? Do you know Matthews got traded to? There are two Matthews in the league right now. The guy with the long bond. Yeah, Clay Matthews. He went to who, Paul? I think he signed the Rams. Yeah, he went to the Rams because the Rams played the somebody and I saw him on there with him. He's doing pretty good on the Rams. Rams are playing the Niners this week. That'll be a good game. Everybody. I think that's a Thursday night game this week. OK, everybody. Niners Rams. Back to what I was telling you. I talked to CJ and oh, I forgot to tell you, Paul, someone said they have a sponsor for us. Oh, yeah. They on the comments. So maybe you'll be getting an email. That was Dan. Oh, you're getting me in trouble. I don't miss anything. Dan says Dan says someone should sponsor us, but he didn't. He didn't say someone has. Let's tell the family who should sponsor us. Who should sponsor us, Fred? Nike, Nike. But neither of us wear Nike. It should be something that you use and can endorse. How about Pepsi? Pepsi. Fred likes Pepsi. Although we're drinking Coca Cola products today, I think. OK, but yeah, soft drink company. Definitely up Fred's angle. Yeah, I can do a rap for him. Why don't you do a rap now about Pepsi? Pepsi rap. Pepsi rap. Just like that. Enough to the chat. My rhymes are fat. I bust platinum tracks. Just like that. I like to drink 70. That is not whack. Coming up like this, coming up like that. This is a freestyle rap because I got it like that. If you don't even know, I got to go with my rhythm that I'm kicking and I'm good to go without a word to say. They call me Freddie D from the 916. Not kidding. Play. Step into the top. Step into the middle. I don't play the fiddle, but I do get riddles back and forth, forth and back. Don't forget about Paul because he knows about all that. We got the 49ers and they're doing really good. Pepsi is a good drink and it'll make you feel good. It'll keep you up if you want to be mean on a microphone like a disco queen. There you go. There's a Pepsi rap. And OK, let's talk about the A's. They're done, but at least they made it to the wild card. So yeah, yeah. Simeon and Davis, like I was saying. OK, so when's the next game? Thursday night, right? Next year with football NFL. NFL Thursday night. I think I think that no, no. Last week, the Rams were Thursday night. The Pats play Thursday night this week. The Patriots played Thursday night this week. I've got Sony, Michelle and my fantasy team from the Patriots. And who? I don't know who they're playing. Oh, but they're going to be good. They're playing no way. The Patriots are playing the Giants this Thursday night. Giants are very good. Drinking soda, drinking soda, leaving to have a subway endorsement and went to subway. Nina and Cheryl gave Freddie a ten dollar card for subway. So we went to subway today. Charles is doing something. No, that's my wife. I thought Charles. No, that's my wife. So I was saying you thought he was saying no, no, no. I'm sorry. I couldn't make it. No. Yeah, you couldn't make it today because he had to work. And we'll pay for you, CJ, that you have a good job this time because you deserve it. You're a good friend. CJ is a good friend and Paul is a good friend. He's like my uncle. So uncle, uncle Paul, uncle Paul. I stand tall. You know it all because we got it like that, because that's a fact, because that's a fact. All right. Hold on. How long did we go? We're about five minutes already. We're on the plane. Hi, mom. Hi, Nancy. One love. Amen. Amen. Hallelujah.