https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=sBNm1Z5oc6E

 Paul show on this Easter 2021. How you doing, Fred? Paul, how you doing? I'm doing good. I'm doing good. This rapper named Mack 10. It's tight, man. And don't forget, I looked it up. Her name is Tweety Bird. She's a female rapper and she's been out for like five years, but she's very good. Very good. Tweety Bird. Tweety Bird. That's her name. All right. All right. I dig that. I dig that. That's cool. How's your Easter going, Fred? Oh, my Easter is going pretty good. At least I made it to church. Since I saw you, I'm doing a whole lot better. Since I've seen Reggie, I've been doing a whole lot better. Reggie's cameraman today. Yeah, cameraman. Crops out. Yo, what's happening, CJ? What's up, Gordon? What's up, Justin? What's up, Mom? What's really going on? All right. So how the Kings doing? The Kings won. The Kings won. Okay. And they beat the Lakers. They beat the Lakers. Oh, that's a good win. I know. Make Reggie sad. Reggie's a Laker. No, Lakers are good, Reggie. I like some of them. I like Anthony Davis. LeBron's okay. Where are some other guys on that team, Reggie? I don't know. I only know two of them. The Stars. Baseball season's here. Baseball season's here. The A's won and the Giants won. Wow, good. And let's see. Pretty soon there'll be When does the Olympics come out, sir? Out of the Olympics this year? I don't know. I think July, August of this year. July, August? Summer Olympics? Look out for that, man. NBA basketball Olympics. Oh, really? I was at Olympics for football, don't you? American football. It's only played in America. That's a new one. I came up with an invention. There you go. Football. American football in the Olympics. The rest of the world, when they say football, they think soccer. I know, or boozeball. Boozeball in the Olympics. Yeah. As long as it's kicking and never tripping, it's all good, you know. That's fine. What's up? So you got a rap for us? Yeah. What's up, Pastor Mark, my cousin? Happy Easter to all my Berber people. Everybody ripping, everybody in Modesto keeping it gang tight. T Grizzly, Ice Cube, Snoop Dogg, and all those guys. And don't forget Ice Cube. And don't forget Mazzy out of Sacramento. That guy's name is Mazzy. He's from Oak Park. He is a big time rapper now. Really? That's how I have to get. If anybody has any endorsements where I can put my music, I already have my music on my channel, the Freddie channel. It's called the Freddie D channel on YouTube. That's Paul helping me with it. And yeah, so. And you were left comments last week or two weeks ago. Yeah. That was really you, right? Yes. All right. I was going to ban him if it wasn't you. I don't have any Freddie impersonators. I don't do that. Don't want any Freddie impersonators. No, no, you got to have a real. All right. You got an Easter rap for us today? Yeah. But I wanted to know one thing. OK. Why? Why don't they give us money for being American? They do. That was your stimulus check. Right. But I haven't got it. You haven't got your stimulus check yet. No, they didn't give it to me. Oh, it should be. I just got mine Saturday. So it'll come. It'll come. Yeah. You think I should get a new debit card since what happened to me? They took my money, my $30. If your debit card has been compromised, get a new one. I think I should. OK. All right. Ready to rap? My price has risen. All right. Shout to Ozana. All right. Hold on. Let me get up. All right. Here we go. You got to scoot back. I don't have to scoot back. It's good. OK. You're good to go. All right. Ready? Yep. Merry Christmas, my foot. Easter is the one that I salute. Coming up like this, like a new persuasion, I get the lasion, the boo MC, because I'm just like that. Enough chitter chat. My stuff is fat. Rolling deep in my homie six-four. Rolling like this, really though. Tee grizzly in the place, don't you see? Snoop doggie dog like one, two, three. Yeah, me. The white boy Freddy D. But that's OK, because I don't discriminate or do that. Enough chitter chat. My stuff is fat. Rolling deep everywhere I go. Jesus Christ is the real thing, though. He rose again from the dead. On Easter, he came in and my name is Fred. Christ is risen. Shout, Hosanna. Celebrate the day of days. Christ is risen. Hustling wonder. All creation amazed. In the desert also running. See, I spread into the ground. Healing leaves grace abound and bring a taste unknown. Christ is risen. Raise your spirits from caverns of despair. Walk with gladness in the morning. See what I can do and dare. Drink the wine of the resurrection. Don't you see we had communion in the CRC. Not a servant, but a friend. Jesus is our strong companion. In joy, peace shall never end. That was my rhyme and we all kicked in. All right. That was a good one. That was a good one. Thank you, Paul. Happy Easter to everybody out there. One love. Happy Easter. All right. You're in transmission. Make sure it would play. Make sure it played. Make sure it played. Did you stop it? Of course not.