https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=73qjQmLVOmM

 Welcome to... Oh, go ahead Fred. That was your Thanksgiving, sir. We had a good Thanksgiving, Fred. Yeah, I went to my mom's. We had a sweet potato pie, a mac and potato gravy, ham, turkey, and a lot of good stuff. Good, good, good. Good was there. Gordon was there. The only person who went there wasn't CJ because he had to work on Thanksgiving. Isn't that messed up? Oh, that's too bad. That's too bad. That's too bad. But you're living in a better house too, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's good. That's good. I'm living with Justin and he's my buddy. Oh, Justin's living there now too. Oh, good. Yeah, so anyways, in basketball the Kings won. They beat the Lakers in LA. It's always nice. But then they came home and lost to the Lakers. Oh, that's so sad. It's a sad thing. Yeah, it's a sad thing. Yeah, it's a sad thing. Then they lost to the Grizzlies, but now they beat the Clippers in LA and in Sacramento they beat the Clippers. So the Kings are going to do good. It's a possibility they can make the playoffs if they keep on playing good. If they keep playing good. And that would be credit what credit is due. That would be awesome. That would be awesome. You saw the Kings game, right Allie? Yes. All right. She went to it? She went to a Kings game. Oh, we should go sometime just for the heck of it. When you think about it for Christmas presents, no, you can get two tickets for like 40 bucks. Oh, that's not too bad. That's all I'm saying. Anyways, so yeah, I was just wondering what you thought of, okay, just explain to me because I don't really know what Republican Party means. What does that mean? What do they believe in? We're going to get political on the Freddie and Paul show? Yeah, I just wanted to know because I never asked you that. What do the Republican Party believe in? Are they civil or? Well, there's certain issues that Republicans, Democrats sort of fall on different sides. Democrat is like, like a demo, right? It's kind of. I don't know. I don't know if we want to get too much politics here in the Freddie and Paul show. But anyways, football, the 49ers played the Seahawks today and they got Seahawks got Wilson back. So watch out. But the 49ers have been not too bad either. But like I said about the Kings, they're 83 now. That's pretty good. It wins and three losses. Kings are 83? Yes. No joke. Wow. That's no joke for the Kings. Let me tell you the players that are good. Deer, Fox, Tyrese. Tyrese, what's his name? I can't believe it's live. I haven't watched a Kings game in years. Barnes, Hodges, Hedges. What's that lady's name? Oh, she wouldn't know. But anyways, they're doing good. They're doing real good. So good. Who's going to? Who do you like? Who do you think is going to go to the Super Bowl this year? Who are the good teams in football? It's probably going to be Kansas City. And I don't know. Who do you think? I don't know. The Patriots are doing better. I don't think they're that good yet. What about what do you think, Phil? Who do you think? The Tampa Bay Buccaneers. Oh, yeah. Tampa Bay and KC. Tom Brady could go to the Super Bowl again. KC and Tampa Bay. Tom Brady's like Mr. Super Bowl. Yeah. So anyway, all right. Any thoughts on the sermon? I don't have your mom here to give a report. I didn't walk out. I know that one. Well, that's good. I'm trying to help me out. It's always good. Okay, serve me on what you were talking about. Don't worry about it. It's about Malachi and the messenger of the covenant and Jesus. And basically, but she didn't say this part, did she? Which part? She doesn't believe you want me to. I guess I didn't say those words, but that is the golden rule. That's a fine thing to say. Okay. All right. You got a rap for us? Yeah, I do a rap. All right. What you going to do? Okay. Come up with a topic and I'll rhyme about it. Well, what about We Three Kings of Orient are? We're getting there in the year. We three kings of Orient are gathering gifts we travel afar, Filled in fountain, lured in mountain, following yonder star. Oh, star of wonder, star of light, starwood loyal, brooky right, Westward leading, still proceeding, guide us to thy perfect light. Excellent. All right. All right. Good for today? Yeah, we'll get another one next week. All right. All right. All right. One love. Amen. Amen. Hallelujah.