https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uZOPPt_Rb4Y

 Alright, welcome back to the Freddie and Paul show. This is episode, I think it's 49. Hello Paul, how are you doing? I'm doing good. We have special guests this morning. They've been on the show before. Yes, all back. Fancy Nancy and Philip the Jesus Man. This is a book that we have of all the different people. These are all the people that Philip has given to the Jesus sign. There's a picture of him right there. These are all the people that Philip has given the Jesus sign to. He's done that all over the country. He's got a story for every picture here. Charles Stanley has one himself. Charles Stanley has one. There's a picture of Charles Stanley. Charles Stanley. He's in here somewhere. We just saw him. There's Charles Stanley with the Jesus sign. Which one is Charles Stanley? Who is he though? He's a preacher on TV. There's Charles Stanley with the Jesus sign. Alright. That guy right there? That guy right there. He's a preacher on TV. Wow, Philip, that's awesome. Alright, what are we going to talk about? Well, Philip's going to talk first because I want him to talk about his ministry. Okay, short story Philip. Okay, I came today to church here and a man from, he's from Los Angeles. I didn't know him and usually the first time I see somebody I end up giving them a Jesus sign. So I gave him a Jesus sign to him and told him my stories. How God led me on this journey of giving out Jesus signs. And I gave him a mission statement. I gave one to my cousin in Minnesota. All he did was lay it on the table. His brother-in-law come by, wants it. And my cousin led him to Christ within six months. Shortly after that he passed away. So if you wouldn't have saw my Jesus sign he may not have cut to heaven. But you know more. Yeah. That's a big awesome. Alright, so that's the Jesus sign. Alright, Nancy and Freddie what are you guys going to do? Nancy's back in church. Nancy was out of action for a while. She had laryngitis. Her voice is still out. I understand that. So she's holding the mic today. But his sermon was in Christ alone. And to me that's where it's at. I mean if I didn't have Christ in my life every minute almost. I would not be as happy as I am. Yeah, you wouldn't be blessed in the Lord. Why? Jesus knows your name and you are a good person. Lord you have my heart. And I will search for you. Jesus take my life and lead me on. Lord you have my heart. And I will search for you. Let me be to you a sacrifice. And I will praise you Lord. And I will sing of love come down. And as you show your face. We'll see the glory here. Lord you have my heart. And I will search for yours. Jesus take my life and lead me on. Lord you have my heart. And I will search for yours. Thanks for my mom in the CRC church. Letting me be able to be your sacrifice. Alright, I like the ad-libbing. Good job Fred. Alright, anything else we got? We got to talk about the Kings a little bit. What we did earlier. We're not going to have to be flashin'. Okay, football time. Football, who's going to win the Super Bowl? Who, Phillip? The... Philadelphia Eagles? Eagles. Philadelphia Eagles. Oh, is it? Wait a minute, Paul. You can't wait for your turn. Who's going to win the Super Bowl? I want the Eagles to win, but it's going to be hard against Brady. That's true. Okay, Fred, your pick? Still with the Eagles? I'm with the Eagles, brother, and I want to know if they'll have their starting quarterback. What's your name? Dort? Foul. Oh, Foulkes is the backup. I forget who they're starting with. Who's the starter, mom? You know. I don't remember. You don't remember. Anyways, let's hope they have a starting quarterback. They have a good team. Foulkes played well last game, though. You know who's going to be at the halftime show? One of my boys. We looked it up. Justin Timberlake. What's up, Justin Timberlake? You hope you do a good job if you're watching the Freddie and Paul show. Anyways, you can look for me. If you want to email Paul, that's fine. And I could open up for you because I'm a celebrity and I got it going on. I know I'm from the 916 and I know you were year-wise if you're from, but I'm a Jesus man. He's from LA. Or Anaheim. Anaheim, there you go. Anyways, what's your pick? Your turn. Patriots. Patriots are going to win. Brady and. I can't go against the family. Go with the running back? I don't know how the Patriots are going to win. They're very flexed on that. Oh, are they getting Grungrosky back? Oh, I don't know. I don't know if Grungrosky is playing against. Because he had a concussion. That's right. That's why I don't know. I don't know if he's back. They need him because they almost lost the Jaguars. Jaguars did really good. Jaguars have great defense. Mortals. Yeah. They're going to win. They're going to win. They're going to win. They almost lost the Jaguars. Jaguars did really good. Jaguars have great defense. Mortals. Yeah. Mortals the quarterback. Yeah. And they did really good. Yeah, they did. But they got some injuries too. That's why I think they fell off at the end. Yeah. Well, the defense wears down. Yeah. All right. We're at six minutes. So. Okay. Anything else? That's it? That's all. Thank you, Lord. Thank you, Lord. Okay. One love. One love. Amen. Jesus number one. Jesus number one.