https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tMuXHkAZ784

 Alright, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hello Paul, how you doing? Good Fred, how you doing? Well I'm going for the Super Bowl. I like Brady and Gringrovsky. And Holmes, I don't like the Chiefs because they beat against the 49ers one year. And the 49ers had the game throughout the whole game. In the dawn, the Chiefs came back with a quarterback pass from McCombs to Gringrovsky and won the game. And they didn't have time to come back. That's what made me upset. What kind of stuff is that? You know, sometimes you're good, sometimes you're bad. Freddie, you should let past Super Goals be bygones. Let them go. Alright, but check this out man. Reggie gave me five bucks today, I put it in my sock. Now I can't find it. So what's up man? 916 and we drew it. What? Dang man, it's like funky chicken or something but I don't know. You haven't eaten Hydrosoate yet? I don't know. Anyway. Wow. Alright, so you're kind of evolving from rapper to comedian. No, both. Both? Okay. I'm multi-talented. You are multi-talented, that is true. Yeah, so Paul, what did you think of the... Oh, Kings, yeah they beat the Nuggets last night. Yeah, they're doing good. McCombs had 24, Fox had 28. Wow. Whiteside had 22. Alright. I keep up on all that stuff because I'm knowledgeable. I got it going on like doggy dog. Anyways, okay, who you going for today Paul? Um, I don't know, maybe get Brady in another way. Yeah, Brady get Brady in another way. Why not? Why not? Go Brady. Let's give the Super Bowl to Tom Brady. Brady campaign, peace out. You don't have that many more years to win it. Yeah, that's what I'm saying. Alright, well I'm going to do a little rap and then we'll end the show. Sounds good. Go something like this. You got the cheeks, you got the fucking ears on the mic because I ain't got no fear. McCombs throwing a pass, interception and I don't trust the pass. Stepping hard to the stop like E-40 says. I'm the king of the hip hop rocking nonstop. People living and giving, staying on top of their life as they're living. I'm Freddie B and I'm down for the show biz. Rip it up Gordon G with our homeboy Charlie. He's got a curl that'll rock your world. He's the man in command. If he can't do it, we all can. We all can Rick. We all can Gordon. We all can Paul. And that's all. Don't forget about my people in Visalia. They're big dealers and they're way up. They're dealers of milk because they protein to say what's up. And I'm on the mic and I'm not Chuck. You're not Chuck. Yeah. Alright. Sounds good. Let's land the plane. Alright. One love. Tune in every Sunday. Every Sunday. Except when it's not. Sounds good. Alright. Every Sunday. That was the worst way for last week.