https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rlV-UPv4vFA

 Yes, Phlebas, it is Good Friday. We do celebrate Good Friday in America. And I debated whether or not to do this livestream because it's Good Friday, but I wanted, I want to try to do first Friday of the month for the Bridges of Meaning question and answer, and I didn't find anything particularly inappropriate about doing a question and answer on Good Friday. So read a few of the comments. IRLPolitik, looks like they're getting their New England estuary up and running. Sherry, Wendy and IRLPolitik, who's been on the channel, met last Saturday. Wendy has done an else net and they're going to get the ball rolling on the Greater Boston, New England estuary. So good on you guys. When you do get the meeting scheduled, let me know and I will contact the two pastors in Whiten'sville because they were also curious about it. And so maybe you can shake loose one of them. Good morning, Annamie. Good morning, Andrea. Good morning, Dali-Bo Fernell. Greetings from South Africa. Blessed Good Friday. Blessed Good Friday to you all. So let me do a little bit of housekeeping here. Share screen, edge tab. Nope. Entire window. Yeah, we'll do that. There we go. So basically usual format. Rick, Rick is having a busy time at work right now, so he didn't come in this morning. So I'm doing it StreamYard style instead of in the voice chat. Rick has all this fancy stuff that he does to get the Discord and the voice chat together. But that's too much for me to manage if I'm going to manage it. And StreamYard just works super, super easily. So everybody's checking in. Dr. Jim, Cassandra, Anselman, John the Alcoholic, Phlebas. Good morning, everyone. Christian Golden. Old bunch of peeps. All right, I'm going to jump into the questions. We have a few that have lined up, and there's some really good ones in here. So Kevin C., have you ever been to Suriname? Dutch colony in South America? Nope. That one's an easy one. See, usually the first question takes me a half hour. Today, just one word. Peter P., of the many things people have recommended you to read, which has inspired and stayed with you the most? That would have to be Tom Holland's Dominion. I'd say Tom Holland's Dominion in terms of contemporary books is second only to C.S. Lewis's miracles in terms of influence on me and this channel. So yeah, Tom Holland's Dominion. So Tom Holland, his new book is coming out this summer called Pax, where he continues the trajectory of Rubicon and dynasty. And he said on Twitter, it's his best book. And someone said, even can't be better than Dominion. He says, Yep, it's even better than Dominion. And I said, we're going to withhold judgment on that until I read it. So another major book coming out by Tom Holland. I honestly have no idea how that man manages to do the podcast, write these books. He has other smaller books that he does. He often does translations of primary texts that he did Herodotus and not too long ago. So the writer's life, space trilogy is greater than miracles, says Luke Thompson. Also till we have faces. Yeah, I like them both. But miracles has a special place in my heart, Luke. It's what can I say? What can I say? So yeah, Dominion of all the books recommended to me, that would have been the one that has significantly impacted me. Second question of the many philosophical and literary classics that one should read. Are there any specific authors that you tried to approach, but couldn't digest, even though you are willing and tried your best in understanding them? And what were the reasons for that? That's a good question. I would probably have to confess that many of them I just simply haven't tried my best at. You know, I've done some work with Augustine. You know, I've read some Plato. I've, you know, I've mentioned a number of times when Dallas Willard in the Divine Conspiracy sort of turned me on to the idea that instead of imagining that the Greeks and the Hebrews were siloed, that Jesus was actually in some ways in the Sermon on the Mount in conversation with a much larger conversation that Plato was dealing with in the Republic. So then I picked up a copy of Plato's Republic in Greek. You can get that nicely in the Logos system and then started looking at some key passages in Greek. That was kind of fun. Most of my struggles, Peter, are with my own ADHD. I mean, and if that isn't apparent by my channel, I don't know what is. Someone recently in a comment said, yeah, within 10 years you will write a book. For me to actually write a book would be probably the accomplishment of my life, just with as ADHD as I am. So, yeah. TPK. Hey, Paul. I enjoyed the channel update last Friday. Do you have, do you have your YouTube channel set under educational category on YouTube or something else? I believe it's under the educational category. I'll have to recheck it, but I believe that's, that's where it is. And then Aristocratico left a couple of, left a couple of little YouTube links for, and I actually did, actually did my homework. Sorry, Joey. I actually did my homework on these and they were rather interesting. Let's see if they will pop up. Basically, these are videos done by AI and they're using a gamer images. And then this, this, this comment caught me. When AI driven voice is a popular video game character gives a better gospel presentation in one minute than 95% of preachers today. So I've been playing around more with chat GPT. I played around with the Bing chat as well. The nice thing about the Bing chat is it sort of gives footnotes so you can, you can go deeper into things. Chat GPT, I think does, gives, gives itself more room for more text. I have to confess that I think chat GPT is really going to appeal to the lazy because, wow, pretty powerful. Pretty simple. And the more I play with it, what, what these, these, these things are, pretty powerful, pretty simple. And the more I play with it, what, what these natural language engines sort of do is of course harvest. Popular language from the Internet. Now, of course, Google for a long time with its search results was looking at popularity rank ordering. Let's say rank ordering answers to things by how many links are to other links. Now, probably all of this is, has been updated and changed because Google of course continues to try to perfect its search algorithm. And we would imagine that in some ways a natural language engine is doing similar things. I have noticed that there are, there can be real accuracy issues with these natural language engines, and in that way, they're sort of more human-like. For example, and I mentioned this in the video that I posted this morning, I, I asked for, you know, quotes from Tom Holland's Dominion, because I was, I was working on my sermon and I thought, you know, I'm kind of curious what quotes it would come up with. And so I found some interesting quotes, and then I went back to Tom Holland's Dominion to actually search and find the quotes, and some of them I couldn't find in the book, which means that some of these quotes may very well have been harvested from reviews of the books. And so what these were, were human beings summarizing some of the ideas in the book, using many of the same words in the book, which I think like summaries will tend to have, and then the natural language engine sort of lifting these as though they are from the book itself. So these tools are pretty rough still and not terribly accurate, but what they can do is sort of give a distillate or a hash of very common language, and especially when it's sort of rank ordered by, by views and clicks. I mean, that's what YouTube is doing all the time. YouTube not only looks at, YouTube not only looks at what you are clicking on, but they are looking at how long you view it for. And because the goal of YouTube is to keep you on its channel as long as possible, especially if you don't have YouTube premium, and so you have to endure the nightmare of these YouTube ads. Now, again, for those of you, I have, I have basically resigned myself on this channel to letting YouTube have its way with my channel with respect to its ads, because the truth is, as David Fuller found out, even if you take the ads out, you can do that in the, in the studio area, YouTube will put them back in. And it's really quite remarkable. So YouTube is always monkeying with your videos to optimize what they're interested in, which is obviously selling ad revenue. YouTube is owned by Google, which is an advertising company. So if you don't like ads, there are ways around the ads. Number one, an ad blocker. Ad blockers effectively eliminate YouTube ads. That's been known for a while. Although ad blockers can be kind of a nuisance. Number two, YouTube premium. YouTube premium means that you pay a monthly thing. And the best way to go about YouTube premium is get a group of people together and go in on a family plan. And it's a lot cheaper than you get YouTube music. And that's what I do. I buy it for me and my wife and my kids. So none of them have to see ads. But so there's YouTube premium. And then the third way is you can watch all of my videos on Odyssey. Odyssey is a blockchain alternative video source. And when I upload a video, it automatically goes to Odyssey. And so it's replicated there. What you won't get is the conversation in the comments section and you won't get as many nice apps for your phones and things like that. Google offers all of those little niceties. And the fourth way is to just listen to the audio version of the podcast. Then you don't get the current evolution of my beard or my bald head. But you will not have any ads on the audio only version. So there are a variety of ways around. Grim Grizz says YouTube premium folks get plus one to saves from here on. So in other words, these. These algorithms. And these these AI bots are going to be a fact of life for us in the Internet world. There's no getting around that. And they will be powerful, but they are the servants of. They are the servants of individuals and they are servants of principalities and powers. So I'm not surprised that a natural language search engine can create a gospel presentation that is better than 95% of preachers. You'd be surprised if you surveyed 95% of preachers in America. On just even one metric alone, my guess would be. 70 to 80% of preachers in America are not full time like I am. They're bivocational. That doesn't mean they're better or they're worse. It just means that the majority of churches in America, the vast majority of churches in America have less than 75 people. Even though the majority of Americans that go to church go to churches of over a thousand people, there's some really the church in America is studied like most people out there have no idea. Partly because. Evangelicalism in particular and Catholics like their science to it's probably the least study, the least studied segment of the church's orthodoxy. Who knows? But it's studied like crazy, and there if you if you dive into. Statistics regarding church, you can find a whole lot of very interesting things, so we're going to continue to see AI preachers outperforming regular preachers. There's all this. Anxiety about the degree to which AI is going to. Unemploy people. Television radio print media. Has already been unemployed preachers and churches for 500 years, and that will likely accelerate. That will likely accelerate. So I yesterday was in conversation with Marcus and Joe from just with Joe Marcus and Joe are putting together a conference in Washington DC towards the end of July, and I'll start putting links to that in the notes below my. My thing, so that's going to be in a Roman Catholic Center in Washington DC. Capacity is only going to be 80 people. And the main speakers are going to be myself, Mike Michael Martin, the sociologist and Spencer Claven. I found that trio to be a very interesting one because I've had one conversation with Michael. And I've had no conversations with Spencer. I'm going to see if I can do. A randos conversation with Spencer just so that we can get to know each other and, you know, selfishly if he doesn't ask any questions, I'll get to know him. And then we'll do this conference at the end of July, but the theme of that conference will be community and the one thing that. The one most interesting challenge, and this, of course, is the heart and soul of the grim gris channel. Yeah, I'm mentioning you grim, you know, got to push grim gris channel up over 1000. I have only one sub to give grim I'm sorry about that, but. I feel free to sponsor my attendance of the DC event of Chris says. To what degree are these AI bots going to become community for people they already clearly are. You know, when Jordan Peterson at the Wheatland, California event says that basically via pornography we're already having sex with machines. Yeah, and we're already in communion with the machines. And with Mary Harrington transhumanism began with the pill. And this is always the way it is right you don't you don't know you're already deep into it, you don't know you're into it until you're already deep into it. You don't you don't know you're already deep into it, you don't know you're into it until you're already deep into it we're slow to realize things, so we are we are already. When I buy a soda I have a conscious discussion of which one I like and an ad bombarded environment. It has little effect anyone were add add heroin addicts. Anyway, so I gotta I gotta take my eyes off the comment section, they are distracting see see see see there's just exhibit number one. So this is a this is a big question and a big deal and Sergeant teddy bear 59 and his AI preachments. We are here oh Joseph's question I gotta take a drink for this one, because this is such a good question. Yes, it's only water wouldn't be amazing if this wasn't water, I would be just the most. Anyway, I try to drain this thing once or twice a day drink lots of water. You said the heart of the grim gris channel the heart of the grim gris channel, I don't know if you've seen it. You said the heart of the grim gris channel the heart of the grim gris channel is virtually not alone remember and body, there is no agency. The heart of the grim gris channel is about the question and anxiety of life being wasted in communion with machines instead of other real human beings. That's the heart of your channel gris that's the heart of your channel and it comes out of very clearly the. The pain that many people are growing up being parented by machines and not by their biological parents. Yeah, there it is all right i'm gonna stop looking at the chat right now because i'm getting distracted. There I turned you off sorry chat away if something bad happens well, maybe i'll open it up in another window oh I distract myself let's see. No, not that window. yeah this makes for crappy this makes for crappy viewing sorry about this. Don't want to play that I want to go over here see this is when I don't set this whole thing up, this is what you get. This is what we get without Rick Rick who manned it, I don't know if you can see this. This is what you get this is what we get without Rick Rick who manages things for me so well. I got to mute this. yep that's what we get without Rick okay so now I can keep an eye on the comment section without. Having to have the comment section right in my face on to the next question. Because this one deserves a lot. Joseph Joshmo 788. it's been a long time since i've asked anything in here, but your Roman study class is clearly getting under my skin. You have now mentioned multiple times how clearly Paul's personal issues with sin and the law come through in the epistle as well as his personal take on theology. Now it's time to say we need to take Freud's take on psychology with a grain of salt because it reflects his own childhood issues with his mother father and sexuality. It's quite another thing to apply that same approach approach to scripture. How do you personally read the epistles or even the gospels and account and account for the author's personal idiosyncrasies. Does that take away from constructing a general theology that applies to all people because it's wrapped up in Paul's personality and history so closely. A good can a good Christian differ from Paul's ontology and or epistemology or does this get trumped by the text status as canonical scripture. It's a really excellent question and. You will know that. commentators wrestle with this question all the time this basically in terms of canon. You know that the text is inspired. Not the. The text is inspired not all of the things that you might imagine are true with the person beneath the text because you don't really have access to the person beneath the text, even though from the first century. We know a lot about Paul of Tarsus. A lot compared to. Many, many people in the first century. But there is so much we don't know from the first century so much we don't know so. I mean even Paul's. So if you look at what do we know of Paul's life, what do we know of his background. Okay, raise the Pharisee in Tarsus and in Jerusalem back and forth, but we don't even we don't even know that much about diaspora living in the first century and we meet Paul we don't meet Paul in the gospel. We don't know whether or not he was in Jerusalem, it seems because he never says he saw Jesus crucified, it seems he came a little bit after because Stephen is not that long after Christ, and so we first meet Paul with the. The stoning of Stephen. So there's a word and then he then after then he goes on a rampage and is hunting down see then then you have this. Then you have this persecution only of diaspora Christians, not of the Hebraic Christians and you have tension between those communities you find that in Act six. And then after Paul's conversion he disappears and he goes to Arabia and there's endless speculation as to that he's going to be in the Arabia and there's endless speculation as to that and you will find multiple attempts at timelines to put together Paul and then multiple attempts at timelines even of Paul's epistles now, this is a great example of the fact that. No matter how much information you have there will always be debate on meaning. Let's think about January six at the US Capitol. I mean we have just floods of information about January six. And it's just obviously a fierce debate about meaning and consequence and what should be done and what people meant and so on and so on and so on. Paul of Tarsus yeah so. And then you also have the debate of you have certain epistles that everyone agrees are from Paul of Tarsus. Then you have other so Romans first and second Corinthians Galatians. Thessalonians everyone agrees that these are from Paul of Tarsus. Thessalonians everyone agrees that these are from Paul of Tarsus. Philippians yeah Ephesians Colossians lot more debate. Timothy lot more debate. So there's a there's a ton of debate around Paul. Now Paul's personal issues with sin in the law come through in the epistles of course. So when I'm studying the book of Romans this is this is a book that almost nobody. Debates whether or not this is from Paul of Tarsus okay almost nobody debates that. Every book that we write is full of our own personal issues. You have then the question well what is authoritative what is canonical what is the teaching of the church. And how does that relate to the person of Paul. There's no there's no end to this debate if we knew more about Moses and. So yeah that's a that's a whole nother kettle of fish in terms of historicity and Moses. What kinds of debates would we have about mosaic law and the person of Moses. We don't we don't have anywhere we don't feel we have anywhere near the historical access to Moses that we do to Paul of Tarsus. Part of the dilemma and the advantage that let's say the Hebrew scriptures have is that. They're far older and oh okay so let's look at prophets let's look at Hebrew prophets you can even look at Isaiah. Tremendously important masterpiece the book of Isaiah how many Isaiah's are there you can have that whole fight. Jeremiah we don't have those same fights about Jeremiah and we know some things about Jeremiah. But how to what degree could we separate some of the things we know about the the prophets from the books. Hosea Jonah however you want to regard that book so those issues are always with us with any canonical scripture. And the interpreter works on trying to sort those things out. And then you have the dynamic of the fact that all of us are reading the text and we read the text according to our interests and what we want to get out of the text. It's been really interesting going through. My my deep dive into the Exodus series is sort of paused as I've been derailed by the J.R.R. J.R.R. no. J.K. Rowling's podcast which I'm almost done is a fascinating podcast. It's a little shy it's a fascinating podcast. But one of the interesting things about the Exodus seminar is that there's a certain amount of shared interest around that table. You know it's Jordan Peterson's directing it. Jordan Peterson's interests are the same as the other people who are directing it. You know it's Jordan Peterson's directing it. Jordan Peterson's interests are are in some ways governing the conversation but the others have their own have their own. Irons in the fire and Peugeot has an agenda Hurwitz has an agenda Dennis Prager and Oz Guinness have agendas. The British scholars have agendas. Stephen Blackwood he's the quietest of the bunch and so it's hardest to see his agenda. That doesn't mean his contributions aren't really very excellent. But these are this this is always the issue we have with with interpreting texts. Can a good Christian differ from Paul's ontology and epistemology? Yes I don't think that we number one it's the debate over what Paul's ontology and epistemology was is fierce. Because Paul is this example of a diaspora Jew and there's a lot of debate about it. About the formation of this Jewish community out in the diaspora. What in fact did they believe? How Hebraic were they? How Greco-Roman were they? How Platonic were they? These are tremendously difficult questions. We cannot really reconstruct Paul. When you get to something like the book of Romans or his letters to the Corinthians or his letters. We can't even agree who exactly Paul is writing to when he writes to the Galatians the North or South Galatians. There's tremendous debates about all of these letters and the debates aren't resolved by more information. More information would resolve some aspects of the debates but they would just go further. Part of what is fascinating to me about my new relationships and conversations with Jews in this little corner. Again is so many of these issues. Also my fascination with conversing with Roman Catholics. Now many, a bunch of you don't take this the wrong way. Many of the newly Orthodox I find a little less interesting because so many of you are so Protestant underneath. So you're not so hard for me to understand. But you know when I talk to someone like Cale Zeldin who's a cradle Catholic. When I watch I'm thinking about doing a video today on the Pope did a question and answer thing with youth. Cale this morning on Twitter posted a comment on it by Larry Chap and they had links to some Vatican and Roman Catholic sources of the question and answers that are in this. It's coming out on Hulu apparently it's coming out on Disney Plus too because Disney owns Hulu and Disney Plus and a whole bunch of these things. It's just fascinating. It's just fascinating to me let's say some of the formational differences between Catholics and Protestants. And it's those kinds of deep cultural differences that again anyone who follows my channel know these are the things that are sort of catnip to me. I'm fascinated by them. So when I listen to you, Yosef or Jacob or Hezzi or Nehama. I'm just fascinated by listening to you people talk and sussing out your worldview and then even the differences between each other. I mean again when y'all are sort of carping on Dennis Prager on the Exodus seminar like he doesn't represent us. It's like I totally get that. You know you don't have Bishop Baron around that table. Then you get Ben Shapiro. I haven't listened to any of the Ben Shapiro episodes yet but I'm really looking forward to that. Because then you might say well Dennis Prager and Ben Shapiro probably aren't too far apart. I don't know maybe that's true. And just some of the conversations I've had with Jacob offline of Jacob just telling me some of the backgrounds of Zionism and anti-Zionism and conservative Judaism and reform Judaism and orthodox Judaism and Hasidic Judaism. I mean it's these kinds of culture religion questions I find endlessly fascinating. And so when I'm studying something like the book of Romans I find those kinds of questions tremendously fascinating. But also when I'm doing that in my Sunday school class I have to do that with a group of people in the room. If you ever visit my adult Sunday school class you'll see that the people in the room are, well has been, a lot of my old African American women are getting ill and dying. But it's older African American women who have been shaped by African American churches. And then some from the Dutch CRC background and now increasingly more eclectic varieties. And so I have to somehow connect all these worlds. It's on one hand a tremendously challenging thing but I also find it exhilarating and fun. So do you personally read? I can't read the text any other way than personally. And you know this whole self-transcendence thing, can we really do that? It's tough. The person's personal idiosyncrasies. This gets this whole question, you will find this question endlessly debated with respect to Paul and women and their role in the church. And you'll find it endlessly speculate endlessly speculated with Paul and LGBT questions and the church. Because one of the ways to sort of avoid certain traditional biblisistic readings of the text has been to say things like, well, Paul clearly hated women or Paul's perspective on women is too bound to the early centuries. Or you know all of this stuff. And so when Jacob comes at me with his anti-Paul stuff, I've been hearing these kinds of anti-Paul arguments for all of my life with respect to how many contemporary issues around me. And in some ways the only way we can sort of play that game is because we know more about Paul than we know about Moses. So and especially if you take a very orthodox perspective where the law comes through Moses, then all of those issues then get addressed to Moses as well. And I'm sure there have been, well you mentioned Freud here, I'm sure there have been some psychologists who have looked at Moses through the very thin details. Well, Moses was abandoned by his mother into the river and raised by someone else. How did Moses abandonment issues get reflected in the law through Moses? Now, many will come up and say, now wait a minute, no, the law was given by God. Okay, this comes up in the Exodus seminar. Okay, well God speaks the 10 words from the mountain. Was all of the law given by God? And so then there's this fascinating conversation between Hesi and Jacob that I clipped on the Vanderclips channel where Hesi and Jacob really start getting into it about these questions. Well, no, was the, were all the 613 commandments given on a tablet? And so then we get into this mental narrative drama around God speaking and God's commands, because if God gives a command, then God gives a command. You're not going to argue with God. But there's an entire narrative behind that, that if you want to play with it, you can get into the psychology of Moses and what his abandonment by his mother. Well, did she really abandon him because sent Miriam to look after it? Or was he just hiding them? And what kind of psychological trauma did little baby Moses and the ark suffer? And well, what kind of psychological contamination happened? Raised and, oh, but they were skeptical about, you know, this stuff goes on forever. So, yeah. So what you see me doing in my Romans class is I can't, I don't talk about these issues directly because people come to the Romans class. Why? Well, they want to, why does anybody come to church? Why does anybody open their Bible? Why does anybody go to synagogue? Well, I shouldn't, I shouldn't ask that question because I'm not sure. Why does anybody go to church? They want to hear from God. Why? Because, well, there's, there's usually all sorts of layers. Many of the people walk in because they don't quite know why they're just, they know they need an aspect of salvation from something. And even their idea about what salvation it is they're looking for is foggy. You'll hear a lot of these themes in my Easter sermon this week. So these are great questions. The answers to them are endless in Christian theology and Christian, Christian treatment of Paul. And I don't think that's unusual given the fact that, let's see if Joseph is in the comments, given the fact that what I heard between Joseph and Chesie, these kind of questions are unavoidable given the kind of psychological world we live in today and how we deal with texts and persons and authority. So, I don't know if Joseph is listening live or not. Just scanning the comments to see if he's here and wants to jump in. All right. So it's a great question. Grim Grizz, they got to be text-based questions, yo. How long until the spiritual home conference call and what opportunities do we have to influence it? Probably not a lot of opportunity to influence it. We're doing the spiritual home conference call this coming, this next week Tuesday. And we're not doing it, we're not live streaming it, we're doing it on Zoom. It would be fun to live stream it. The difficulty, especially with, so we're going to have myself and Peugeot and Vervecki and Vendankh and Catherine. So that's already five people. And then when you throw in a comment section, you've really got a lot going on. So it'll be a Zoom call and we will hopefully get some progress made towards it. As you can see from some of my recent videos, I'm already very much thinking about it and mulling over it. So you will have influence through me. I don't know to what degree you can influence Peugeot and Vervecki. They've already in many ways climbed up a status hierarchy pretty high and are increasingly, I mean, just getting the three of us together for a Zoom call. The day after that, I'm doing another one with Peugeot with vocal distance and Benjamin Boyce. That'll come out, go on Benjamin's channel. So yeah, stuff is coming out, but be careful how popular you want your favorite YouTube interlocutors to become, because the more popular they become, the more access to them you lose. So yeah, don't pray popularity on people too quickly. You want to talk to Grim Grizz? He does live streams quite often and you can jump on his channel. And you want to talk to PVK? Maybe it's not as easy as many of you would like, but yeah, it's also a function of how much, I mean, I've got a day job too, so that takes time. David Walker, Kansas City, Missouri. Is Jesus going to come back from the sky with eyes of fire and blood soaked robe one day, or is that all symbolic? Read C.S. Lewis's book, Miracles. That's not a great answer. Is Jesus going to come back? When I read Matthew, yeah, Jesus will. I believe Jesus will return just like he left. I take it like that. I think to take it another way, I think when people take it other ways, they are, you'd have to sort of ask on what basis, and the basis they take it other ways is sort of skepticism. Now people might have really good reasons to take it other ways, and I'm not going to judge them for that, but I just find it easier. And this is where Lewis wrestles with these questions in his book, Miracles, like he wrestles with the ascension. And he basically says, when you try to, let's say, so he'll, the angel's ascension, beginning of the book of Acts, he'll come in the same way he left. Okay. When you try to, when you have to expand that into a 300 page book to answer the question, you've lost something. And so Lewis basically says, basically says there's probably more reality in the descriptions, which are of course symbolic, but symbolic doesn't mean less real than what we imagine to be literal because any language we use is symbolic. That's what language is. So, but I, another video that I want to make, I was, I was watching Christian YouTube and I guess there's some new movie coming out about Abraham. And of course, The Chosen is out there, which I haven't watched, but I started taking a little peek on it. Every time I watch a Jesus movie, part of me gets triggered. And after five years of playing around in this little corner, I have even more issues that get triggered because I was thinking about this with the question of the Pope doing this question and answer Disney plus Hulu special. Best thing about it's in Spanish, cause it's kind of fun listening to the span of the Pope speak Spanish, the beautiful Spanish. When you try to make a movie out of a book and you know, Grim Grizz, you know, chided me on and quite rightly. So, you know, should I even say anything about Harry Potter if I haven't read the books? Fair enough, because if someone said to me, I've only seen the movies, I haven't watched Lord of the Rings, I try not to get too dogmatic on them, but I definitely know there's a lot lost even between the first three Lord of the Rings, not even going to talk about the Hobbit or that abomination on Amazon. But these questions are really difficult. And so I think in many cases, this is part of the reason I have plenty of critiques of certain kinds of Biblicism and fundamentalism. But in terms of not losing the thread, there's something beneath some of that Biblicism, which isn't easily discarded. So in other words, David, I don't know that I can improve on what the text says. I'll say it that way. It's a good question. If you were young again, and were restarting your family in 2023, would you do anything differently this time? And if so, or not, why? Oh gosh. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. Or not, why? Oh gosh. I have a lot of, it's easy to get judgmental on, let's say, couples and women that don't get started having children until their 30s. You know, they can't have as many children. It's harder. They have way more money. They probably have a little bit more wisdom. But now being someone who is close to his 60th birthday, it's easy for me to look back and say, and have second thoughts and regrets about whole ranges of things. I'm not going to detail them on the internet. You are not my confessor. I am so glad we started having children young. I am so glad we had five children. Some of the things that my wife was more right on than I was, limiting screen time, she was more right on a whole bunch of things. I think she was wrong on some other things that I was more right on. And to get into the particulars of my family life, I'm not going to do that on the internet because it too deeply impacts commentary on my wife and my children. And I don't talk about that stuff directly on the channel because I don't know that it's fair to them. So there's a great moment in the Yellowstone series where John Dutton finally gets a chance to spend some time with his grandson. And his son basically says to him, you weren't like this when I was a kid. And as I don't have any grandchildren yet, I hope to someday, I will be a different grandfather than I was a father in many ways, and hopefully in some ways better. I shared this that I talked to my cousin, so I've got a cousin who's about my age when we were growing up. We played together all the time. We have very different lives. He's a welder, I'm a pastor. He works in stuff. I work in words and ideas. So in some ways we're very different, but he's got three grandchildren. And they're still quite young, so he can't quite take them out like he wants to. But he said to his kids, he says, I learned a lot from being a father, and I can take a lot of that into becoming a grandfather, because a grandfather is a different thing from a father. And fathers learn fathering sometimes at the expense of their children. And hopefully we learn something of fathering both from the things that our fathers got right and the things that our fathers didn't get right. So John Van Donk actually is in charge of a tiny little group called Pro Fathers that has one patron, I think. And it basically gives John Van Donk a little bit of expense money to do some fathering support things with people. And if you go back and listen to my conversation with John Van Donk, for him, fathering is such a big issue. Just in general terms, that's so hard. So one of the issues that my father's passed, so it's a little easier to talk about him. One of the big issues that I think one of the regrets that my father had was that when we were young, he spent too much time working. And I would have to say that I probably did the same thing. Looking back on it now, I wish I had prioritized my children's life, but I think I wish I had prioritized my children more. But at the same time, I was at that age, usually you're trying to build a career and you're trying to get your feet under you and you're trying to build a good marriage. But these issues are so complex because if you're in an intact family, you're always co-parenting. And the two of you come to this parenting challenge, both with your flaws and your strengths and you have to negotiate. So it's a great question. And I think it's something that anybody who's ever fathered or parented thinks about. Probably didn't give you too much good stuff in your answer, sorry. Again, the generic answer I give to fathering questions is be the person you want your children to become. Because who you are, more than what you say, will impact who they become. But each of you, so I have five kids, they are all different. I love them all. One of the things that I didn't appreciate when I was younger is just how much fun it would be to spend time with your adult children. One of the things that my wife, on my wife's insistence, we homeschooled our kids and I have zero regrets for that. I think homeschooling, if you're going to have a big family especially, homeschooling is, I think it's a great way to go. Now it's not for everyone, not everyone is cut out to be a homeschooler. My wife was a better homeschooler than I was. But homeschooling, when done right, can be a wonderful thing. All of my kids both had homeschool and public school and then some of my kids had Christian college and that was up to them. I had a lot of thoughts about Christian college too. But yeah, it's a wonderful thing. I tell younger men and women this, there are few more meaningful, more important things that you can do in your life than raising children. Children are a gift from God. It's an enormous privilege to raise children. And it's deeply meaningful and deeply satisfying and tremendously challenging. Raising children is one of the, you know, it's better than a career. It can, and it can go absolutely, as a pastor I know, it can go absolutely disastrously bad. I know marriages that are just hellscapes and I know from people's stories, some homeschoolers some homes that people were raised in were hellscapes. But to not take the adventure, if it's available to you in a responsible way, would be one of the biggest things to miss out on in life. And we tend to prioritize, I love to travel. Would I love to go visit almost anywhere and everywhere in the world? Yes. But a lot of that was exchanged for having a big family. And I would not, I would not make that, I'm very happy with that exchange. I would rather have more children than more money. I would rather have more children than more travel. Now, I know people who have had 8, 10, 12 children. That's a lot. I don't know if it really scales that well, given everything that we're dealing with, but five was a wonderful number. And the truth is, one of the greatest joys that my wife and I have is that my children really enjoy each other. They love getting together. And when we get together, we play board games, we laugh, we watch stuff together. And now with, now that my children are entering into romantic and committed relationships of their own, it's so much fun. I mean, every Sunday, we usually have two of my kids and their significant others in the house for Sunday afternoon and evening. And for my wife and I, those are highlights of the week. My wife and I are constantly scheming to figure out ways to get the attention of our children and to go on vacation with them or lure them into the house. Or we're always scheming for those kinds of things, because for us, nothing is more fun and satisfying than getting to know our children. And now there's significant others and there's ups and downs with that too. But if you invest in your children when they're small and you raise them well, it can produce a harvest of blessing. That doesn't mean, now my children are, most of them are in their 20s and they're now getting into romantic relationships. None of them are married. One is engaged. I think hopefully another one will be engaged soon. You know I'm talking to you. Everyone's waiting on that ring. And I know in the future they are going to have bumps in their marriages, like my wife and I had in ours. I know they're going to have struggles. There's going to be heartbreaks. There's going to be job losses. There's going to be illnesses. There's going to be moral failures. There's going to be all of those things. But this is human life. This is the canvas upon which this meaningful, magical, sometimes tragic, sometimes glorious path is written. Boy, what a question. I'll be with another one. Got another question set. Could AGI be considered intelligence without being alive? Artificial general intelligence. Could it be that we can really only consider artificial general intelligence to be alive in the colloquial sense if it could be determined it was as a conscience? Is our conscience what mediates our ability to introspect? Would it be any different from AGI? In some sense then, must AGI know God in order to be considered alive in the colloquial sense? In some sense then, must AGI know God in order to be considered alive in the same way we humans are or maybe are at all? Maybe that wasn't short. It's amazingly difficult to define life. For me, one of the better definitions of life is anti-entropic. I don't see AGI as being anti-entropic in that same way. It's too upper register. In other words, it's dependent upon the machines and the electricity and all of this stuff that we're making. In that sense, it's dependent upon us. It's dependent upon the people powering the generators and the transmission lines and the powering of the It's built on an enormous infrastructure. Now, you might argue that human beings are built on an enormous infrastructure called planet Earth and the natural order or something of that nature. Yes, but human beings, we are alive in that we not only live off of these spaces, but we perfect and generate these spaces. Now, I think AGI will be dependent on human beings and to the degree that it can participate in that function, continue to be dependent on human beings. In that sense, that biological, physical definition of life is important. I think AGI is finally parasitic. It relies on us for it. It borrows our life from us to appear alive, at least from what we've seen so far. And rocket. Can you only consume content from one of these people the rest of your life? The others are blocked from accessing their writings or videos. Peterson, Verveci, Peugeot, who are you keeping? You can only consume content from one of these people for the rest of your life. from one of these people the rest of your life? The others are blocked from accessing their writings or videos, Peterson, Vervecki, Peugeot, who are you keeping? You can only consume content from one of these people for the rest of your life. Oh, okay, I understand your question. So if I could only consume content from one of these people for the rest of my life, the others you are blocked from accessing their writings or videos, Peterson, Vervecki, Peugeot, who would you be keeping? There's a reason we have the churn. So this week, this week or last week, I bumped over the 25,000 mark YouTube subscribers. So every now and then I go back to old videos and I look at the comment section and I notice who's still with us. A lot of who's still with us is, you can even find in the comment section today. Luke was an early, there he is. There's my friend, Luke. Luke has been with me right from the start. Let's see, Lynn Lavoie, she's a long timer. Grim, Grim's been around a while. Our secular coronism is a relative newcomer and I'm sort of fascinated by the name. So Gavin's been around a while. Andrea's been around a while. Yeah. Janice has been around a while. Sandy's fairly new. Golden, Golden's been around a while. Oh, Chad, Chad's been around a while. Mark, Mark's been around a while. So, but there's a lot of people who, Mark's been a lurker for a while. There's a lot of, there's an Anselman, Anselman's, Anselman's OG. Eric's been around a while. So a lot of us and, but a lot of people who left comments, who have had Randall's conversations, YouTube, this is part of where YouTube is artificial because, and it's very different from a church. Most of the people in my local church have been in this church longer than I have. And I've been here 25 years. Some of that where the church is, this year's the church's 60th anniversary. And some of the people in the church have been here 50, 60 years. So, I have, so I've, I've, I've shaken hands with, actually come to think of it, I've shaken hands with Jordan Peterson more than I've shaken hands with John and Jonathan. That's interesting. It's an interesting question. So I've, I've shaken hands with Jordan more times. I've met Jordan at a bunch of the VIP things. I've met Jordan backstage. I've never, except for the one conversation I had with Jordan in April of 2018, I've never had a long conversation with Jordan. I've been debating whether or not to write him and say, okay, Jordan, it's time, it's time. It's time Jordan for our convo on my channel. And I'm gonna do a Randall's conversation with you. I, you know, I did that conversation with Mary Harrington and I'm very pleased with it. I learned some things about, I learned some things, I learned some things with my conversation a while ago that I did with Tom Holland about how I wanted to navigate those things. And so I incorporated a lot of that into my conversation with Mary and I thought the Mary conversation went well. So maybe, maybe it's time to do a conversation with Jordan, I don't know. So John and Jonathan, I've had way more Zoom conversations with. I've had the most Zoom conversations with John Verbeke than I have been even with Jonathan Peugeot. And I got to chance, got a chance to meet them at a whole different level then in the Thunder Bay conference and we're gonna spend more time together in Southern California. So the videos are a distillate of the person and of the three, Jordan continues to provoke me more in many of the areas I'm deeply interested in. John's cognitive science is tougher for me. He's very scientific, he's extremely well read but the way he approaches ideas, I think temperamentally I'm more similar to Jordan. And so I tend to listen to more of Jordan stuff than I listen to the others. Although all the Exodus is Peugeot too. And I'm learning, I learn tremendous amounts from all three of them. The advantage that Peugeot has is that in terms of sort of churchgoers, we have the most in common and that would maybe lead me to not choose him. It would probably be Jordan just because just over the period I've Jordan reliably provokes insights in me, he just does. And he does that for a lot of people which is why his channel is so huge. So Jordan is it, but again even though I've shaken hands with him more, I've had, I feel like I know him personally the least. And again, that's just a hierarchy thing. I mean, I've had more access to John, to Jonathan and John. And, but part of the difficulty with Jonathan is that he's, so I went to a Catholic funeral the other day and I commented on Twitter that I want, I'd love to have, I'd love to have Cale Zeldin by my side whenever I go to Catholic things because he's so full of insight and wisdom. Nothing against you, Father Eric, but you're a father. And Cale, I can have conversations with Cale that, well, that's not necessarily true. I really love Father Eric. I love you all differently. That's the problem. So it's a great question, but I've listened to more Jordan videos than John and Jonathan videos. And I find, again, Jordan tends to provoke me more. So I would probably have to keep Jordan. Is it me or do people give Jesus all sorts of credit for healing the sick and the lame and such? While meanwhile, he often, he most often credits the healing to their faith. If it's not me, what do you think is up with that? That's a good insight, Grim. But clearly, the faith is in Jesus. Now, I gotta be careful with that in that dative. Their faith is in Jesus. I think that's the key because it's not, so in this conversation that John Vervecky had with this woman that I had in the video a little while ago, John Vervecky made a really important insight that when he was growing up in the Christian community, he was in, faith was sort of equated with a sort of determined certainty. That sort of faith was in him. That's sort of faith in the abstract. That's not what Jesus is talking about when he's talking, when he's telling them that their faith has healed them. It's their faith in Jesus because if faith was just sort of this amorphic thing that was just kind of out there, then they wouldn't need Jesus to be healed. In other words, it's fundamentally a relational thing. It's not that you can just sort of have, and this is part of modernist Christianity and modernist secularism. People of faith, that's such a stupid phrase. People of faith, what you have faith in is the critical thing. Do you have faith in the jab? Do you have faith in Jesus? Do you have faith in the president? Do you have faith in Biden or Trump? Do you have faith in the party? Do you have faith in science? Do you have faith in the American government? Do you have faith in the US dollar? Do you have faith in, it's faith in Jesus. That's the critical thing. All right, Christian Golden. Are generational identities important or rather, what is significant of a generational identity like a bloomer millennial? With ubiquity of social media over the last 20 years, it seems like there will be less and less to distinguish one generation from another in terms of identity as trends seem to simultaneously come and go rapidly yet also linger in perpetuity thanks to the everlasting nature of online data. I think part of the reason we had these generations to the degree that it actually works and that's very debated is because we are so constructed by our narratives and especially in the era of mass media. So on Twitter, I just reposted, someone did a, here's a synopsis of Star Wars. And then they basically took out Luke Skywalker and put in Harry Potter and changed like the spacey stuff to the wizardry stuff. And the synopsis read exactly the same for Harry Potter as it read for Star Wars. So in other words, for people of my, I was born right at the right time for Star Wars. Star Wars came out in what, 75. So I was 12 years old in 1975. That was the perfect age to fall in love with Luke Skywalker. And I remember seeing Star Wars in the movie theater. I remember watching Battlestar Galactica on TV cause like, whoo, look, Star Wars for free. And then I remember going to see the Empire Strikes Back. And now by the time the third Star Wars movie came out, I was already in college, I think. And so I was paying attention to other things more than Star Wars at that point. But these stories, I think, are part of the generational formation. And I think you might be onto something that the, the scrambling of the, as Charles Taylor calls it, the supernova of the internet will probably disrupt this. But what we've seen from the internet is that there are even meta patterns with respect to platforms. For example, all the old ladies are on Facebook. That's why we stream our church service to Facebook because my mom can see it on Facebook. The old ladies can't do Zoom, but they can do Facebook. The young ladies are on Insta. One of the better episodes of the witch trial of J.K. Rowling's is on Tumblr and 4chan. I said 4-tran, 4chan. And that was an excellent one because it really showed how these platforms themselves form generations. So in other words, we're probably going to increasingly have micro-generations. But one of the things you can find, so I made the point in the previous video that Peterson was born in 62. I was born in 63. John Vervecky born in 61 or 62. Peugeot was a little younger. Sam Harris, the Weinsteins, we're all children of the middle 60s. We were, we didn't really participate in the baby boom in the way that let's say that the people who were 18 or 21 during the summer of love in the 60s, I was only in 1967, I was only four. I couldn't participate in any of that. I was too young for Beatlemania. I was too young for all of that. I was just at the right age for Star Wars. So I think we're going to see, just like with everything else, the resolution upping and we're going to have these other little clusters and tribes. Plus the fact that, I mean, I grew up in the Christian Reformed Church in that particular era, which was its own thing. I think it was, I got an email from another CRC pastor who went, had been pastoring in Texas, CRC church plants in Texas. And then he went up to Western Canada and he noted that the, and he was doing a study of the book of Romans and he noted, he was using a John Stopp material on Romans nine through 11. And he noted that a lot of the Canadian Christians in the Christian Reformed Church in Western Canada didn't seem real up on, you know, sort of the five marks of the five points of Calvinism as in the canons of Doric. And well, what about that? So I think you're right that we're going to see a proliferation of this, but some of the markers given the deep impact of technology on our formation are probably going to persist. Is Christ being a carpenter a case of redemptive use of technology? There are a lot of people that think Christ was, when we think carpenter, we think of someone who maybe builds tables and chairs. There's a lot of, there's a lot of people who think Christ was a construction worker. So if we say construction worker, that sounds different from a carpenter and that he was building, you know, some of the new Galilean cities in the area, the Galilean cosmopolitan cities in the area. There's some interesting books written on that. Christ's story is very interesting. And just even in the shape of it, of course, we have the birth narratives and Luke, you have 12 year old Jesus in the temple, but, you know, the silence between then and, you know, his baptism is just very intriguing. I think Jesus working with his hands, I'll say it that way, is very much in keeping with the God who makes a man out of clay and breathes life into it. I'll answer it that way. You've mentioned the term meaning porn. Since I've been hesitant to watch too much corner stuff, can you help distinguish meaning porn and education? Could a holy book be meaning porn? How would you avoid that? What would be the harm of meaning porn addiction? Meaning porn basically would be similar to what John Vervecky talks about when he talks about bullshitting, that there are, I mean, when we use porn in this, in this agitival way, in this metaphorical way, we mean basically a distracting falseness that is finally unfruitful. So it would be watching video after video after video, it would be watching Jordan Peterson videos all the time and never cleaning your room, something like that. It would mean being distracted by all of the insight, addiction and never actually making progress in your real life, which is why I don't have a problem with the churn if people are said, yeah, I watched Vanderclay for a while, but I got tired of watching him talk about having a family and I had a family myself and so I don't have time to watch Paul Vanderclay videos anymore because I'm actually living my life and to that I say, God bless you, keep it up. The point isn't to, the point of learning to read is not to enjoy the books you needed to read to learn how to read, it's to finally enjoy reading. So I think many of us are insight addicts, ooh, there's a new idea, ooh, there's a new idea, it's all these shiny things, but if they don't produce fruit in your life, if you don't actually apply them, they're of no purpose for you. The purpose of training and righteousness is righteous living, not knowing all the rules about righteousness. Howdy, Paul, any thoughts on the state of things seemingly compiling birth rate shortages of trades, worker, pensions, chat, GPT, political, stereo or just all hype? Thank you, I appreciate you, I appreciate you too, Chad. History happens, it's gonna keep happening. When things get out of whack, there are collapses and there are big collapses and little collapses and there are big catastrophes and little catastrophes and we'll continue to have both. This is the way the world works. Graham Hadley, he's a great writer, the way the world works. Graham Hancock just put out a very interesting podcast with an ancient Hebrew scholar about the origin and meaning of Elohim in the Hebrew Bible. I recommend checking it out, but there's a question that they brought up. He claims that in the Bible, the Jews are commanded to offer up smoke from burnt meat as an offering because the smoke calms God. The thing about these theories is that they're deep tells of us. It's sort of like if you have a baby and you find that playing certain music soothes your baby, this is how you can manipulate your baby and put your baby to sleep. Now there's absolutely no question that religious practices throughout the centuries have been designed to manage God. But what you begin to betray is the fact that you imagine that God is a thing that you can manage. And it's sort of like a toddler thinking they can manage their parent. Now any toddler that can manage their parent, it says a lot about the toddler, but it says more about the parent. So if you look at John Walton's work of comparing other ancient Near East. So I've been watching this series on Rome and the protagonist of the series is in a ship and it appears the ship is going to be wrecked and he says to his buddy, no, we're going to get there fine because we've offered up the proper sacrifices to the gods. That entire perspective that gods are basically able to be bribed has built in assumptions about the power, sophistication, the relative power and sophistication of the gods with respect to us. They ask why is God, creator of all things, need to be calmed down by something he created? Why also why does he experience human emotions if emotions are all derived from animal reactions? They seem to suggest that different Elohim in the Bible represent some kind of superhuman group of people from a lost civilization. Why would Graham Hancock come up with an idea like that? That's his whole schnick. Lost civilization that acted as mediator or rulers over different groups of people all over the earth. I assume this is all just examples of linguistic confusion and thousands of years of translation and language evolution. I know these ideas are kind of heretical in this corner, but any thoughts? If your God can be manipulated in the same way that Samson was, you should go find a new God. And we've said often that God is not a super thing in the sky and not sufficiently unsuper as to be easily manipulable by all sorts of little tricks that we possess. Again, in the same way that if your three-year-old is manipulating you, you'd better level up or that three-year-old is in trouble. So many of these things, almost all of these things assume they're tremendously hubristic because they imagine that we can sort of outthink the universe. And by the universe, I don't mean even the circumlocution of saying universe instead of God. If we were so smart that we could outthink the universe, you'd think we would have more of what we want instead of all the calamities that Chad is pointing to. We can't even game the stock market. We can't even, I mean, if we were so smart, you'd think we ought to be able to sit down at 20 and decide what a good life is and then achieve it. There are some people that sort of seem to come close at that as long as their visions have a degree of wisdom and simplicity. Almost everyone I know who has any years at all, if you'd ask them and say, what did you think your life would be like when you were 20? I think back at my 20-year-old self and I think, I didn't know Jack. There's so much more I know now. But realizing that difference, I think, if I live another 30 years, what will be the relationship between what I know 30 years from now? If I have my faculties and what I know now? We're so full of ourselves. Hey, Paul, how's the quest for the spiritual home related to growing the body of the church? A theme I keep turning over in my head is the relationship between the infinity of God and the body of the church. It seems like somehow the church must grow to complement Christ in order to fulfill, to fully inhabit the title Bride of Christ. There's no question that the church sort of has to grow into this title. It's also difficult. So we had questions about symbolism and analogies. So when we say Bride of Christ, do we think of two 20-year-olds standing across the altar or 20-somethings like my wife and I were, let's say? Or do we think of a 60-year-old man marrying a 16-year-old woman, where the 60-year-old man is on one hand a husband, but on the other hand also a father? Metaphors are funny that way. Now, spoiler alert, I think the church is tremendously important in the quest for a spiritual home. And I think that's the same thing with the Christian foreign minister. That shouldn't surprise anyone. At the same time, part of what's interesting about Peugeot and the Exodus series, and he sort of won me over to this, that part of the purpose of creation is to sort of fill in. It's the will of God becoming flesh. And I think that's implicit in, my kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in the direction of creation, its redemption, and its perfection. So I think Peugeot is right in that. And I think to the degree that we arrive at home, now another spoiler alert, I think there are limitations in this instantiation of creation that limit its capacity to finally be a home for us. And I think that's going to be built into Christian theology. And that's going to be one of the tensions that we have in this conference. And these kinds of tensions are really good. And they're built into the structure of the conference. And so, I mean, John Verbeke with his critique of two worlds mythologies and his overall stance with respect to a lot, I think that's going to be an area of tension in the conversation. How could it not be? But I think that debate is important to have publicly. And I think I actually have all the data. And all the data, you can find all the data, walk through any crappy nursing home in North America. There's the data. Does this look like a spiritual home? Does Alzheimer's look like a spiritual home? Can you have a spiritual home in the age of decay? Now, he's got some neoplatonic cards up his sleeve, so they'll be fun to watch played because, you know, of course, that's been rolling around in the church for a long time and Peugeot will get into it. So it should be a great conversation. Now, when in Christian language, in the Book of Revelation, when the church is the bride of Christ, let's think of bride as maiden, mother, matriarch. We're still at the maiden stage. And I think part of what happens in whatever Christ brings us into through death will continue a journey. Will it look like maiden, mother, matriarch? I don't know. We have so little we know. And I think we have so little we know because we can't know because we're simply formed by this particular dispensation. So, Brian Algh, the story of the penitent thief today makes me cry every time. Is there a story out of the Bible that tugs your heartstrings? Oh, lots of stories tug my heartstrings. If there are a ton, then just one that comes to mind doesn't have to be the mostest. I think about Jean Valjean and Les Miserables. Any redemption story. So I've been watching this HBO series on Rome. It's a number of years old. It's shocking in a Tom Holland sort of way because at least as the episodes get going, they get more and more into this, the relationship between Pulo and Varinas, the two characters in the series. The stories of friendship always grab my heart. Frodo and Sam. Friendship is so deep and important. But Jean Valjean, even in the, I can think about the, one of the movies, not the latest movie version, but the one before that. Where, you know, with these candlesticks, I have bought your life. And then Jean Valjean goes out and weeps and buries the candlesticks and gives his life, you know, for the others around them. Any redemptive story, I think it just pulls at me. What are your objections to the theology of Orthodox Christianity? I don't know that I have a lot of them. I don't pay a lot of attention in case I don't want, let's see, how am I going to say this? Because I do do this. There is a time and a place for theological debate as such. Theological correctness is important. More important is living the life of Christ. It would be very Christian Reformed of me to, let's say I line up all of the Christian Reformed theological points and I line up all of the Orthodox theological points and I look at the two columns and say, Oh, I think Orthodoxy is more right. So I leave the Christian Reformed church and I go to Orthodoxy. Number one, I would be a theological consumer in doing such. And I'm not trying to criticize people who leave one denomination for another because they think it's a better denomination. It's that's fine. I'm not going to do it. Now the Christian Reformed church might collapse, deconstruct around me. That could be happening now. Part of the reason I come to this is because I have spent my life as a local church pastor watching how for most people who have very little grasp of things like theological orthodoxy, what moves them to to live a Christian life? Let's use the example of the the Mormons, the LDS church. Theologically, that's a mess. From what I've seen. Mormons can be good people. I don't have a lot of respect for the theology. Islam. Islam. Better see if our Quranist is still in there. I'm going to address Islam. Dum dum dum. Yeah. I think we can turn orthodoxy into an idol. And I don't mean big orthodoxy. I mean, I mean, doctrinal orthodoxy, doctrinal correctness. Doctrinal correctness should be an icon that points to Christ, not an idol that we use to try to manipulate God or each other. And so I haven't spent a lot of time, even though I hear plenty of chatter about energies versus essence and all of this stuff. And I've got some interest and I've got interest. I've got more interest in the Orthodox Church as such as a living, breathing thing that I have in their distilled theological statements. And from what I've been able to see, you know, there's a certain degree of freedom, autonomy and chaos built into their theological constructs, which I'm fair enough. If you can manage to keep stuff together and have a degree of freedom, fine. I remember a gentleman once sent me some links to a guy who left orthodoxy for Protestantism, and he made a lot of cogent arguments against a lot of Orthodox belief. But that game, that game we'll always have with us. But the fruit, when I read the New Testament, so there's a degree that I will always be Protestant. It's just too deep in my formation. And so in the New Testament, the Lord will evaluate us on our obedience to him. Now that obedience is certainly filtered through a matrix of theological orthodoxy, doctrine and dogma. Absolutely. But if the thief on the cross, after living a horrible life, can see with enough clarity that Jesus is the way out of the hole he's dug himself into, and simply asked to be remembered. And the answer is today you will be with me in paradise. That says something. How much, and I've known, I've known many saints who outperform me in Christian discipleship, and know about as much dogma to Philothimel. When I have to stand before the throne of God and give an account for my life, I don't think I'll be given a quiz about theological doctrine. I think my life and the choices that I've made will be examined for how much I've done. I'll be examined for how much I, how good a disciple I was of Jesus Christ. How much doctrine did Peter have? Part of it is the problem of wineskins and what a doctrinal container would be. So that gives you an idea of where I'm at with a lot of those kinds of questions. I think studying theology is a wonderful thing. I think people who are interested, and I think that's a way to love God with our minds, and to have debates that sharpen and... To have a way that sharpens and perfects our knowledge of God through doctrinal debates and conversations, it's all good. We should, as a community, as a group, as a church, get it as right as we can and teach it to our people. I have no arguments with any of that. But to make it the ultimate thing is idolatrous. When I think it's very clear from scripture and from Christ that our lives themselves are the goal of that correction. And dogma and doctrine can be helpful, but to make dogma and doctrine the end all is the tail wagging of the dog. From Dolly Bofernell in the chat, Paul, what can you say about communion and partaking in it? What is significant of it, and why is it so vital for everyone to partake in it together? What is the symbolism, history behind it? Well, it comes right from very early in the church. You can see Paul writing about it in 1 Corinthians 11. What we have today in churches is a ceremonial enactment of it, obviously in continuity with Christ and his disciples. And as Paul critiques the church at Corinth, it again, just the mental correctness about it is insufficient if the rest of our life doesn't sort of come together in it. How to make this simple and brief. We take Christ into us by bread and wine, and he nourishes us. He himself becomes our spiritual food. Part of the loss of, you might think I'm going to completely undo the answer I just gave, the loss of a living theology of the Eucharist and Protestantism is a real issue. Right now, in a lot of ways, that's one of the issues beneath the particular struggle in the Christian-formed church today. So one of the places that I read and write most about the struggle of the CRC today is on CRC Voices. CRC Voices took a pause on fighting about the debate about same-sex marriage on Voices for Holy Week, which is a good thing, kind of cool everyone down. Postings diminished considerably because of it. But one of my friends in a church in Grand Rapids keeps emphasizing the table, and he's right. When we come around the table of our Lord, it connects us not only with the other people in the room, but it connects us to the church all the way back. And connects us to Israel and the founding of Israel, all the way back to the Exodus in many ways. The Lord's Supper, the Eucharist, is in some ways the continuation of the Passover meal in a similar way to that baptism as a continuation of circumcision. The Church of Christ, quote, Calvinist Reformed doctrine, they are signs and seals. And Christ feeds us with his body. My church, we don't have weekly communion because I'm not going to, at this point, I'm not going to put my older people through what to them might be a little bit of a rough change. All of the younger churches in the CRC in the area have weekly communion, and I think that's the best way to go about it. Because I think the Word goes together with the sacraments. I think they're of a whole. Take, eat, remember and believe that the body of our Lord was given. And the CRC formulation for the complete forgiveness of all your sins is good, but I think people hear that sort of in sort of a forensic manner. And so sometimes if you watch my serving the Lord's Supper at church, I'll sometimes elaborate. This is for the complete renovation of your whole life. It's fairly Greek and maybe even a little Gnostic to think that just a whole bunch of thinky talky videos and listening to stuff will be enough to change your heart and life. No, the table is right there. So when I went to So when I visited my friend Kale in Rhode Island, he showed me their chapel building, which was a beautiful place. I'm going to end the questions here. Maybe I'll have a little time to bring people into the room. I noticed that when we came in, he bowed. I noticed that at the Catholic funeral that I went to because the host is in this box up on the wall. And so then, you know, you could tell who the real Catholics were because they knew everything to do. And the Protestants among us just kind of watched. But that, you know, just that simple act of always bowing Orients. And that's where I think the the sacramental traditions like the Orthodox and the Catholics really have something. Now, are there dangers on the other side of it? Yeah, that's the Protestant Reformation sort of fought about. But you don't have church without the sacraments. What are the here's my here's my catechetical formation with three marks of the church, preaching of the word, administration of the sacraments and the discipline of the church. And Calvinist churches, those are three marks of the church. If you don't have one of those marks, you lose the church. It's part of what the Christian Form Church is struggling with, struggling with discipline. Catholic Church is struggling with discipline. Orthodox seem to have some discipline. So good on them. But sacraments and preaching, I think Protestants have really emphasized preaching. The Orthodox and the Catholics have emphasized sacraments. I think the Orthodox preach via their liturgies. Is that effective? I don't know. Again, I'm I am where I am. Proposing Paul's wife be a Vander, a Vander wife for future conversations. You don't know what you ask. Have you read any Colin Wilson, most notably his original work, the outsider, wondering if there's a meaning crisis is throwing more and more people in the outsider camp? I have not. The meaning crisis has been with us for centuries. Orange tactics. Given the difficulties many people have in finding opportunities for and forming relationships, at what point do you retire? You retire yourself to an unmarried life. I want to have children and I'm materially situated to support a family. But I worry as I start put it pushing 40 that I haven't had any success in the last few years finding anyone, especially for men. With the with the softer with the softer limit. It's hard to know when and that's just not part of God's plan for you. C.S. Lewis. Never would have imagined. He would. Have Joy Davidman. It happened. They didn't have children. She had children. He got to play father a little bit. There's a whole lot of stuff in that whole relationship. It's quite something. It's quite a story. Part of why I don't think we can finally arrive at our spiritual home in this world is because of what you just say. Not all of our dreams will come true. The Apostle Paul and 2nd Corinthians 12 writes about the thorn in the flesh. People speculate. Oh, what was that? Was it eyesight? Was it same sex attraction? Was it? We don't know and we're not meant to know. But I think that's part of the story. I think that's part of the story. I think that's part of the story. I think that's part of the story. I think that's part of the story. I think that's part of the story. But I'm sorry for your unfulfilled longing. There are a lot of married people that maybe wish they had never married. And there are some... It's harder to say that there are some parents who wish they had never had children. People have said that to me. I don't know. God can bring surprises into our life. God can bring surprises into our life. God can bring surprises into our life. I never would have imagined that I'd have the fun I've had over the last five years with all of you. I never would have imagined that I'd have the fun I've had over the last five years with all of you. So, who knows? So, who knows? Pray, be faithful, follow the Lord. You have no idea what he might do. So... Yeah. Don Tom. I have lived with a winding down idea of history, Christianity for most of my life. But I've slowly worked towards a winding up expectation, switching from kingdom to... kingdom to come to kingdom among us. Seeing Tom Holland's journey makes me feel that there's been a leavening all along. It seems that Jordan Peterson has struggled to make a move away from apocalyptic expectations. Any thoughts? They're both true. I think Tom Holland is right. The difficulty is in imagining we can grasp the whole. Just like cognitive science has realized the whole is too large for us to grasp. So, all of our evaluations will be limited and biased. That's part of John Vervecky's relevance realization. Our biases are the relevance realization tools. So, the beauty of what Tom Holland has done is that it is a... It is a window into the conquest of Christ throughout the centuries. And it's an amazing story. Jordan has anxiety about losing what has been achieved over the last few hundred years. And I think a lot of that anxiety is well founded. But we are never able to evaluate the whole because we are too small and too short lived. We are not God. So, but it's a great question. All right, ends of questions. Let's see. Invite. How much time do I have? I still got to finish my two sermons. I might do two rough drafts this week. See if anybody wants to jump in and ask a question or tell me that I'm all wet. Those are the most fun. There's the link. I'm going to pin it. Come on in if you want to come in. Hope Orange Tic Tacs doesn't give up based on age. We don't always get what we want in life when it is most ideal to have it. But relationship and family are worth it. Nice word, Sandy. Nice word. Again, I'm going to pin it. I'm going to pin it. I'm going to pin it. Nice word, Sandy. Nice word. Again. Here comes. It's my friend. My friends. Oh, they're all coming in. Mark, you're not in your normal place. I'm in New Hampshire. Wonderful. All right. Go at it, y'all. Sandy dropped out. Well, I just wanted to let you know the Claire's all up in the emails already about what went happening in the high mind chat on today's stream. So you're going to have to address your chat moderation situation. Your wrenches are abusing their power ruthlessly. Uh oh. And it's just it's not fair. All of the wrenches again and just give it to a select few. Yeah, you might. It might be time to clean that out. I hate to. I hate to be the cause of of drama, but perhaps I am. Perhaps I'm guilty of it. I've been I don't know. There's a situation, though. I'll talk to Rick. Maybe Rick and I can figure out a good way to to do that because a lot of it, you know, you'd sort of proliferate wrenches because sometimes you get bad actors in there and it's really hard to moderate while you're talking. But I don't necessarily I'm pretty liberal in terms of tolerating people that others want to ban. And so if if people are banning people too quickly, that's problems. I'll talk to Rick about it. Maybe we'll figure out something. I personally never did more than a timeout. But but things things happened, I suppose. But you're Sandy again. All right, I will I will take that into it. We can't hear you, Sandy. You think after all those times on Grim Grizz's channel. So, Graham, how are you feeling about things? How you feel about your channel? It's under a strike at the moment. Oh, no. Is it really? Yes. Is that why I haven't been able to see anything? I've I've I've been I put up everything that was in the stricken live stream on and off channel that none of it has received any strikes. So I don't know if it was a targeted attack or what. But now, even if the channel does creep over a thousand, I won't be able to pursue monetization while under a community strike for my it was was a dangerous conspiracy theory. Apparently. Oh, somewhere. Somewhere somewhere in this life. Yeah. Just which one can you I'll happily cut it out from the video and upload everything else. If you just tell me which one I'm how is it? I don't know. I'm worried about filling in a chinos. We only have like 15 people. We have 15 more slots to fill. And I don't know that we're pushing the event enough. I think I think the event has gotten a lot of attention from my corner of the corner. I don't know how much Peugeot and Verveke have pushed it. So the conversation that we do this week that will go up on their channels should should be able to push that. So don't be sure and let Peugeot know that he can come camp with me in case he's been looking forward to that. All right. Maybe he has. Maybe he has. We will see. Thanks. Well, I'll see you. All right, Grizz. We'll see you. Well, Sandy, how about you? What do you have to say? Can you hear me? I hear you. Oh, OK. I keep telling people that I find you scary and that feels rude saying it. So I thought I'd better pop on in a podcast. You find me scary? Yeah. Why scary? I find you scary to Mark. Don't ask questions. Oh, no, no. He's he's scary. I know I'm scary, but he's definitely I've met him in person. I was frightened. What about me scares you, Sandy? Um, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. That's a good question. Partly, I think partly I think it's must be something that reminds me of some of the side things going on in your denomination. Partially my own background marrying somebody in that denomination who I'm now divorced from. So I think part of it is habit, but there's also something in some of you not now today today. I'm usually at work now. So this is my first time I've seen you live when you're just talking about other people in video clips. There are times when the way that you use your emotional energy comments, cheekiness. Yeah, those those things are a bit scary. So so scary in the sense of. Well, is it scary that I'm going to lead people in a bad direction or scary that I might hurt people? Maybe. Maybe. Are you open to possibly the question? I don't absolutely. Absolutely. Rude questions are some of the best. OK, you might not get an answer, but I don't mind a rude question. OK, well, it's not rude. And it depends on on which category of rude. And just keep it short because this is an actual question, but I don't want to get into feel feel logical crap. Oh, darn. Oh, darn. This morning, there was somebody on talking about Calvinism and they were looking at it in light of some of the context of the DSMB. You know, all of those assessments that you get for if you're going to get a label like my son is autistic, my ex has dyslexia and a couple of things possibly in the discussion this morning. Oh yeah. What was it? Oh, the topic was this morning they listed off several things, but the video is called Calvinism and Narcissism link examined. That sounds fun. And there was a little bit too much truth in some of the logic that I came across there for why as a non Dutch non Calvinist. Well, I might be. I was raised Anglican Presbyterian United Church. So, plus a few others. My family like to intermingle. Yeah, so the adjustment into from from that into The nomination that's very, very rigid in some respects, but very, at least where I went to church, very outgoing very community minded very all the stuff that that I'm hearing about, you know, for this little corner. But there was always that something that kind of picked at me that I couldn't quite place. I was well loved in the church I had good friends there I mean there's like nothing that's, you know, I had to redo my profession of faith because the something like 90 year old elder that interviewed me couldn't quite put his finger on on understanding anything to do with my background. You know, height 57 wasn't a denomination. Yeah, so, I mean you maybe you had to anyways but it was all small towns, big families. Well, the CRC majored in a lot of places like that. Small towns big families, and I don't know if it's an apocryphal statement or not but Martin Marty who was a the 20th century church pundit historian was asked about the Christian Reformed Church said Christian from churches and then the nomination it's an extended family, and there's a lot of truth to that. So, so I, I don't know. I don't know, don't have to answer now because I don't know the question exactly that you're asking. Um, Well, you know what, maybe there, maybe there isn't a question maybe I just needed to say that. That I'm scary. Well, yeah that you're scary and that I was listening to something that kind of implies why not you personally. If you figure out why I'm scary let me know. Okay, that's all right. Let's let's bring in Mark. All right, Mark. What do you have to say or ask her or answer. Well, I have a bunch of stuff. I'm just, I did an eight and a half hour live stream last week on Friday. My live stream before that, I got just over 1000 views between the three channels. I got my first 1k video on navigating patterns super congratulations. Thank you. Thank you. I'm very happy. But actually, since you opened the door, and I'm sure you're going to regret this. I am. I commented on one of your videos where you were doing a clip of Nate's video where he was talking to all the people about justice. And you made that comment about, is it just for a university to offer a degree, a PhD in particular, that maybe somebody couldn't earn enough money on to live off of. Yeah, and I just I'm I'm just flabbergasted by why anybody would come up with that formulation. Paul, like, as far as I'm concerned, and this is what I've been telling people is near as anybody's been able to tell me. PhDs are literally for wealthy people to have something to do so they don't destroy the world. Like with the WEF and things, those people should be taking courses forever. And they should be paying for them out of their own pocket forever. That's the proper use of PhD. To me. More education equals more money is just weird materialism that I don't want you involved in. Did your parents talk to you about materialism, Paul? Because they should. My parents, my parents lived out anti acquisitionism. They did not. They were not. They did not live life for the stuff. No, no, I realize. But they but but you're right, though, because I actually there was a point in my life when I looked at getting a PhD or an advanced degree. And I realized that makes no sense. I and I have a friend of mine right now, a colleague who is getting a PhD, but he just wants it. The truth is he's spending thousands of dollars, hundreds of hours of time. And and I just decided that I'd rather buy more books and do more thinking. And I took the auto didact route. So and YouTube has certainly been part of that, too. So, yeah, I agree. Like, I don't know why colleges and universities offering something that somebody may or may not want and be willing to pay for. Is it justice issue? It's not a justice issue. It's it's a availability, affordance issue. I can see that. I can see that. So. All right. Good. Thank you, sir. Yes, sir. How are you? A.P.M. Walker at Yahoo dot com. Yeah. Listen, Andrew. Andrew. Yeah. Listen, Andrew. On on the mark. Can't remember what the name of the facility is. OK. Where did I meet you, Mark? On Discord. Yeah. I'm listener and on Discord. Are you receiving me? Are you hearing me? Yeah, we hear you. OK. Because everybody's frozen. I'm not sure whether that's because they're amazed or because there's something wrong with my feet. But you can hear me so fine. We hear you fine. And we're moving. You can watch Chad put that shower together. Oh, wow. No kidding. OK. Well, I'm doing OK. The first time I was on this feed was back several weeks when we were talking about the the refreshing in Tennessee. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Strange that we should be having a huge ha ha. Over the Tennessee legislature kicking out to legislators. Yeah. So soon after that. But what I really need to talk about, which I can do very briefly, is every week since that conversation, I've been looking at your calendar and it says no slots open every week. Yeah. And even when, you know, when the month changed from March to April and I waited for a new April calendar, as soon as I saw it, I think the same day it went up, it was full. OK. Well, I'll explain how the calendar works. Every Monday, I look ahead at my week and my slots are usually Wednesday morning. And I have to ask myself, can I take rando slots this week? And like this week I couldn't because it's Holy Week and I've been working my butt off. And other weeks, sometimes there's church things in the way. So I only open them up Monday morning for the next week. When I first started doing this, I had them all open, and then people filled up six months ahead of time. And after they filled up six months ahead of time as I would get close to the event, then people would write me notes and say, oh, something came up and I can't do it. So so this is so don't check all the time. Only check on Mondays because it's my check on Tuesdays because those are the days I usually open them up. But it all depends on what's happening in my real life during the schedule. That's the whole that's the whole gig. Oh, keep that in mind. Would it make a difference if I friended you on Discord? I don't know. No, that wouldn't make a difference. Send me an email and tell me exactly what you want to talk about and why you want to talk about it. And maybe we'll just do something else then. I am open to special appeals. I shouldn't even say that. But right, Mark, I shouldn't even say that because there are a lot of people out there who have made special appeals and say, OK, let's do it. We still haven't done it, right, Mark? You do owe me a third way talk. I do owe you a third way talk. And I owe I owe Manuel. What are the best ways to actually get in touch with me is DM on Twitter because that stays a little more organized. But send me an email. OK, I'll send you. I'm not a Twitter member. Yeah, don't get on just to do that by no means. Send me an email and hopefully I'll see. It's not there's no perfect way. There's no perfect way. The best way to have a conversation with me is visit Living Stones. That's easy. That would be quite a commute from Boston. Yeah, well, there's a Boston Estuary starting up. Oh, is there? There is. No one knows about this. It was just it was the if you scroll all the way back through the live comments, IRL politic is getting it going with Sherry Harkin and another woman. It's going to be wicked salty. Are they having it in the Harvid Yard where you can pack your car? And there's a good chance I get to I get to Massachusetts semi regularly. And once there's an estuary going there, there's a good chance that I'll be able to meet people there. And that might even happen this summer. So, wow. Well, I'd better chase that down. Yeah, chase that down. Get get in touch with those people and get get going with the estuary because I I I like to I like to help estuary groups start. And I will travel under my own money to help groups start just to get more people there. So and I will at some point probably do a do a retreat thing in Thompson, Connecticut at my sister's house. So I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I am not as available as I used to be. That's just kind of what happens. How dare you, Paul? How dare you be so selfish with your time? I can't believe it. I know it's terrible. But but yeah, no, Boston, that's that's you'll we'll be able to meet at some point. Fantastic. OK, well, I got to get to work. The governor will be very upset when she finds out that I'm doing this. Well, we don't want that to happen. No, we don't want that. Take care then. All right. Happy Easter. Thank you. Happy Easter to you, too. Hey, Eric, how are you? What's up, Paul? How you doing? Good. Good. What's on your mind? I didn't have a specific question. I just enjoy watching you. So I want to jump in and say hi in person. All right. Well, thank you. I appreciate that. I appreciate you answer my question. No problem. Thanks for thanks for all the good comments and stuff that you always leave. Always lots of good, good, good thought. John, how about you? Hi. Thank you for letting me on up here. I am not a Christian. I don't believe that I can accept Jesus as a Lord and Savior because I don't believe Jesus is a co-equal to God. I am a I used to be a follower of Claire Caw of secular carousel. Oh, I guess. Because I have no idea. I should have her on for a randos conversation. I mean, Jacob, don't Mark says no. Definitely says no. She's obviously started a huge thing here. Yes, I was one of the first tenants of secular caronism. I guess we fell away because I actually accept I was I converted or I reverted to Islam during that time. She actually was helpful in me accepting Islam. So I thank her for that. I guess the reason why I wouldn't call myself a secular caronist anymore is that she believes that I think it's I don't know exactly. But I think she wants to establish some sort of Noahide laws. And I guess that's where we differ. I think we just differed on like stupid things because we were both activists at the time, too. So, you know, activists go there. Just get really I think it was a strategy. I think we also butted heads on. But, yeah, no, I think we probably align a lot of things. But it's weird that people you align with a lot of things with have these separate ways and you go back and I don't know, man, it's weird. But anyway, so, yes, I'm a former secular caronist. But I just say Islam chapter two, verse 256. There is no compulsion religion. So Islam will accept Christians practicing the beliefs as well, too. OK, I'm just fascinated by your comment about Noahide is given the fact that there's no one there's no one who scraps with Claire as much as our local Noahide promoter named Jacob. So I'm just fascinated by the you know, give me the popcorn and watch watch those two go on Twitter. OK, I wasn't quite sure how you're going to react. I was like, I thought you're going to boot me honestly after I said what I said. So thank you for keeping me on here. I love conversation and the newer, the more interesting to me. And when this whole secular caronism, I'm like, what are they talking about? I have no idea what they mean by that. So I was just curious. I'm very I'm a very curious person. They haven't kept me for talking about psychedelics all the time. I don't think you're going to get kicked for that. Yeah, I'm pretty open. I'm pretty open. The only thing I would have let Claire on and I'd like Claire on now. But I have there she is now. Claire, I do have a rule about showing your face because and John noticed that I let John turn his camera off. I put him out again because I noticed that people play fast and loose with things when they don't show their face. Right. When you show your face, you've got skin in the game. And one of the things that I learned as a as a local church minister was that a lot of bad things happen in church when people are talking to the back of other people's heads. And when they have to say things face to face, eye to eye, then, you know, then people will they'll be kinder. They'll be more truthful. They'll be more honest. So there's a real thing about face to face conversation. And that's why I have this this little rule, because the truth of the Internet is, I mean, with all these names and things, it Mark LeFavor might her real name. Her real name might be Janice Joplin. And, you know, who knows? But I've now known Mark LeFavor. I've ridden in his car. I've sat with him. I've, you know, embraced him. I've done all of these things. And so and people have lots of opinions about Mark LeFavor. Conclusion to the Good Friday Q&A. But that's part of the reason I have that little rule. So Claire, I'd be if you want to send me an email or DM me on Twitter, because she's on Twitter, I'd be open to having a conversation with her. But it's got to be face to face. I have to say, don't take it too personally. I've maybe seen her face me twice and I've known her for four years now. On offer for years. And I've seen her face twice. On a podcast. That to me is a red flag. Because you can't build a relationship with someone if... She always has like this Berkha avatar on there. And I know she does it just to kind of be provocative. And I'm provocative too. So we have similar personalities in that way. But I guess maybe my one critique of Claire would be like, yeah, she doesn't sure face that much. OK. I also have to say too that Christianity is idolatry. There. I'm going to say it. There you go. You have expressed your opinion about Christianity. You're not alone in that. That I know is true. OK. Perfect. And Claire, hopefully you have the courage to show your face and come up on here. Because I think these people are very interested in good faith of what you have to say. Yep. We are. All right. Mr. Chad, you have anything you want to contribute to this? I was wondering about... Sorry, I'm not showing my whole face. There. I've seen your face. No. Hey, good point. I don't make Chad show his face. But I've met Chad in person. And there's kind of a thing to Chad in the face. If we ever meet in Discord, you will see my face all the time. So anyways, my question... I did recently watch... My wife and I watched all of The Chosen. It was actually really good. I was actually really surprised. Thought they did a pretty good job on a lot of things. Anyways, it's also just a television show. It's not like the Bible or whatever. But there's an episode in there where they go into the woman touching the garment. And I was really moved by that. And it is a very strange story. And I'm wondering how that relates to, like, Peter walking on water and faith. And kind of also the concept of how each of us understand God through our own experiences. Even though that sounds very pluralistic. I'm wondering what you think about that. What are your thoughts on the garment, the woman touching the garment and the crowd and all that? I think you're right in connecting that with Peter and walking on water. Because when he takes his eyes off Christ, he sinks. And I think just as I said in the answer, it's not just sort of an abstract faith. The efficacy of your faith has everything to do with the object of your faith. Or the focus of your faith. Or the attention of your faith. If you have faith in a bridge, the efficacy of the outcome of your relationship with that bridge will be in the quality of the bridge and the bridge itself. And so in that way, faith is a connection. It's a bridge. They say this about the placebo effect. Because the placebo effect is judged against every medication. But the placebo effect is essentially your faith in something healing you. And they don't know why, but they test your body has the ability. If you really believe something, you think you're getting a real pill, you're thinking a real surgery or something. Depending on the level of belief you have in it, the higher the chance that your body is going to heal itself. And so the level of what the universe can open up to you based on your faith is essentially what that story is, I think, illustrating. If a woman touched, she believed, she was healed. You take a sugar pill, you believe you're healed. And then the other illustration, can you walk on water if you really believe? And that's the other example. I have a question. Didn't Jesus actually rebuke those that said that he saved them? Like when he went around the village and he said he rebuked those that were like, oh, Jesus, you saved me, you healed me from blindness or you healed me from this? No, he said, depart from me. It is not I who saved you. It is your own faith that saved you. I wouldn't say that's exactly it. But I want to bring Claire on. Claire, I want to thank you for turning on your camera. I know it's my silly rule. And I know that you've wanted to participate more. And apparently some people use their wrenches to silence you in the chat. And I'm sorry about that. And I think Prim is right that Rick and I might have to have a conversation about the proliferation of wrenches that we had. But I'm glad that you've come on. And I'm curious about what you have to say. I thought what I would mention as it's Easter, the differing view of the death of Jesus in that the Muslim view is that he didn't die on the cross and was lifted by God straight to heaven. And by the way, thank you very much for your gracious explanation. I wasn't expecting that, really. So thank you for that. Well, I am interested in conversation. But I know I have this rule about faces because I think when we talk to each other face to face, we have better conversations. Yes, as you can see, I haven't got my makeup on and I'm not. I'm not sure why. So thank you for coming in. Yes, I'm curious. The secular Quranism. I'm not quite sure what exactly you mean by that. It's basically Sharia for non-Muslim people who are social conservatives in the West who find that Christianity is no longer doing the job of promoting marriage and family values, you know, the good old traditional values. It's interesting. Now, do you live in the UK? Yes. Okay. It's interesting to me how, you know, I heard this from Andrew Tate. I've heard it from a number of people in the UK that for them, Christianity has become so nominal that it's virtually meaningless. And I don't think that's necessarily the case in many places in the United States because, you know, there is a pretty strident culture struggle going on in the United States over many of these issues. So it's interesting to me the way... You have your Bible belt and your evangelists. And many evangelicals throughout the country, not just in the Bible belt. And in some ways, when they're not in the Bible belt, they're even more strident like places like California and New England. But it's just a question, even though I'm agnostic, which is that if God did indeed forbid idolatry and blasphemy, then it would appear, according to Jews and Christians, that they are guilty of idolatry and, you know, popes and archbishops and bishops might poo-poo the whole idea. But if God exists, then he would have a view on it, wouldn't he? I think Christians very much believe that God is against idolatry. John Calvin himself said, our minds are perpetual idol makers. Human beings, we very much can take the gifts of God and the things of God and turn them into idols. I mean, one could even do that with, let's say, a crucifix. You can turn a crucifix into an idol. Or even an idea. Oh, even an idea. Absolutely. We make all sorts of things into idols by using them in place of God and in place of true faith and in place of a right relationship with God. So you'll find no argument with me on the fact that human beings are perpetual idol makers and that Christians, non-Christians, we all fall into idolatry regularly, myself included. Yes, we can understand that one of the repeated verses in the Quran is your wives and children who may be the apple of your eye can be treacherous. So what you love as a material being for another physical material being could turn out to be treacherous. And therefore we should measure them really by the kind of principles that they claim they adhere to. And it is useful if you have a moral system to kind of basically pigeonhole people and say, well, are you Christian? Are you Muslim? And if you're Muslim, then what are you doing drinking and eating pork in a casino? And the fact that you're found there as a Muslim drinking, eating pork in a casino means that you're a bad Muslim. And if other Muslims discovered what you were doing, then you would be, well, a very low status Muslim. And the same with Christians too. You're not a Christian if you don't believe in the Trinity. You're not a Jew if you don't, or you can be a Jew, but you would be a heretical Jew if you don't keep the Sabbath. And we know from the Torah that breaking the Sabbath attracts the penalty of stoning to death. And part of what I think my tradition has focused on is that, in fact, laws themselves and legal systems themselves are become tremendous temptations for idolatry, because these systems invite us to imagine we can appropriate them and use them to achieve what can actually only be received by grace. And the giving of a legal system or a framework is, in fact, an expression of the grace of God for us. And so part of Calvinists and Lutherans also recognize is that legal systems themselves are prone to becoming... Corruption. ... idolatrous. Corruption. Yeah, well, not corruption, but there's... I'm doing Romans 7 in my adult Sunday school class, and there's this struggle that the Apostle Paul is having with the fact that the law sort of comes in, and his rebellion takes that law and uses the law against the ends for which God intended it. I'm not sure. Could you explain a little bit more what you were just saying? I'm afraid I'm not familiar with the idea. Well, I use the illustration of, let's say there's a young woman and the mother says, you should be home by 10 o'clock at night. And the young woman begins to think, oh, what happens after 10 o'clock at night? Maybe good things happen after 10 o'clock at night. I want to stay out after 10. Now, the daughter might have come home at 9 o'clock every single night before then, but once the law comes into play, something in her heart is triggered. And I think that's an echo of the story in the garden where, you know, it's amazing that Adam and Eve live in the garden and they never eat from the tree. And then in a sense... Until God put the idea into their heads and then they couldn't resist it. Did God put the idea into their heads? I think he wanted to kick them out, don't you? He had enough of them. I don't think that was his invention. Who puts the ideas into their heads in the story in Genesis? It's the serpent. The serpent, the creation of God. Aren't all ideas emanated from the highest source of creation though? I'm sorry? Don't I... all ideas come from the creator. They're all manifestations of an act of creation in one way or another. But then rebellion itself wouldn't be rebellion. Well, how can you know what is moral if there is no immorality? Well, there is immorality, but Paul's point in Romans 7 is that the pointing out of morality, rebellion, sin in me, harnesses that pointing out of morality and turns it into a way that I can actually work against loving my neighbor. In other words, the law can be a tool by which I hate my neighbor. And if the law is in service of... if the law can truly be summarized as love God and love your neighbor, what does it say when the law can be used as a tool of hating my neighbor? That's the point that Paul makes. I don't want to have this whole thing derailed here, but go ahead, John. Yeah, doesn't it in Deuteronomy that it talks about... now forgive me, I'm paraphrasing. It talks about when you forget about God, people make trinkets about God and then they'll eventually... they'll lust after each other and then man will wait with man, woman will wait with woman, and they'll be in an abomination. So isn't that also too that when we forget about like the Ten Commandments or forget about God, if we forget about him in our hearts, that we have these laws that we have to upkeep or else these abominations will happen and we'll justify it in any way we can too because that's what the mind does. And we can also use law to justify abomination, which is also what we do. But I want to get to everyone. So thank you, Claire. I really appreciate you coming in and turning your camera on. You're welcome to stay, but I want to at least give Eric a chance to say his thing and then I've got to do some of the work I've got to do today. So thank you, Claire, and thank you, John. Eric, did you have something you wanted to say? Yes and no. I mean, there's always interesting comments that come up and I usually lose those thoughts about five seconds after it happens as the conversation keeps on rolling. But I guess one of the things that has popped up during this conversation is just how I think it is, yeah, I mean, idolatry waits around every quarter of everything we do. We can idolize, you know, we create idols of our own intellect and our own. Yeah, we idolized literally everything. And I think one of the biggest issues with modernity is that we have idolized our own intellect and our own self, even though it is a sort of it has a sort of sovereignty, but it's not above God's. And I think that's one of the tricky things that we're dealing with with. That's one of the tricky things that we're dealing with in regards to sussing out, you know, various faith paths and stuff like that. So often we'll meet we'll meet a faith tradition or we'll be in a faith tradition, find humans that executed poorly and then attribute that to the entirety of the of the of the faith. And there's some veracity to it sometimes, but sometimes a poor execution of one faith is still better than a proper execution of another faith, perhaps. But I as as someone who inhabits an iconoclastic tradition, I would love it if idolatry was so easily avoided by getting rid of statues. And as in even in my Calvinist world, one of the things that we've noted is that our and Calvinists have tended to hollow their doctrinal and theological positions, but those positions themselves can become idolatrous. So it gets back to Calvin's comment that I think Calvin is basically riffing on Paul in Romans seven that idolatry is fundamentally taking the good gifts of God and using them against the glory of God, the obedience of God and loving God and loving our neighbor. And we we as a we as a fallen species tend to find innumerable ways of doing that. And and so it's part of the reason misery deliverance gratitude that the good that we do I see as the proper way of positioning that is in fact gratitude for responding to God's grace. So that makes me a Calvinist Protestant. I mean, that's one of the things that when you're talking about that, it reminds me again of the depth of Proverbs three, five and six, where it's talking about don't lean on your own understanding. Like, it's not that you shouldn't have it, but you shouldn't lean on it. And I think that that's the tricky thing is when you I mean, it's spoken of a fair amount, but I think just because of our human limitation, there's this tension that's always going to be there. Where a lot of things have to be held at the same time that are beyond our human capabilities. So when in doubt, lean on, you know, prioritize what God has spoken explicitly first and try to love your neighbor through that, just as you would do for yourself, which is wish nothing, you know, hopefully nothing but life and generative right relationship with God, who is the source of all life at all times or something along those lines. All right. Thank you, Eric. Okay, last words anyone until I shut down the stream again, Claire, I want to I want to really thank you for turning on your camera and being willing to come in. It's lovely to hear your voice. And I've been curious about your perspective. And I know people around me all have opinions about everybody else. And trust me. I'm everybody around here has opinions about everybody else. And there are some people that people don't want to share a stream with. And I completely understand that as a local church pastor, I live in those waters all the time. But I, I think it's fair to have conversations with people and hear what they have to say. So thank you for having me and being so fair to Paul. Yeah, Paul 7pm navigating patterns discernment tonight 7pm Eastern. I've got popular live streams. So come and join me. I won't join you because I will scramble to finish my service and submit my sermon and then tonight I've got services so you could do it. You can do. Thank you, Paul. Always. All right. Good to see. Okay. Have a good weekend, everybody. All right. Thank you all for joining. Bye bye. Happy Ramadan.