https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uglzTg5CjAc

 There we go. Okay. Hi Paul. Hey Fred, how are you today? How was Hawaii? Hawaii was wonderful. How was the weather? The weather was beautiful. It didn't rain or anything? Last day it rained but we were heading to the airport. Was there a rainbow? I saw lots of rainbows. Rainbows are beautiful. How did rainbows in Hawaii? Do they have the custom of wearing Hawaiian shirts out there? They do. I did see a lot of Hawaiian shirts. Did you have some chauffeurs? I didn't have any. Did they have any show first? No, I didn't have any show first. When you guys were eating, did the people... Well, we mostly bought our own food. Oh, okay. We had OBS and so we cooked for ourselves most of the time. And we had some food trucks. I would love to go there one time. Far as I've been is Philadelphia and Chicago. That's good. Well, you know about that. He picked me up after I did my performance out there. Yes, I did. Hey Kid Chris, if you're watching, hello. Hey Kid Chris. You are alright, Kid Chris, but you could have kicked in a little bit more fun from my performance. And I'm sure Charlie would agree with me. And if people search on YouTube they can find Fast Fed, Charles Gay, Kid Chris. I changed it to Fred. Well, I forgot to tell you I'm not fed eating anymore. Yes, Naina? We're on the show. You want to come on the show? I'm ready to be. I'll find her before I leave. Anyways, I'm going by Freddy B now. Freddy B? Yeah, because someone took my name. Someone took your name? Uh huh. Ballers, means Freddy Ballers. Freddy Baller? Ballin', yeah. Oh, okay. Like playing basketball ballin'. Oh, not to mention the Kings. Get a draft pick next year. Okay. Because they made a deal with... But why is Luke Walton coaching the Kings and he was a Laker? I don't get it. Anyways, the 49ers played the Seahawks today. That should be interesting. Last time they beat... Did they win or lose? I think the Seahawks beat them last time, didn't they? And 49ers in San Francisco? No, I think they were in Seattle. Oh, okay. Why don't you close that door? There's a lot of noise coming in. Okay, okay. So now 49ers have a great team. We'll see how they do in the postseason. Garoppolo. Garoppolo's been a good quarterback. Kittle. Yeah. He's been... 85. Kittle, he's a tremendous... He's tremendous. Tremendous tight end. So the last time the Seahawks and the 49ers, who won? I thought that they played in Seattle on the Seahawks one. No, they played in Seattle today in Seattle. Oh, so... They played in San Francisco and I think they won. Oh, okay. I don't remember. And then... Hold on, let me get this right. Okay, the Raiders have a chance. If they win today and the Saints win, and then if another team loses, then they'll get a wild card. Then the Raiders get in the wild card game? Yes. Okay. Now the Patriots play Miami. That's gonna be easy. That's gonna be easy. Tom Brady be throwing dimes. And Antonio Brown, they're trying to put him on the Saints, but I told him no way. He don't deserve to play the way he acts. He really don't, Paul. Okay. So let me just do my wrap and then we'll finish this up. Alright. I gotta pick one. You pick one. Which one do you want? They're all Christmas... Most of them are Christmas cards today. Okay, I'll just... The first one that comes up. What child of this? I'll do that one. Okay. I shouldn't have to have the paper, but... No, this is more of a wrap song. Jesus, because you know how they were doing it? Yeah, yeah. Okay. Check it out. It goes like this. Jesus, Jesus, oh what a wonderful child. Jesus, Jesus, Holy meek and mild, new life, new hope, new joy he brings. Listen to the angels sing, glory, glory to the newborn King. Jesus, Jesus, oh what a wonderful child. Jesus, Jesus. So Holy meek and new, a new life, new hope, new joy he brings. Listen to the angels sing, glory, glory, glory to the newborn King. Glory to you, Lord, don't you see? You're the best, Jesus, in the M.I.C. You're the best, that's why we praise your name. My name is Freddie B and that ain't no shame. Coming up like this, coming up like that, my boy Charlie is rolling fat. Don't forget about Gordon. He stands tall. He looks for everything that comes all tall. Don't you know? Paul's good to go. He preaches really good. Really though, good to go without a word to say. We're on YouTube. Happy New Year, okay? Okay, I like that rap. You're right. I made it up. That was good. That ended up well. I made it up. That was good. Oh, one more thing. 49ers, I hope you win because you're in like Swin, Swin Bicycle going down the street. So fresh, make your grandma freak. There ain't another beat loving heart of their mind. It's the beat of the future gonna blow your mind. What is a DJ if he can't rap? What is an MC just like that? But I can do it all, baby, just like that. Just like that. Wow. Wow, that's a good show. Yeah. Alright. My turn to bust a rhyme, Paul. My turn to bust a rhyme? Please, because New Year's just come up with just saying We Three Kings. Please, Paul. We'll see. Next show? Maybe next show we'll see. Go 49ers, Kettle, Joropolo, and let's hope the Raiders get a wild card. And I won my Tolly ball game so I don't have to host the draft party next year. Did you get me a Hawaiian shirt? I didn't get you a Hawaiian shirt. Can you give me a 49er beanie for Christmas? I don't know. At the auction? What auction? The one I'm full of something. I'm gonna go buy my mom's sometime. Anyway, we won't talk about politics. Anyway, that's the funky fresh stuff. Alright. Okay. Alright, let's wait and play. Ready to play on the plane. Here we go. One love. Happy New Year. Happy New Year. YouTube Freddie and Paul show. The A.M. Paul show, yeah. Alright.