https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=5YNchZByANA

 All right, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hey, how you doing Paul? Good Fred, how are you? Oh great I just wanted to say I'm gonna close that, that is loud Go ahead Oh, I just wanted to say I hope everybody had a good Thanksgiving And the 49ers should have won that game against the Ravens but they got a field goal, the Ravens got a field goal and and The Ravens won unfortunately but and I think the Raiders lost but anyway, but who did win is What did the Philippines tell me the other day? Oh, they're winning today against New England The Saints right? Yeah, they're winning against the Saints right now. Yeah, 35-30 Now what's going on is is my friend Philip wants to talk about his Walk into Jesus faith. Jesus. I'm the Jesus man and I went to Walmart and Little voice says to take some little magnets this year and I started to myself out. I'm not gonna meet nobody so I went in there and the first thing I met was a Greeter and he loved my Jesus sign here. So, okay and so then I went on and I met this lady with had four kids and She had a Jesus sign on so I greeted us inside Went back and got all my stuff and went out outside and I Forgot who greeted me the first time so I went and got some magnets and Went back in and I found the lady and I gave her a Jesus sign So I went on the way back. I Remembered it was the greener and so I gave him a magnet and he said Do you make him out of wood or whatever? And so okay, so I went and out to my car and put on a Jesus sign I gave him one now I make hope love joy and then Jesus on that pieces on there today That's the word is Tivity see advent. Yes, I need today. Yeah on peace. Okay, so I'm trying to give people peace Whatever love I'm giving out my Jesus and that's how they get my Signs. Oh, okay I'm gonna do a little rap about peace. Okay, right. It's called Oh day of peace. Oh Day of peace Oh day of peace that don't this shine through our hopes and prayers dreams got to justice and truth Delivered from our selfish schemes may swords Hate fall from our hands our hearts in Ebony No envy fine release till by God's grace our warning world shall Christ promised reign of peace Then shall the wolf drill with the lamb nor shall the fierce Devour the small and beats the cattle of commonly grazed a little child shall lead them all the way Then the enemy shall learn to love all creatures find there to accord The hope of peace shall be fulfilled For all the earth shall know the Lord He's the Jesus man. Don't you see he paints his blocks like one two three He is in command cuz he's doing it good He's doing it for God and he ain't got it going on don't you know because when he's on a mic He recites to a dry He's the Jesus man and he's a disciple and all out of sight Out of sight. All right And I do one more for the 49ers I hope the 49ers to win today because they are the good team in the USA they can win with Kittle rocking on the mic cuz he might play the fiddle But when he gets the ball in the end zone, he's coming up like this like MC tone Gotta come up before the night is through. I hope the 40 miners win, dude All right. All right. All set. I'll have one next week. All right Yeah, everybody's gotta get ready and go You