https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bG8lRmb7FxY

 It's spontaneous. It is spontaneous. With me and the sermon. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. What number is this Paul? This is season two episode 11 I think. 11. Yeah we've got it. We're close to a hundred. Yeah we're in the high 90s. We're in the mid 90s I think total. Okay my mom didn't want me to talk about things personal. But people out there if you know of any way for me to get my mouth fixed or my teeth with implants please email Paul because my appearance means a lot to me. And I just want to do not just cleaning but implants. And I get medical treatment for free. At Carrington College. Oh they'll do it? Yeah. Implants? I don't know if they'll do implants for all students. Okay. But they'll do what they can. See. I won't mention your name but our studio audience is very helpful today. Call Yasi. Hey. Call you Yasi? Yasi. Okay we'll call you Yasi. I'm a little older little Paul. Yeah am I not in the picture? No over here. Oh we gotta change it. Why do we gotta change it? Because we're putting her in. Oh that's okay. See our studio audience is even our camera person. That's even off. Okay so what are we going to talk about today? The A's are doing good. I won three in a row. The Giants won two out of three. The 49ers have won three games in a row. Well they're all preseason. They're all preseason. Football season starts this week. This week Thursday. Yeah Thursday. Yes mom got um I'm not sure who mom got but Leon got uh Belle. Yeah see Belle plays this year. And John Carr. I had Belle last year. He didn't play the whole year. My first round draft. What's Carr first thing again? Which Carr? Reggie. Where's Reggie? Where's the Raiders? Tell Reggie to come in here. He's needed on the Freddie and Paul show for some fantasy football advice. Who was Carr? Derek Carr. Leon got him. Leon got Derek Carr. I'm not sure who. Oh you guys got uh. I got Todd Gurley. No she's mom got uh. I have. Reggie on fantasy football. Don't try to show Reggie. I thought Reggie. I actually thought this week maybe you and I should have our own show on fantasy football. Just come back. Come here. We're here by foot. Just tell them who we are. Yeah. We're having. Reggie is he's run twice in three years of our church fantasy football team. Reggie is the new Tom. And I'm going to take him down this year. I'm going to take him down this year. Our God is an awesome God he reigns from heaven. Alright. So we have Ben Wright. So who's on your fantasy. Ben. Let me start with an easier one. Um. Roethlisberger. Oh Roethlisberger. No one can say that man's name. No that's not Ben. Ben Roethlisberger. Big Ben is calling Big Ben. We're all Big Ben. We're on a first name basis. Uh huh. Alright. Who's on the line up. Reggie every year tells me his line up. Alright. You have to look it up. You do not. You go to bed at night thinking about each and every one of them. Lord please be with my running back. They did not blow out any knees. Please be with my quarterback. Big Ben. Who got fresh scott? Who got fresh scott? I don't know. So he is going to actually go through the lineup. Well I will. We're going to be a special extended edition. Please. Everybody's going to like it. So Reggie and Nancy's fantasy football team can. But we have to. But you might have something to do. We need to talk to Paul because the whole website changed and I have to see the. I have to see it. I have to see. Do you have any idea what she's talking about. Live scoring. I got to see it. Live scoring. I have to bite my nails on Monday night. So okay Reggie. First I have the best wide receiver of football. It takes a few weeks to get it done. We'll be down in a minute. We have a great and exciting Alvin Camara. A young up and coming running back named Nick Chubb. A wide receiver who catches more balls. A running back who catches more balls than most wide receivers. Sonny Michelle. Sonny Michelle I think this is going to be his season now. More touchdowns. He's going to be goal line man for the Pats. Quarterback for maybe the best offense in football. Baker Mayfield. And again the sleeper of the year. Telfon Coleman running back. I was a sleeper. He's pretty. And then you got that receiver Reggie. You got Julio Jones. He's got good running backs. Now Reggie always has so many. No he's a wide receiver. Oh he is a wide receiver. I didn't get it tweeted. Oh hold on props out to my people. What's up Gordon? What's up CJ? What's going on like this Forte? I'm the number six. The best rapper. No I'm not going to take a nap with the happer. I'm stepping up and I'm never down. And that's right homeboy. I wear the crown. Don't you know I'm the best in town? I might be white but I do get down. But I don't discriminate you know. Because if you discriminate God knows. This is how we do. This is my rap to you. I am weak and I need your strength and power to endure with grace. My weakest I will help you through the darkness to face to see. Don't you know it's Freddie D. Believe me oh Lord. Leave me. Because I'm the man in command like you. I want to follow you and be just like you. Because Jesus you're so awesome on the mic. Not even an opossum. Don't you know good to go. I am lost if you take your hand from me. I am blind without your light to see. I got to see you like Jesus because I love thee. Lord forever may I trust you. I your servant to be. Lead me Lord. Oh lead me. Lead me. Guide me along the way. For if you leave me I cannot stray. Lord let me walk each day. With you lead me my whole life through. That was awesome. You got any words of wisdom? I'm going to say that was good. That was great. Alright cool. I hope everybody likes it. My mom will really... those folks who... Northside Chapel, Patterson, New Jersey, Lead Me, Guide Me, used to sing at the end of every service growing up. Peace out. Are we done? No sermon report from Nancy? Oh yeah go ahead mom. Okay well we have now had miracles. What did she want to say? And you know... We now have miracles. Yeah that's what you've been doing sermons on. That's true. I've been doing sermons on miracles. Jesus in the boat. Jesus in the boat. Then the... Demoniac? Yeah that man. Nancy was a little concerned about that sermon. Yeah and I'm glad the guy got the demon out. I mean I ask for the demon to come out of me all the time. The devil. Because I said devil you're not going to win. Okay. Anyhow this week we had the unclean lady and she had it for 12 years. Now that's important. Because then in the next one the daughter of Jairus that he healed was 12 years old. Now what the number 12 means I have no idea. Twelve. But anyhow the part I got out of it and this is a testimonial I guess more or less. Is that we have to have faith that when we go through this turbulence and the sea is a sign of chaoticness and distress. When we go through this we have to have faith. Now that's the only thing that gets me through right now. I've lost my husband. I have lost four sisters. I have lost my mother. I have lost my father. And basically my children I have to have a lot of faith with that too because. I'm doing much better mom. I know. All I'll tell you I'm good. Praise the Lord and I won't go into all why he's so much better. I know tell her. You can say it's the medicine. Okay it's the medicine. The medicine keeps me good. Pretty wasn't taking his medicine and he went way down. And I didn't know it would go like that Paul if that happened. But I'm much better now. You're doing well. But sometimes I feel frustrated sometimes because I wish things were easier. That's all I'm trying to say. Every night when I pray I pray the Lord lead me and guide me and give me wisdom and clarity. And we say I say I know you're there so I can go to sleep. Amen. Amen. That's a good message. So email Paul on anything if you know of any living situation and other appearance for my mouth for implants. Okay. And praise the Lord and let's do our one love. Okay. Amen. How ready are you to do one love? One love. One love. Amen. Amen. Hallelujah. It's a wrap. Alright that was good. Alright.