https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=yd8UT6wsp6o

 Well, we're getting that we're getting it set in here I'm not in my I'm not in the car I usually am and So we're but this would be 46. I think the last one was 45 46 we did that one That was a good one Paul you like that one. Oh, yeah, we talked about Freddie. We talked about football We talked about now we're talking about now we're getting serious and talking about the the Livingston Church History, okay. Let me tell you what my history is Paul Okay, my history is back in church. I used to go to church every single Sunday almost and I was loyal Because I would have a ride all the time and now it's back to being like that Because I have a ride for my family and I come and see you preach and once a while I'm sorry Paul. Sometimes I talk to you during the sermon I just get into the moment and get into what you're talking about I really apologize, but I don't know it's just like the other day you said about recycling I said, well, yeah Paul, I like to recycle because it's money Where where money goes is money's granted because money makes the world go round Anyways, okay. It's your turn to part. This ain't the Freddy show. This is a Freddy and Paul show Okay, it's Freddy and Paul show. So so you wanted to talk about the history of the church You've been at the church longer than I have. I've only been at the church 20 years I've been there 42. You've been there 42 years all your life. You're baptized in that church by Reverend Marlin By Reverend Marlin. Yes, that's why I was baptized. I made profession of faith in the church. That was when I was there Yeah, you made profession of faith when I was there right on cool. That's right. That's right So I am a loyal member and your father your father went to that church before he died. Yeah, God bless his soul And your mom still goes to the church, yeah, and she's so she's still there She's just matter of fact, she's sung with me that a while back. That's right. And Freddie has a good voice He does have a good voice and Freddie often swings with things with the praise group sometimes when all the time Ready off I mean last week You often bring people from your home to the to the church to some some times, but I bring my friends too Yeah, like Gordon and CJ Gordon CJ cuz my best friend and they've been on the show before too Yeah, and CJ will be back on he told me CJ. I'll be back on some time and then you and CG Okay, so let me tell you about what else about the church. Okay, what else about the church? Okay, Jack DeWitt Yeah, Leandro Sager. Yeah, we all used to be on my dad's Softball team for the church. Yeah, that's right. And that's when we Reverend DeFrice was preaching That's right. Bob DeVries was the boss. He was a very nice man. His daughter Christy was just in church on Sunday She was visiting. Yeah. Yeah, did you? Yeah, I remember Chris. Yeah, Christy was in church. Wow. I wonder how What's his name is it Mark Matt Newton boom Yeah, how's he doing? That's doing good. That's doing right on. Thank you. Hi Matt. How you doing? Hi force Forcing Reggie come to church. Yeah, they're loyal to yeah, they're good. They're both elders right now. Yeah, they're awesome And Mark Cole's a deacon right now Mark's doing good. Yes. Yeah, and We got to give props out to forest and Reggie and we got your props that Nina Yeah, and I know I hope you were you were you really said I have a good voice lately and I I really Appreciate it if you can help me harmonize when I'm practicing in the morning that'd be greatly appreciated Hannah sings on the praise team and mom let's hope you get to feeling better because when we need you at church Mom hasn't been feeling well lately and we could use you in the choir mom. You never wants to be up there and sing Okay, well, she's gonna have to leave it to her son Freddie D. That's right. She'll leave to Freddie D and then Base to represent yes age. So let's see. What else about church? What else? Oh Volleyball we had a volleyball team. We used to be really good Wow. We used to play over off of Early one I think okay. I think you know what I'm talking about I don't know what you talk about anyway to play volleyball. I play volleyball too. That's pretty good Okay, I could spike the ball set the ball. Okay hit it up. Yeah do it all you know Good. All right. I think it's time to do a rap. Okay, go ahead do a rap about church. Okay We do a rap about church like this. You see I got my boy pastor Paul is good to me I got my mom and she's good to go. I hope she gets better Really though. What's up, man? Niner? You're the leader praise time Rocking on the mic like a nursery rhyme Gotta come up for the 90s through cuz see our see Really, dude, what's up? Leon? What's up forest? What's up? Reggie? You are the best Look at the Patriots say one again, but look out for the Eagles cuz I come in in One two three, you know, it's me the boy they call Freddie D from the 916 for Shiggy D High Canada high, Michigan 916 tell we free flakes every single day on the mic really though. Okay Peace out now I got to say a prayer Dear God heavenly father. Thank you that we were able to have lunch today. I enjoyed my pastor He is awesome. I think I am growing in the spirit of the Lord through the Living Stones Church family and Dick Dick Director Tory, I don't know how that word but whatever and God I just praise you and be with me Help me through my trials and tribulations Because God I've came a long way and I need the spirit in me so I can Relate to others and get out the good word and Lord, I love you so much I love my pastor. I love all my church friends and I love this show I was so glad we could do this show that the show was good and everything is doing good in Jesus name Amen. Amen one Love. Thank you Paul. All right, Fred