https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=bHIgABz_7q4

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show, a little different set today, Fred. How you doing? I don't know, but you're a remarkable person. Why do you say that, Fred? Because you've got all kinds of venues. You've got the camera that way, the camera this way, and then we've got the mic here like we're on antenna TV or something. An antenna TV. I don't know, man, but did you hear anything about Pepsi or Coke for me to do a commercial? Pepsi and Coke neither have approached me yet. Pepsi and Coke, he drinks a lot of your product. If you want an endorsement, Freddie is ready to go. I'll do a tune for you and it'll be good. It'll be all about Pepsi and Coke and probably sports and probably... I think Freddie should do the halftime show. Oh, wow. Next year? Pepsi halftime show, Super Bowl 2021. Oh, wait a minute. All-star game today. Oh, yeah? Basketball, NBA. Oh, I didn't know that. Yeah, NBA. What Kings are in? Okay, they have a few Kings, Lakers, Bulls, Denver Nuggets is one of the guys. Usually there's somebody from every team though, right? Okay, Durant. Okay, well, yeah, some of the big stars. But I don't know them all. Okay. Okay. But anyways, I've been doing pretty good and keeping busy. And I hope you guys are checking me out on America's Got Talent. I'm hoping I made the list because I had 600 views. That's not too bad. Hi, CJ. I hope you do well too because you're my brother. It'd be fun to see you and CJ on America's Got Talent. I don't know if he could do that because he's got so much work and everything. We can't really rehearse all the time. So if it is, it's going to be one of our other songs we did before so we know the song. So we don't have to practice it and practice it, you know. It'll just be momentarily total velocity of the second hand motion. Okay, okay. We've gone on for a couple minutes. Anything else? So America's Got Talent. I hope you get to feeling better, Mom. Is she coming to church today? She's thinking about it. Okay, okay. We'll see. Okay. If you're out of America's Got Talent, please select me because I think I'd be a good candidate for the show and I think I would get the crowd hype and that ain't no jive. All right, I'm going to do a rap, Paul, and then we'll close the show. Okay. Yo, it's a Pepsi. What you got next, G? Pepsi on the one, number one, one, two, three. Drink the Pepsi down like this, you see. It feels real refreshing to the taste. Rocking on the mic like my name was outer space. But I came up till the end was through and Jesus Christ is the number one dude. J-E-S-U-S. Like Philip says, it's the best. Paul preaches his way straight to the top just like kid and play. Step into the middle and step into the front. I think me and Paul might even go out to lunch. One love. One love. One love. That was good. That was good.