https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=qqysHbD23dE

 This is the first video of a new disposable又是 딱一本世界的船 The city's the man who does not want you, Council of the wicked, for a scandal and way of sinners, for to sit in the seat of mockers, but his delight is in the light of the Lord, and on his law he meditates day and night. He is like a tree planted by springs of water, which yields its fruit in season, and his leaf does not wither, every faith he does prosper, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away, therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. The Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked, but the way of the wicked shall perish. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked, but the way of the wicked shall perish. The Lord watches over the way of the wicked, but the way of the wicked shall perish. The blessed is the man who does not want you, Council of the wicked, for a scandal and way of sinners, for to sit in the seat of mockers, but his delight is in the light of the Lord, and on his law he meditates day and night. Day and night. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit in season, and his leaf does not wither, but his faith he does prosper, not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. The chiefs are now assembling. We have Christian Baxter in from right behind the... Can you hear me, Christian? Does this thing work? Yep. All right, I hear you too. Good. All right, this is the symbolic world, Fear of Missing Out FOMO live stream for Friday morning. I just got my virtual ticket to work this morning, so I just caught the father, the young Jordan Peterson taking over the Q&A. All by his lonesome. So all right, Christian, well, let's get your report. Someone said, I haven't checked your channel yet. You posted a video? What's been going on? Well, yeah, I posted last night just some brief reflections. And then I actually posted the Jordan Peterson conversation question with Father DeYoung. I just, it just went up like probably a few minutes ago. Doing a little bootlegging, huh? Yeah. It's not the whole conference. Come on. You'd have Jonathan Feigeau with a dog-headed warrior on you pretty soon. Maybe I should take it down. I will if it gets salty. No, I'm actually... A few views will be okay. If it goes viral, you have to take it down. That's sort of the rule of YouTube. You can kind of... Okay, okay. Yeah. Yeah, I'm outside the VIP lounge where Father DeYoung, Stephen DeYoung's in there with a little group of people having a follow-up debriefing there. That's kind of cool. Yeah, it's just been one of the things Jonathan said last night was that... And you've experienced this in other situations, Paul. He's like the important thing, one of the...that he wanted to get out of this is for people to just find people. And so that's been a joy to meet up and share some meals with people and that kind of thing. And I just got out of Neil DeGrad's artist talk and it was really good. So, okay. Well, let's start. You got there yesterday. You drove? No, I flew. Yeah. I flew in. Yeah, it's kind of like this. I came by myself. It's kind of been a pilgrimage. You know, I'm just finding my way, bumping into people and trying to embody and not be too stargaze and all that kind of thing. Yeah, yeah. There's definitely a strange effect that these screens have on us. I mean, and that's all the way back to the silver screen, which is a reflected light. And of course, these are lights passing through images. So there's a starstruck thing that happens even with YouTubers, which is a strange thing. Yeah. I was on a stream with Teo the other night, real late, getting ready for this. And he said, there's going to be people that recognize you here. And I had just only had that thought like a few days before that that that would actually be a possibility. And then it happened. Yeah, there were a few people that happened like that. So yeah, it's very interesting. So then you saw Grizz. We got the video of you seeing Grizz. Yeah, that was again like that moment. I'm, you know, the first person. It was like, maybe I'll see him out in the wild. And we were both we didn't get the parking pass. And so we were finding our way to this. I was just going out exploring and he had found this other place to park. And I look up and I said, he waved at me and I was like, I think that's Grizz. I just I turned the camera on. And so I mean, you couldn't recognize him. Well, I mean, it was, you know, that's the he's his videos real blurry sometimes, you know. I that yeah, that's the I had a thought and I think I just just left me. But well, it was it was noted on Twitter. His his complete betrayal of Team Denim. You know, Kail Zeldin immediately scored points. That's right. You know, you know, we've got a war to prosecute here and and and Grim shows up in Hackey. Definitely, you know, I could see with the timeline of him trying to find a seat may have been a little difficult before the. It's my it's my it's my high tech camera jester here. So. Oh, no. The. The you know, getting to experience people. People. I kind of I OK, here's what I was going to say. I kind of even even coming in and hopping on here is like I feel like I'm trying to balance. What does it mean to oh, am I trying to get attention or am I trying to represent people that I actually know on this channel now? I'm probably both, but I'm but I'm like, I feel like I have there's almost I do feel like it's a responsibility a little bit to you guys to this little community. And you didn't even run a grift. You're paying for this out of your pocket. Oh, that's true. I mean, he's doing his work in the VIP, but he better come on this live stream because he's got he's got he's got people. Yeah, he's he's and I think he has stuff he's been he's been documenting along the way. I think he's trying to create a a little mini doc that he's going to put out to I think that's part of that's going to be behind his his thing. I think that's part of what he's doing. So he hasn't been maybe as as like point and click. And that's the thing. I mean, I don't have I'm not in a place where I can I can I can sell this stuff. Yet, you've been doing a great job, Christian. You've been doing a great job with your channel. Yeah, it's it's a it's been a whirlwind. And again, that's that where I'm at in my life and my journey trying to find a place to approach it honestly and even feel whenever it feels like there's other motivations and just kind of acknowledge that. And so that I'm yeah that's that that's been that's I'm still that's even here thinking about talking to my wife about it on the way home. And I just hope I wasn't annoying people. You know, but but also I'm trying to like, you know, I spent a lot of money to come here and I'm trying to do you know and be a part of this and so you know. So talk to me about the physical surroundings. What what is the place that you're meeting in? It's so it's well I'm in it. I'm in like a I'll use the evangelical term. I'm in a family life center. And on the other side of it is a is a conference room on the other side of that wall. Is this a church? Is this a school? It's well there is a school around here so that may be part of it. I don't know. It's all it's kind of a conference center. And I think it's connected to the to the Greek Orthodox Cathedral here. I think it's connected. There's a there's a huge Greek population here and I think it's yeah there's a score board up here. Yeah, this is just where the what is the team mascot for Greek Orthodox Christian School right now? It looks like it's a drag a golden dragon. But oh, that's not the Trojans or anything like that. Yeah, somebody oh last night would have to be the Spartans. Last night someone said they were from Troy and it was like Troy, Tennessee or something and then Richard Rowling from the bag goes we're all from Troy. So yeah and then I guess if you saw the father to young video this morning that he was poking fun at the the Greek versus the Latin. Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's that's what we really want to do. We really want to inflame the the Greek versus Latin wars. Yeah, well, that's been so productive for you. Funny funny story about that. So he spoke first this morning and I was talking to Father Stephen from YouTube acclaim and wait no not Father Stephen. Father Eric. I was talking to Father Eric and he and we were talking about you know stories in the Old Testament and he said yeah. I come or I prefer the Latin making a little tongue in cheek joke and so like that was really fresh in me because the next 10 minutes later there was a joke about it. You know, so you know, if there were some hopefully charitable. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It is I mean it is a I mean for all intents and purposes it is an Orthodox conference platform. Yeah, yeah, except for Peterson everybody there is all the speakers are Orthodox. Yeah, yeah. And, and but as my thesis contends is you know, Martin Shaw had a very evangelical upbringing. And then, and then, and then the other guy Pajow had like you bring it all with you. You bring it all with you. I felt like you'll get a chance to listen to Jonathan's talk from last night. I was like wow he just did an excellent job sharing the gospel. And you know what I'm just like the evangelical neo Orthodox. Yeah, so that's that's that's playing out here hardcore. In terms of, I mean we know that we know the headliners the people on the thing but the more randos that are there. Yeah, I mean there's there's a lot of couples here. There's a lot of there, you know, there's a lot of it's very egalitarian as you know I think who's the guy from first things. That's MC in this thing. Here's. Yes, he kind of was making a joke about it the first night, you know, he was surprised by how many women were here and I think that's in contrast to, and like Peterson, you know, general type thing so I think that's, that's pretty interesting. That's on that level and then you know, a pretty wide range of ages there's young men but I would, I wouldn't say there's a lot of really young, young people here, but it's hard to tell it's hard it's getting harder for me to tell that. Well, it's a, it's a, I mean, attending one of these conferences costs a lot of money. That's yeah, yeah, you have travel, you have lodging, what was the price of a ticket at the conference. Yeah, you know, I think it was 400 just for the regular regular Yeah, so that was a that's a, that's a pretty steep, I mean that most that like the Chino conference I think was 165, or, and I think the Thunder Bay was about 160 170 so yeah. And I also say, it's a, it's a reserved group of people. Which is why we send Grizz. I gotta spice things up. What I what I mean by that is, you know, Peterson's walking around, like, amongst the people at different times, like before, and he, he has security with him. And I think people aren't just there. Yeah, because I think the nature of the of the crowd, like I think it's a, it's a more introspective group of people that are here not not the Peter Sonian slayer dragons and pick up your load type, you know. So, so how orthodox to the degree that you can, because you probably are more salient with, let's say, TLC folks. And so my question is, what's what how orthodox a conference is this in terms of its attendees. I would say it's again, I, this is just straight intuition. Yeah, yeah, that's that's all you got. I would say it's, it's probably pushing at least half. That would be my kind of guess. And which I, you know, it's a big, a big amount. If it, if not more because I'm with his again the whole platform is. And so it would basically be people that, you know, just listen to this, these guys on YouTube that maybe aren't. I don't know. I honestly don't know. But I would say. How about how people are dressed casual suits. You know, I would say the millennial hipster, you know, not. I'm probably one of the few people wearing my hat backwards. I don't know. It's. Yeah, tucked in shirt jeans and dress shoes and kind of a nice. Yeah, it's it's it's it's fairly casual. It's fairly casual, but some some women are wearing dresses. What's what's the weather like. It's a little you may know this term June gloom from I don't know, Southern California. It's actually a little cloudy today. And you get away with the T-shirt. I got a little warm with my flannel on yesterday was the day went on. It's nice. It's clear. Okay. Any estuary type breakout group. So now those of you in the high blind. What one done by who made it. Well, they don't have to tell you we sat down for some drinks with a group of people. And it was me, Grizz Nate, a friend of Nate's named Doug, who I think is a commenter. And then a guy named Paul, who was at Chino that I met. He's from Austin. His last name's French. I don't know. And we got into some. It was mainly between me and Paul about basically Paul was presenting an idea. I don't want to mischaracterize him, but that everyone just needs to get into orthodoxy. And I think I was I was wondering who was going to play those cards there. And so I, you know, as the least orthodox person in this, you know, as far as like I'm not attending, I kind of went with some of the arguments that I have that actually I feel like. Oh, yeah, yeah. It's it's definitely it's definitely Paul who is the one who came up. If you've seen the video on he came up and and he had a little had a little sesh with me. Yes. So I guess I'm representing your spirit because he decided to get down. You. Yeah, I had my own session and it was kind of an interesting feeling walking out from it was a little contentious. And we made up afterwards. And I was walking out with Nate Kyle and his pastors. Father Joe, he brought his priest with him. And and I kind of felt like, well, these are my people. I kind of know Nate from being in these spaces with him. And I felt a little known by him, not just I don't know how to explain it, but that was a really cool feeling. And it was kind of related to this this thing. So that's that's the only is there. So I'm I'm just going to I want to preface this by saying my questions are not criticisms. I am a I'm not worried about you. The rest of the listeners, because I am very interested in programming these conferences. And what I said, what I said to someone last night was or yesterday was often there's a liturgy to conferences that people sort of mindlessly inhabit. And they just slot in speakers and then a conference is a conference. But it doesn't have to be that way. I'm a deep person. And that way, because I like to mix things up. And a big part of what John Van Donk and I have been doing with Estuary and what Nate is working on, too, is we want to not just do conferences, but we want to play with the formats. Yeah. And and that's that's playing with a pretty deep liturgy here. So for my impression from the website has been it's been basically straightforward conference. Am I correct? Well, they haven't had a lot of direction for the off time. And I would say that that's where you guys are kind of from my from what I've kind of gathered is being more intentional with that. And so, yeah, there's actually a lot of open space, which can be good, but it's more organic than with an intention, I feel like, which but the show did put it in the open space. But there's not like an intention for cultivating conversation like intentional conversation. Yeah. Yeah. That was one of my criticisms of the art conference where actually increasingly when I look at conferences, I think the plenary sessions are optional and the between sessions are mandatory because that's what I think is the most important. I mean, I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. I think that's the most important thing. That's something you're going to remember from the conference. Yeah, it's memorable. Yeah, yeah. I know this person a little bit. I will say they did do this thing where, again, I'm blanking on the first things guy who's kind of in seeing his name. Paul Hears. Paul Hears. He did this icebreaker with, and he has this, I made a little video, I need to post it up. How modern or how ancient are you? And we did this, he did five questions and then he asked, you know, and you scored yourself and then you did the math and you came up with a number and it kind of shows. And so there's this graphic that walks you through. And so you can kind of maybe look at somebody's number. They haven't made a whole big deal about it, but then you can, oh, this person's kind of like this, but they haven't pushed it too hard. That was kind of a personality test-ish type thing. Dread personality test after I posted that video of the conversation of the colonizing that personality tests do. Yeah. So what has surprised you so far? What has been the biggest surprise so far? Yeah, I think that how, how Christian it is and then that Jordan Peterson was wearing a coat that said Jesus Christ on it. Really? I haven't seen pictures of the coat yet. Well, I took a picture of the back of four people's heads and it's on Twitter and Jonathan Joe reposted it this morning, but there's four, it's Martin Shaw. It's Jonathan Jordan Peterson and Richard Roar sitting watching the concert together. Richard Roar, Richard Rowland. Rowland. Yeah. Richard Roar is there? No, he would not be allowed. I don't think he would be allowed. The, and they, and there's this light shining on Peterson and on the back of his, it's this new, it's like Greek Orthodox icons on it. So apparently there's been some contention about if she, he should be wearing iconography, which I made the point. I'm like, well, if he's not a Christian, like he doesn't have a pastor that can rebuke that, you know, let him be. Yeah. So. No, Kayl, I haven't seen it yet. I haven't been on Twitter today yet. It's been, it's been busy. I listened to the Father Stephen DeYoung talk and, and watch Jordan Peterson take over the question and answer. Yeah. How'd you feel about that? I turned my camera on. Well, that's true. That's true. That's a good point. That's how I felt about it. I was like, I don't know what's about to happen. So that's, I just was like, this is, he, you know, he's talking to a Orthodox priest and it's happening, you know, and, and, and this is, I mean, he's been in a lot of other explicitly situations, like even back when he spoke at Liberty or, well, when he talks with, you know, Catholic institutions and stuff. So I don't know. I, it was, what did you think about that? That's something, because he was talking about bodily resurrection and, and I just feel like we're getting close to the event horizon with faith and that kind of thing in the conversations with him. Jordan Peterson's event horizon. I love it. I had a lot of thoughts actually about Stephen DeYoung's talk. I don't know. There is, I'll probably make a video, maybe not specifically about it, but about this dynamic of, of, part of what's happening right now in this space is we are working on some very deep issues beneath the issues that are present in the gospel. And one of those issues is realized versus anticipated eschatology. And what Stephen DeYoung... That's almost been a theme. That's almost been a theme when you go back and look at what Jonathan, even on that picture I took of Jordan Peterson and he's like, this is kind of my vision of the eschatology. Yep. Yep. Yep. And Father DeYoung's talk leans into realized eschatology. But if I would use those words with him, he would probably pull back because, but I think the Orthodox actually, a lot of the moves that the Orthodox make and Peterson's made, made the realized eschatology move a number of times. But then was interesting. So then when Peterson sort of asked his question, Peterson then moves into an anticipated eschatology, a future eschatology and the ontology of a future eschatology and the importance of a, of a, of a, of an ontological future eschatology for our psychological realization that I know I'm probably speaking words with a lot of people, but you understand. You've got some theological background, so. Yeah, I have a little, you know, it's bad this, but it is what it is. And the thing, the thing about that is I think the helpful part about it is how, how, how much you can contrast, you know, the two ideas. But, but then the part about what he, what he is always bringing that either psychological and even a scientific perspective to it, but taking it seriously. And what, and he kind of, you know, he drew the parallels between, you know, kind of embodying your ancestors. You know, is that, is that the resurrection of the body versus a more real, stay away from the L word, resurrection of the body? Yeah, not the L word, but the, I mean, there's, what's interesting is that this is going to be a little controversial. There's, if you listen to enough orthodoxy on some of these issues, there's basically an anticipation of theological liberalism in it. Because if you would take some of what, let's say someone like Nadia Bolz Weber says and put that next to Father De Young's talk, you're going to find some resonance there. And of course for a lot of, you know, there's a lot going on. Yeah, okay. So we do have a, figuring out the relationship between realized and anticipated is, because you can, you can sort of say, okay, well, we're not going to, we're going to dismiss the tension between realized and anticipated, but that's a very real tension experientially for all of us. My, you know, my wife yesterday was, I shouldn't tell stories about my wife, but she was going to work and she was like, if I won the lottery, would I go to work today? And then, and then she said about a situation at work. If I won the lottery, that situation that she kind of talks to me about almost every day when she gets home, I would just laugh at that situation. And I thought right in that moment, there's the, there's the drama between a, because obviously, say, a lottery winning means a release from the necessity of having to go to work. And now if I didn't have the necessity to work, how would I then handle the difficult things at work? And you can listen to Tim Keller and many other Protestant pastors make those kinds of references. We're getting pretty deep in the weeds. About vocation, about the, but I would, I would bounce that thought to the, one of the deepest thoughts that I took away from our conference was when Jonathan Peugeot talked about care. The first thing I thought about when you said that was how would I handle this if I won the lottery? Well, maybe a kind of a materialist, nihilistic answer would be like, well, screw them. But if we're human and we're trying to be goodly or godly, maybe we would, instead of never showing up with our FU money, we would go to work and put in our two weeks notice and we would try to make amends or something like that. You know, I'm not, I'm not saying that's how I am. I don't want to come across as pious, but that's what that makes me think of from that illustration or that real life situation. All right. All right, Christian, I have a very important thing I need to ask you to do. Oh, no. You have to show us what you're wearing. All right. I am wearing, I got my khakis on today. I actually, and I'm wearing my, I'm not wearing my funky shoes that, that, that Kale made fun of on Twitter the other day. He said, I don't know. He said, I don't know about all these. What's with all these millennials who wear like zip up hoodies and, and, and really interesting shoes and act like they don't. And I sent him a picture of what I basically wore the day before. I was like, for some of us, it's the basic pattern. Oh, we are losing the denim wars as we speak. I was wearing denim. I was wearing black denim last night and I'll wear, but no, no. Where I actually wear khakis today. That's so funny. So, Jordan Pearson was wearing denim. Yeah, there we go. There we go. What of the, what of the plenary sessions or breakout sessions are you, is the one that you're most anticipating? Well, I've been least exposed to Martin Shaw. I haven't taken the time to dig in. And I think because maybe a lot of his stuff other than his conversions not on the YouTubes, it's more in books. So that's going to be weakness for me. But the, I am interested to hear, hear from him on it, on it with that intention. And then, yeah, I think, I think that I'm interested in that. And there's also one that I'm interested in that's about taking this stuff and how it can be practical in your community or in your life. And so I think that's important. Let's see. I got distracted by the hive mind. It's all right. I mean, the denim, the denim wars are being fiercely fun in the hive mind right now. They're blowing it up. They're blowing it up. Yeah. I had a question in mind. Oh, you staying in a hotel, staying by yourself, sharing a room? Are you Airbnb? I know. I, you know, I spent a lot of money on this trip, but where I didn't spend a lot of money was where I was staying. Sleeping in your rental? No, I'm staying on a La Quinta in about 20 minutes, 20 minutes from here in La Quinta. One of those things have gone. But yeah. Anybody camping? I don't know of anybody camping. I know that Nate got a VRVO with his father, Joe, and I think, I think his friend Doug, I think they got a VRVO together. Nate's a chef. And so when he did the DC thing, he had me over to his Airbnb and he cooked a meal and it was wonderful. Yeah, that was, they talked about that, but they're doing a Tomeda with Paul tomorrow night. That was a part of it. Or I think that's what it's called. It's like a, it's almost like Toastmasters. It's a, it's a formal liturgy to a meal. If you look, if you listen to, I can't get the name again. Paul, I got his Paul here. Yeah, he does. He does. He's going to host one. He's hosting one part of a extended VIP package that I didn't get because when I signed up for this thing, I used my wrong email. And I didn't get any of the updates. And so the only thing I had was a picture I had taken of my actual ticket. So they were like adding things on, adding, you know, spend more money here. Yeah, yeah. Some of it was important. And but, but Jonathan actually, to that point, he kind of got, when he got up and shared last night to open it up that apparently I'd seen this in a Richard Rowland video, but that they'd been having some trouble getting things to work like with the release of the Snow White book. And I think some of the financial things behind all that. And he said that the virtual tickets actually helped them make it. Well, it could be, it could be. Oh, that's right. It's John here's not Paul here's your rights on. OK, so I got it all backwards. John, I got it. I got it backwards. I called him Paul. He's got an orthodox. I don't know the name of his brother, but I talked to John. I did a conversation with John. So he's he's he's done a good job. He's been funny. Yeah, he's he's a he's a he's a really cool guy. Any sighting of the the grim grizz suit? I haven't seen it yet. You know, so who knows? But this is this is this is the kind of things we're anticipating. I noted that strange theology on Twitter pointed out that the now iconic picture of Grim Grizz holding up his VIP pass. The CIA's shield is behind him. Oh, my gosh. Is it really? It is. You better watch your step, Christian. I know picture. You did take the picture. It's you're exposing you're exposing the truth. You know, you know what? If it's the whole the whole time, it's he's he's the three letter agency. That's right. Jacob, you know, Jacob's been looking around for it. And, you know, and here Grim Grizz, you know, he's got the cards, he's got the savings throws. I bet you it's been working for the CIA to infiltrate the TLC. And yeah, so I feel like I'll go ahead. Go ahead. So so besides so Grizz did an opening of his of his VIP bag. What else does what else has the VIP sort of gotten you? Well, that I was kind of skeptical for a little bit about the utility of the room back there. But when I came out and Father DeYoung was in there kind of with people having a I thought that that was a cool extra. And I was only in there for five minutes because I had to come get come talk to somebody else out there. But the the that was a real, I think, value to some people to have a sit down in a in a it's a small room in a in a intimate space with a. How many VIP tickets did they sell? Any any sense? I don't know. I know they they opened it up towards the they opened the extra ones up. So, you know, it's probably there's there's three or four rows of chairs on either side that are VIP in the front seats. And there's probably 30 30 chairs a row. So 200, you know, I think something like that. Maybe maybe a little less, maybe 150, something like that. So Faith, Faith Encouraged TV says, by the way, the design of Peterson's Coat Spark talk because the design is based on an order of monks called the schema monk. It's very exclusive and filled with meaning. That's that's that's what you if you just see something and you say, oh, that's cool. I want to put that on my coat, you know, for all of the anti politically correct dismissal of cultural appropriation, symbolic appropriation can be a sensitive thing with many different communities. Yeah, that's true. I haven't thought about it that way. Is he appropriating something? But maybe you could also look like it's an attempt at somebody to participate in something. Yep. Yep. It goes it goes both ways. And what and and I mean, it's just so funny because any situation can be critiqued by anybody for anything. And it's like, won't you just become a Christian? It's like, Mr. Dr. Peterson was like, well, he's here. He's wearing a jacket that says Jesus Christ. He takes scripture seriously. You know, I don't I don't know what and and we're not static. None of us are static. We are not static. We are moving through time towards a telos of our. Oh, you're so Protestant Christian. You're so Protestant. Why? I think it's a good thing, but keep going. Oh, no, that's it. I just think that that word. He's on a journey. You know, and this movement is, you know, this is I mean, just think back. You're not, you know, 2016, 2017, to where he is now sitting with Jonathan at this and supporting his friend. You know, like that's a beautiful journey. That's a beautiful story. Yeah. Bob, brother Bob says Peterson is a Christian. I believe that. Yeah, I don't I don't want to. If you got to go, if you got to go, I can eat something. If you got to go, I can let the hive mind in. So because nobody I sent a link to Nate, I sent a link. And if there are any other people that want from there that want to jump in and ask questions or give impressions, it's fine. Otherwise, I'll have to entertain the crowds all by myself. So any yeah. Any other last thoughts before you get something to eat? Well, is lunch is lunch a part of the conference or you got to go out to get something? I don't know. I don't know. There's a it's a walkable. Here's what I thought when I was coming in. Tarpon Springs looks like any other Panama City, Florida town when you're driving through the main thoroughfare. But when you turn off and go down into their main downtown district, it's a very walkable place where there's cafes and it's a it's you know, it's kind of an ordered and ordered versus disordered existence in the in the Old Town Park. You can go to little places by seeing some people with trays over here. So I don't know. I'm going to go check something down. All right. So Christian's gonna Christian's gonna go get some food and I'm going to play a little bit more dog bark. How's that sound? All right. And talk around if anybody wants to join. Share the link with them. And because I'm looking for people. All right. OK. Christian. Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, oh, uh, uh, uh, The city's the man who does not want you, Council of the wicked, for a standing way of scissors, or to sit in the seat of markers, but his delight is... All right, we have somebody else. We have Kale Zeldin procrastinating, avoiding the grading he must do. Big time, big time. I mean, I keep thinking that these stacks will grade themselves, but we'll see. There is no agency, Kale. You have to grade them all yourself. I'll try to tell the kids. There's no author, I suppose, is the version of that. No, no. So what are some of your thoughts, Kale? Well, I mean, it's funny. I really wanted to go, and I was going to try to get professional development bucks to make it happen. But because it's fall, I mean, exams end for us today, and then I've got to grade and write comments and everything. So it was just, it was really, sadly, a kind of no-go. But I hadn't thought that it would be like an ortho-bro fest, but that makes sense now that I, I mean, I don't know why I didn't think that. But that's always just funny to me, you know. And I'm always intrigued. You know, as a Roman Catholic, I'm always used to being the sort of avatar for like big, old, you know, ancient church guy stuff. And then, you know, the orthos come around and they kind of flex on that, too. So it's just kind of funny. So it makes me feel like an American Protestant, which I appreciate. No, I, when I saw the lineup, I knew it was going to, and I saw they, you know, this is, I suspected, I mean, when they talked about we'll have a secret special guest, we'll announce later. I probably have to give it to Jordan. I'm so, I'm so colonized by you. I thought it was going to be you. Oh, no. You really did. But I forget, you know, that the little corner is not as little as I think it is. And, you know, you've always made, you know, it's a vervecchian, you know, side. There's a you side. There's a pageau side. So I guess I forget because I don't, I don't do any of the pageau stuff really outside of your, you know, like when you bring them on. I got, and I love him and I listen to him, but I don't, it's not nearly as plugged in. I know there's like a big Facebook. Hey, Sam, how's it going, brother? Hey, Kevin. You know, I just I'm not as plugged into that stuff, honestly, as as other people are. So, yeah. So anyway, it was JVP. Yeah. Well, I, you know, when I saw that when I saw the lineup, I knew this was going to be I mean, there are corners to the corner. And most of us don't get the word on a lot of vervecchi events because vervecchi doesn't really host his own events. And this sort of, I mean, figuring out how different elements of the corner have sort of grown in terms of institutions and organization. So, of course, the vervecchi foundation is sort of the institutional organization of the vervecchi corner of the corner. Symbolic world, of course, of of Jonathan. And there have been some there have been some some twists on that. Ron and Luke, devices not connected, I see for you. I'll let you in once. I'd like to say here, Paul, I mean, I think, you know, if I'm not in the spirit of one upsmanship or anything like that, but, you know, you know, vervecchi is way more plugged into sort of the specifically academic world. So I think anything that he would do would sort of be, you know, people learn to lean really heavily on the institute or the platforms that have sort of promoted them or or not. But sort of they run into. Right. I'm wondering, hey, Luke, I'm wondering if, you know, so so, you know, so Jonathan is having his version and vervecchi is ultimately going to be much more academic oriented. What about yours, man? Let's do this. We've had Chino. We've had Vervecchi. I have a place, you know, I mean, I live in a campus. There's plenty of stuff here. I am thinking of redoing a kind of my first conference, which was at my sister's house where we had about a dozen people and all we did for two days was share meals and sit and talk for two days. And I'm thinking about doing another one of those. I'm not sure if it works anymore. What's that, Sam? I'm not sure if you can do it at that scale anymore. Really? You're crazy, man. You're crazy. You know, you just like talk behind your camera all day long. Like they're like they're hordes of us. More than dozens. Right. The dozens meme. There's more than a dozen. Well, maybe I'll just up the price and we'll only get the rich people there. How about that? It's up to the price of the rich people paying. Then you just count the rest. Well, I don't know. I like that. I like small. I mean, estuary is all about small. So I'm not saying load up to like 200, you know, plus, you know, over over 200. But I don't know. I just just just, you know, I I know I post my little picture of estuary every day on on Twitter. But like everybody can come see the estuary. And, you know, we have plenty of space here, especially in during breaks, especially during the summer break. Yeah. Somebody somebody asked how many showed up in Battleground. Well, that was true. I I the pastor asked me how many to expect this. I have 15 to 20 and we had about 40 ish. So it was it was it was quite a bit. I'm going to take salmon. Luke, I'll bring you back in now. Luke, you've what are some of your thoughts, Luke? Oh, man. Well, yeah, I wish there was more. My main thing would probably be the issue of scale. And it's actually what I've been talking about lately on my live streams because I just don't like I think if you're going to try to communicate things by a bunch of luminaries on stage that are understanding things through academic scholastic terms, you're you're you're for your for-funting propositionalism versus relational knowing. And I think relational knowing is fundamental and that requires smaller scale and time for people to know and talk with each other, which is why the TLC, as far as I'm concerned, is a PVK corner of the corner. I don't really think the Peugeot and Brevet keep rolling it very much because it's idea centric. Is that your baby, Sam? That's right. I don't know what your signal means, Cal. I mean, I hear you, Luke. You know, and I to me, you know, you know, I think of like a medieval city, you know, a medieval town, really. And, you know, you've got neighborhood and then you've got neighborhoods, you've got neighborhood churches and you've got the cathedral. And I think there are real times in which you have to orient toward the cathedral. Not not as a sort of a day to day thing, but it's a it's a kind of hierarchy is a sort of a natural hierarchy to that that I think people crave. You know, everybody wants to be on the mothership. You know, and so I think people crave those experiences, not just sort of. I don't know. I don't know. Maybe I'm I don't know. What is if I get your allergy to get your allergy to it. I do agree with you. And elbow bumping into and meeting people and talking to people on the side, even art for as you know, broadcast the academic as it was, it sounded like they had a lot of hanging out and stuff like that. And so I am I think that what what are the next biggest in PVK land? And I don't think that there is any sort of flagship concert or conference in the world. So Nate is working on something in the Pacific Northwest. And that's probably going to be at the Olympia CRC, because again, the I mean, a lot of this is networks. So the battleground estuary happened because I had to go to a meeting, and I know the path. I know the path to an Olympia. And so in the CRC, I have a network and she know was of course in there. But I mean, at least what Vindonk and I and I think made also what we want to do is not just have conferences. I think we want to play with the format and the implicit liturgies along the lines of what Luke was saying. Right. You need because you need those. I mean, I think, you know, I think a lot about liturgies and not just, you know, I know, like my Catholic liturgies, but I mean, just like liturgies of life, liturgies of being. I feel like we're really not good at those. And so therefore, if I were to if my two cents were worth anything from a planning standpoint would be like this is implied why I think Grimm talks about paintball for Jesus. Right. I mean, the idea is that, you know, it would be like it's like I remember the first time my wife threw a birthday party for one of my kids when they were little, little. And like my my sort of sense of it was like, well, you know, we'll have some Kool-Aid and we'll have some cake and some ice cream and like we'll hang out. And my wife was looking at me like, Kale, you can't just have little kids hang out. You need to give them something to do. And I'm like, you know, and of course, I now know exactly what she was talking about. Right. It's like it's why Thanksgiving in America has become. You know, you go over somewhere and you you you pre eat when you watch a football game and then you eat and you watch another football game. It's not because everybody's necessarily obsessed with the NFL, but it gives it's it's something around which you or coordinate. Right. Right. And and that's it. So I was I was really and again, I'm analyzing here. I'm not critiquing. I want people to understand that. And again, I'm not worried about you guys. I'm worried about just people listen because P.V. Key is on there, you know, criticizing the symbolic World Summit. I am not. But I, you know, whereas, you know, when I first talked to Peugeot and he says, I want to talk about the liturgy in your church, I said, our liturgy is a mess. So I'm curious about the liturgy of a conference because that's I think part of what's going on. So, Paul, I think this is this is right in line with what Vervecki and Jordan Hall were talking about recently. They were talking about this transjective ecumenical type relating and dialoguing about all that stuff. But you know who actually has boots on the ground evolving and developing this over the past five years are in the corner and only your corner of the corner. Yeah, I would say I mean, I don't think the other. Oh, oh, I was just going to say, Paul, you know, I think, you know, when people hear the word liturgy, you know, especially in church. In church conversations, you know, the easiest thing to see is, you know, look at the look at the mass or look at the, you know, the what are the what are the orthodox call it again? They call it the divine liturgy, the biology. Thank you. And, you know, it's like, yeah, those are clear and obvious. But I mean, you know, your your liturgies are liturgy. I mean, again, it might not be something that I'm accustomed to, but you know, exactly like if you if you've been a member of your church for a year, even, you know, you walk in, you know, exactly. And it's all about anticipating. OK, this is when we do this part is when we do the next part, you know. And so I don't know. I have a obviously I'm biased. I I think the Eucharist is the point, you know, personally. But but I think you're selling yourself short to suggest that you don't have a liturgy. No, I know. And I very much know I do. And so for James K. Smith from from Calvin, I mean, his whole book Desiring the Kingdom, that whole series of books, he makes the point that all of life is liturgy. And that was Peugeot's point about liturgies develop. And so if you actually want to form life, liturgy and formation are deeply tied. And there's a great essay, there's a great essay, I think is written by an Anglican vicar. You know, we're talking like 1930s, 40s maybe. And he talks about the liturgies of life. He talks about the liturgies of the home. And that was the first time as a Catholic. That was the first time that I really began to understand that liturgy was not just this sort of reserved thing that I do on Sundays or sometimes during the week at seven o'clock in the morning. That liturgies are sort of scripted play acting into the world and not fake. Right. Not. But look, I think this is what you were getting at with SendStock and this whole K-Fave business. I mean, people hear the word K-Fave and they immediately think you're being dismissive or being playful. But I think there's a deep truth into the way that we organize ourselves through play acting. And that's why I think some of that stuff that Peterson did with play and kids years ago now, three, four years back, is so, so important because when I hear folks here talk about breaking the fourth wall or participation in that I mean, really what we're talking about is like, how are we going to play well with each other? You know, we have that phrase to play well with one another. And I think that is exactly the crisis that we are facing is we don't know how to play well with each other. And to Luke's point, I think what you are sort of spearheading in this space is really, I mean, look at the three of us. You know, you're reformed, Unitarian, Unitarian, is that how I call it? And a Roman Catholic. Like, what? Like, you know, and here we are, we're learning, you know, there's a sort of a participatory attitude toward what you're doing here that I think is vital. And maybe that's what Luke is, you know, objecting to in this sort of this scaled up version that's impossible to control. I don't know. No, I think that's right. And the fact that I said, I'm sorry, I have I have to publicly apologize to Sam about. Lapsed. Sam has suffered more than I have for the faith. I will I will completely I will completely own that. Sam, you have suffered. And not caved. I never caved. Sam has not caved. I gave every day, Sam. I don't know what you're talking about. Until until I get to finally win the battle and Sam. Luke, your Billy Crudup energy is killing me today, man. It's like it's like Russell Russell from Almost Famous. I love it. It's like you're a golden god today, I guess, you know. I don't know who that is. Oh, come on. It's like one of the best. OK, almost famous. You were you were channeling Russell the lead. I I don't know. I have this weird thing. My wife doesn't know what it is. Number one, people comment on my looks all the time and everyone thinks I look like someone famous. I don't know what that is. Well, you do have sort of a Hollywood disheveled quality to you. It's not. Nathan, what say you? Hey, I just wanted to maybe give a little bit of. A little bit of pushback on Luke's comment. Sorry, hold on. I can hear myself on YouTube. That that Paul's corner is the only corner who's facilitating connections. You know, I basically went through the pageo pipeline and took seriously pageos kind of go to church message. And so I think a lot of us who converted, you know, from Peterson to PBK to pageo kind of exited more online interactions and started interacting more at our local. So that's all I want to say. Yeah, no, I'm talking I'm talking about exclusively the online community. Gotcha. Yeah. Which is like a different thing, because like Sam and I have never met in real life. And I don't know, I like Sam's maybe one of my closest friends. I don't know. We're like we know each other really well. That's true. That's true. I don't know the way you dress or the way you look though, but well, all sorts of people or your facial hair grooming or any of those sorts of choices, but I appreciate it. Well, it was funny because I at the so up in battleground, I was talking to the pastor of the church there. And part of what's going on in the CRC right now is that in this whole fight over same sex marriage, there is a group from really the affirming side who wanted to because they lost so badly at the last two synods. They they want they started a group called Better Together that was basically what we're not affirming. We just don't want the family to split up. And so we want local option and basically all of these things. And they went to the Lilly Foundation got a one point to one at one point three million dollar grant from the Lilly Foundation. And and then when a bunch of people heard that they're like, gosh, VanderKlay, you're doing that. They got nothing going. You're doing more than them. Why don't you go to Lilly and get a one plus million dollar grant? So I mentioned that to then I mentioned that to Vindak. I said, yeah, you know, we could probably we could probably get a million dollars for estuary. But then I said to him, would that kill it? And and so I think, Luke, you're you're probably more sensitive than most about. This is this is something that is helpful to I know that I've been criticized for this a lot, but helpful to keep it small and keep it slow and keep it organic because money does something to things. So, OK, so, Luke, I'm going to go here. Sorry. So that movie that I just talked about, Almost Famous, have you seen it or no? It's been a long time. I've heard movies I've watched before. My mind was opened. Paul, Paul, have you seen it? Yes, I have seen it. OK, so there's a crucial moment at toward the end of the film in which Jimmy Fallon is this sort of slick producer. And he comes into this sort of up and coming band and up at this time, they've been taking this bus from small town, a small town, a small town of the kind of things. And Jimmy Fallon's character comes in and says, guys, guys, you know, look, you know, you need to go big. This is your moment. You know, ditch the bus. I'm going to I'm going to, you know, we're going to put you in big stadiums. I've got airplanes. I've got, you know, the whole bit. Right. So that so that is right at the cusp. And of course, every band and this is I think really is scaled to what we're talking about here. Every band has to sort of hit that moment. OK, like we can hit the status rocket that we have been. I mean, since I've been playing in my garage at the age of 12, this is the moment. This is the moment. But am I going to sell out? Right. And I think that that, you know, look, I I noticed today Paul in the hive mind like all this stuff about grip, grip, grip, grip, grip. Right. And, you know, and I look, this is something that I yeah, they're right. Right. Exactly. You know, this is something. Yeah, I know. It's remarkable. This is something that I've been I think about all the time, as you know, Paul, right. Just like, you know, the dangers of falling into the territory of grip. And I and I just I think it's a it's proper to be mindful of that sort of thing. But I feel like in this, especially this side of the little corner, we get really, really sensitive about the sort of the turning it into the grip. And I just again, I'm not saying I don't know where the line is myself, but I think it's OK to play with that line a little bit. It's OK to be successful. Right. You know, Paul, you and I had a personal conversation about being poor for Jesus. Right. And the thing that haunts me all the time is that, you know, I have like you, I have chosen meaning versus money. And I just wonder if I've been way too radical about that, you know, about that line. And so and so I just I like Peugeot. And I and I like I don't think people will say that Peterson is sold out because of the daily wireless stuff. I just don't really think that's true. I think that I think it's actually kind of security more than gripped. And so what is the thing? Because I think the three of us would all agree that like what we are doing, what you're doing, Paul, and what I'm participating in here with Luke and everybody is a good thing. Period. You know, full stop. It's a good thing. And so good things are meant to be shared. Right. And so how can we best share it that preserves its genius like its spirit? But but doesn't sort of keep under a bushel. But I think that's fundamentally the problem of mammon is that when you want to keep it in control and capture the spirit, it turns you take God and you turn into mammon, I think almost every time. And the spirit moves where it will. I just that's that's that's always why I've been so I just joke with Paul on our way to Thunder Bay. So remember, you were talking about the Israel trip and you were saying Peugeot was going over there and well, I don't know. And and I was like, yeah, Paul, just go over there. Real just get behind me. Get the status. Get the money. There is there is, though. I mean, part of what I think, but I think Grizz does really well is that he inverts this stuff. I mean, the goalpost grift where I mean, it's he is he is the televangelist of the corner in the funniest way. And he can do it because his channel is small and do it because there are days his channel is unwatchable. Sorry, Grizz. Sometimes your channel is unwatchable. But it's unwatchable the same way the Freddie and Paul show is if he was tempted like Jesus in the desert. If if anyone were truly tempted with that, I mean, that's the thing. I just I don't I will give you all this. That's always the temptation of scale and power and money. And it's hard to get a man to see something if his salary depends upon him not seeing it. Amen. Really hard. But then but then I mean, but the church works in this world. I mean, you know, but not of it. I know. I know. But, you know, look again as the sort of the the the the local Roman Catholic here, it's like, you know, it's the absolute mess of of of the hierarchy. Right. I mean, it's it's people I know people will prattle on about, you know, the donation of Constantine and and you know, the church has been wrong since then. And, you know, I get what they're saying. Look, Dante himself explicitly talked about that. But but like you need to actually have a building and you need to have a priest and you need to have all the things. And so as soon as you start doing that, you know, as soon as you are, you know, what is the line? You know, the bird worries not about, you know, sorry, I see I just out of myself as a bad scripture guy. But, you know, you already said you're a Catholic. Yeah. So, you know, but the it's like you can study this dynamic in in the formation of the bird worries not. But you see dead birds every day. Right. So so so if you think, you know, St. Francis of Assisi is the is the is the sort of the model for this. And if you've ever read, you know, kind of a write up on this, you know, that like he wasn't he wasn't trying to establish an order. Right. The Franciscans actually kick him out of the Franciscans at one point toward the end of his life because he was too radical. He was too much. It was too much Francis. Right. And and so I believe that the tension is not solvable. You know, this tension that we're talking about and it's very tempting to be a purist. Believe me, I have in my own life been very tempted to sort of go in that direction. But I think there's there's a there's a maybe for me, I'm speaking here. Maybe there's a cowardice that hides behind pure seeming. It's it also I think you're exactly right, Cale. And I've thought about this a ton and I continue to wrestle with it regularly. Yeah. And I think I've been doing a lot of thinking about a lot of opponent processings. And I've been rereading both. What you went silent. Sorry, I hit that I hit the button on my mic. This is this is a great book. Unfortunately, I when I mentioned it in my channel a couple of years ago, I really drained the used book market of it. So now you got to pay like eight hundred dollars for a used copy of this book. So Capitalism at Work Boys and Girls, maybe they'll put it maybe they'll put it on Kindle. I've been rereading. I've been reading that and I've been rereading Carlos Iry's reformation. Yeah, which is a which is a terrific book to it. It's really necessary reading. I mean, for all of us, it really, really is. Yeah. And, you know, and so I was thinking about sort of the opponent processing between that happens with the Protestant Reformation and and sort of what's happening right now is there's sort of a swing back to a lot of the pre reformation things that the need to embody the need to instantiate the Neo sacramentalism. And so we because we as human beings can't get these things right. That's right. And and when you listen to Jesus, the last week I just preached on, you know, when Jesus so there's the story of the rich young man. So you have women and children. And children, if you go back to last week's rough draft for Sunday, maybe I'll post the full sermon on my channel, although the sound is never good. And my real sermons are contextual. You can always see them on the church channel. The link to the church channel is always below. But the Jesus when you know, Jesus is just blowing their minds in terms of this money question. Right. No. And but then he flips around the other way and he flips around the other way. He keeps just keeps flipping it around. And that's similar to the realized versus anticipated eschatology questions and that there are so many of these issues. And I think part of what Jesus does again and again is basically say in this era, in this dispensation, you cannot solve these issues. Right. And God and mammon is one of them. Now you can if you go all the way to one side. But what what happens when you go to all the way to one side, like with St. Francis, you sort of wind up flipping around. Because the Dow. Yeah, I think it's just it's just this nature of this reality right now. And it's it just keeps scaling down. So this is an intimation. This is an intimation of of our in inborn desire for heaven. Right. Heaven is the is the cessation of tension. And this is what peace is. Right. Peace is the sort of being freed from the contingencies of having to stay atop the surfboard. Right. It's like it's like here I am. I am here like, you know, we know we all have a taste for that, that that must simply point to the beyond. Right. Because there is no rest here. Right. There is no abiding city, etc. It's like so. So I think to attempt to solve the problem rather than to balance the problem is, I think, the heart of much skullduggery in the world. Well, everyone has to live with the problem. That's what these problems create. We all have to live with them. And Luke lives with it in terms of his family, because you cannot be a father of family and completely avoid the problem. And so as much as Luke would love to live stream all day, every day, God has given him a wife that that is, you know, a thorn in Luke's side sometimes and helps him be a good father, which is exactly what she should be doing. But yet Luke is also building into those children. You know, Luke's insight of, you know, the flowers of the field and the birds of the air. They are there. We'll see. It's an experiment how it is with that's my kids are basically raised on the line of the Dow, my wife of like order and structure and me of just complete chaos and absurdity and nonsense. And they're just right in the middle there. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And as they grow, they will, you know, they'll they'll you'll just watch it. And so that's why balance is sort of a metaphor that we try to use. But it doesn't really balance either. Well, right. Right. Grip is probably I've always as soon as I heard. Vervecki say that on video from from Chino. I think that's where he first started carting that out. At least that's where I heard it first from him. Like that makes so much sense to me because if you know anything with a handle, you know, it's like every time you swing the thing, every time you get a hold of the thing, you're like you're you're you're finding it like for balance for different shots for different moves, whether it's a hammer or golf club or a spade or whatever it is. It's like you're really always adjusting for that that moment. And it's it's it's it's active. It's not you're never done. Like you never grab the club. Finally, I grabbed the club the right time and it's a no. Every time you have to kind of keep redoing that. Yeah, that's that. That's that beautiful personal knowing because it is relative and contextual to every situation, but not arbitrary. Right. Right. Right. Right. That's that's exactly right. And Jesus, you know, the reason Tom Holland says Jesus is the greatest short storyteller ever, you know, in the world, you know, even when he gets out, you know, give the Caesar what it sees just give to God and what's God. I mean, that's just like you can't get to the bottom. That's right. That's right. Of that saying. Because it's because it's it's what is that what is that that concept in physics where it like as soon as you try to like pin down a thing, it moves Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. Yeah, you know, it's like I think there's I think that's embedded in these sort of parabolic teachings of Jesus. It's like you think, OK, that's what I need to care. Right. You know, like go and sell everything you own. Right. And follow me. It's like, OK, that's what I have to do. And then you go and do that and you screw it all up. Right. Because you forgot all the 920 thing other things you have to kind of keep in some kind of balance. And I think we want to isolate it, you know, pin it down and make that the thing and then everything will fall from it. And it's like it doesn't really work that way. Yeah. You know, and and the, you know, Dr. Jim says Father Jim, sorry, Dr. Jim says capitalism is the enchantment of our age. And the truth is that when you make decisions with respect to this, these decisions will bind you. So, you know, I talked to my children about because my children are now at the age where they're just starting getting into careers. And I tell them, I say there is a relationship between meaning and money when you get into when you get into a vocation. There are some vocations that are deeply meaningful and the money will be small. And there are other vocations that are deeply lucrative and the meaning will be small. Now, sometimes you get both. And that's really wonderful when you do. But there there are these tradeoffs. And and the thing is, I watch it with people, too. What Jesus says about money is true. Yeah. And Paul, I don't. So this isn't behind your paywall. So I don't know if we can talk about that guy you spoke to, who's the successful businessman consultant. In England, whatever. Yes. No, that's not behind the paywall. It's not anymore. OK, no. So this is but this is like almost proving the point of what I would call technological babble in the closed circle of systems with money in regards to everything. He is hired as a consultant to come in because all the people that are in the system can't see outside of it. And they just keep trying the same things over and over and over in this binary way because they're they've made themselves into machines and they can't figure out why it's not working. And then he comes in from the outside and he's like, well, this is why it's not working. Dumb, dumbs like this is obvious. But that's that you can't be closed in that closed circle. This is why religion and conversations and everything has to be constantly dynamic. This is my beef with confessionalism. So, so, Luke, what's interesting to me about this is that, you know, so I, as you know, I teach for a living and, you know, for years I was an academic administrator. And then and then and now I'm back into teaching full time. Right. And like I have like loads and loads of experience with this stuff. Right. And, you know, I can go online and talk to other people about like what I know as a teacher and all that. And I have genuine wisdom and insight into these sorts of things. But I guarantee you that I cannot go up into my faculty meeting here and say the things that I know to my colleagues because they're like, Kale, who the heck do you think you are? Like, I see you like change into your golf clothes to go coach the team. Like, who do you think you are? Right. And so there's this weird dynamic where I'm I would be, I think, somewhat of a commodity to another outside place about the insights that I might bring to the classroom. But my fellow colleagues would just be like, yeah, shut up, dude. We know you. Well, and and they're part of I mean, part of why the church has been the church has been wrestling with these issues. Always all the way back to Ananias and Sapphira all the way back to Jesus. It's so funny that we're talking about money and Chad just keeps dropping the super chats. Well played, Chad. Well played. This is to Chad's point, though, the reason AA works and why it hasn't been beholden to systems and manipulation is because it is precluded money. Yes. Yes. That's what it but it's also go ahead, Kale. It works from the money of others. I was just gonna say, it's like it's not doesn't it doesn't not need money. It just it's not it's not sourcing it in the way that other institutions source their money. Right. So you're saying it's parasitic, but it would still work. No, not parasitic. No, no, no, no, no. Not parasitic. It's just it's gift. It's the spirit of gift. It lives like the birds of the field, but birds die every day. Right. It would work in Sub-Saharan Africa. That's the reality. That's the reality of this. Now, when I say dispensation, it doesn't mean I'm a dispensationalist. The word is older than you guys know this. But you know, I would I say that word. I know as a preacher, when you use words, you learn you don't just have to sort of live in this technical world. You have to live in the real world where everybody else uses language. Don't lie. We can see the Left Behind series behind you. The ducks eat bread. Contributions, not donations. Okay, famous big business. So, yeah, yeah. So I want to get back to the conference a little bit. The impressions from you guys from I did buy I did buy the virtual thing basically because it was. How can I not know what they're talking about and run this channel? So for me, it was like, OK, I'm going to have to I'm going to have to see what's going on there because I at first I was like, you know, I again, I have limited amount of time I can actually leave Living Stones, especially Sundays. And I know I couldn't do this conference and be back on a Sunday. But here's one thing, Paul. So I don't know if you saw this yet. I'm assuming you have. But like Jordan Peterson retweeted or whatever Paul Antleitner who posed who posted a little thing from Joe Rogan talking about how like essentially the world needs Jesus now. And we're in dire states and and then George said he's going to be back. Yeah, like he's going to be going back on Rogan soon where I'm assuming they're going to be talking pretty explicitly about religion and Jesus. It's going to be interesting. So I don't think Joe Rogan understands the second coming, but that's all right. Anyhow, he's like me. Jesus anticipated versus right. Right. We're back to that one. Right. Totally. So I don't know. In light of all this, I mean, I don't I didn't buy access to it. I'll see stuff when they come when it comes out or whatever. I wish it weren't quite so ortho bro. He has Kale said because I don't know. I just I think orthodox. You are Luke. You join the Orthodox Church and you get a rash from orthodoxy. So you, Luke, I don't know. It's not even that it's the East. I think there's a lot of people who are the leaders that cause the Eastern right evangelicals. Yeah. The people that convert to orthodoxy and want to just convert everyone to the new exclusivist religion, the right side of history, which isn't what orthodoxy does. That's what evangelicalism does. The Easter. Right. No. What did you say? Eastern right. Eastern right. Evangelical. Yeah. My goodness. Look, here's because Luke, you and I both know, you know, and I know this. I know that you're a conservative and treads don't understand is that we're all Americans and and we absolutely kid ourselves to suggest that we're not we haven't been opponent processed into we're all radical Protestants. Every modern the modern world, the modern democratic world is Protestant. Right. So all this sort of grandstanding that I see from ortho bros and Catholic trads, you know, it's just it's it's it's just low res and and it's, you know, cope or whatever, whatever, whatever sort of sneer I can drum up. I'm not trying to be a jerk about this either. You know, this is why maybe Paul, this is why finding your channel all the way back in the day when I did was such a breath of fresh air for me because I was very, very close to going full bore rad trad like I'm sick of all the MFers, you know, and and and and I talked myself off the brink of it because I realized it was it was in fact a kind of a lark too far. And again, this is coming from somebody who actually believes in larping right so and I really mean that on ironically I you know it's how we have it's how we live and move and have our being. And, and, and, but, but it's, it's this shrinking of the world, right that that you see, again, losing using your phrase Lucas sort of evangelical Catholics and evangelical orthodox is just sort of this strange shrinking of things it's like well it's just these 10 things. And if we ever just did these 10 things everything would be just fine. It's like, come on, how old are you. You know, I'm 51 now like it's like I stop it, just stop it. Well, but all of that we spoke about this explicitly me and Mitch this morning and the live stream that I did is like the, but I think that tension that exclusivist religion of the right side of history is the tension that has brought us to where we are, because I think there was There was salvation for the Jews, which was for the world in Israel. And in Christ I think there's the particular exclusive Jesus which is for the world for the person and for the individual which we are living out here in these tensions in the West, and I think. I don't know because like it does matter it a lot of it comes down to me I think Jordan Peterson this whole conversation the Jordan Hall of her vacay conversation TLC. Is only here we're having this Kairos moment because of the meaning crisis because of the nihilism of the West, because the whole world has been Protestantized right. Yeah, again, and it's well P sort of way and and I think that's exactly right and you know the way that I make peace out of it. For me personally, and I may have shared this with you Paul I'm not sure but is that I understand this place to be purely liminal like this is not a T Los, you know this is this is this is this is the what we're doing even like just literally right now physically. Right now, versus what we're doing with TLC, and what we're doing YouTube is it it's it's liminal it's it's something has risen up that affords us an opportunity to create what it was the flotillas and life wraps and whatnot. But this is not where this is not our destiny, our destiny is not YouTube our destiny is not, you know, whatever I can do in the online space destiny is, you know, meet space. But for whatever reason, we were, this is the dojo. Well, right. This is the, this is the. This is the virtual Silk Road. Because it's where it's allowing people, what does everyone say who's in your corner the TLC, I had no place where I could talk about these conversations. Right. And it's also as sure I keep telling as choice church adjacent I'm not starting a new church. I am not starting a new church we have plenty of churches okay you have orthodoxy Catholicism you got how many kinds of Protestantism, I'm not starting a new church. But I do want to help people that's, that's, it's American it's mere Christianity hallway. I do want to help people find a room. I mean that's that's been my goal all along. Yeah, I like it I think that's exactly right and so for me, you know, I can, you know, waddle on up to mass on Sundays, and I'm not being killed every Sunday. And I used to get killed going on Sundays, right. Oh, say more about that. Because I'm there, and I'm looking around me, and I'm listening to the homily and I'm watching a kind of meh liturgy. And I just I just know, I just know that it. I know that it can be so much better right but then when I when I so. So then you start like well this is this is terrible and this is terrible this is terrible this whole thing everybody sucks about it you know you sort of play that game. And Chester to has helped me in that regard. But specifically like these kind of conversations and listening to Paul like on the regular all the time has meant has meant that when I go to mass on Sundays, you know, and this might sound cheesy and hokey but I can focus on Jesus, I can focus on me getting right with And ultimately doing all that because I've got my two, you know, got my, my three kids next to me and my wife is next to me and we're mass and like, I don't need to get out of this liturgy, every last little drip and drop that will satisfy my monkey brain because y'all know I'm thinking all the time like you can't shut this thing up I wish I could but I can't. And so, like that's why I like Twitter, you know, and like sometimes I do stupid things on Twitter but oftentimes I'm just like, just get to get out of it's here and I need to get it out I need to get it out I need to get it out so it's liturgical for me. I swear I bet you could like look at my Twitter feed and know like okay Kels up early. So he's like, he's like sending out like 30 tweets in a row because he woke up and he's got 50 things on his brain, and he got it out and so now I can go and approach my day I can do all this sort of stuff. And so when I go to mass, I don't need it to be perfect. I just need to be good enough. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I think you know so then I think about the medieval village. And, and I think about many churches and you know what am I, I love all my videos but I love some of them more. I have a video about sophisticated Christians and simple Christians, and you know, the Lord has blessed cursed us with the jobs we have the brains we have the temperaments we have all the things that we have. And I do think I think you really nailed it kale this is a liminal space and this is, this is this is a big cope for a whole bunch of us to help us stomach. What we have to stomach for the for the good of the world. And so it's a gift from God for us to talk about our stuff I mean, and, and what is, you know what is what to me smells like the Holy Spirit, you know Luke you're, you're, you're morning live streams have been just tremendous. You've, I mean everybody's known you've been a, you know, big presence here but at least for now in this season these morning live streams you've sort of found your platform. That's it's almost exactly what kale does I think I might stop all YouTube for lent to so, but I'm a little late for that. Mine hasn't started orthodox lent hasn't started him a delay they're delayed from the Western or delayed. Weeks. Yeah, yeah, it doesn't match up. You know, I will miss you but that's okay. So, but yeah that's that's exactly what I do is like I come in. I just like don't open it up for a while and I just talked to my, like, in this frantic almost neurotic thing for like a half hour to myself looking at comments and then I let people in and it's a. I don't know but that's, I am the same kind of person like I need that like this is where this is what my buddy Cal says all the time to just like what else is there to think about than theology, like what else, what else do you think about. Like this is all I think about all day long, and it's, and my family grounds me my wife grounds me she's like okay let's she tries to listen to me for a while until her eyes glaze over, and she says let's get practical. But it's a, I love it. I don't know I absolutely love it it's where I feel. This is my flow state, you know, navigating patterns. Yeah, navigating patterns. Yes, for me, for me, like that has always been my classroom, you know that that it's it's funny because it's a very structured it's a very structured place right is CW at your door Luke. I hope not. No, I don't think so. Okay, go ahead. I'm sorry, Cal keep going. No, just like, you know, so for me that flow state has been a very interesting place for me, right, that that. It's interesting because it's such a scripted place in some senses right. But then always comes in. But yeah, no I think that's right Luke it's a flow state experience for me, like that's what draws me into it, but do you find that then that makes your day like you okay I can like do my day now is that how you feel. Yeah, but I get it out. I mean I have normal, because I'm like that like I'm crazy or like Joe Rogan will say if I didn't work out every day I'd be a psychopath. I'm kind of the same way like I got to work out. I got to do this kind of stuff because I have. I don't know I'm like 98th percentile enthusiasm or something on the big five. Like it's just, it's a lot. So, well and kale your, your poetry on Twitter. I think that's a blessing for Twitter, because Twitter can be inane insanity, and to just drop some, you know someone who knows that world, and to just drop a little bit of poetry on Twitter. And I think in it for me, you know, Luke it's the same way people say you know are you gonna, are you gonna quit YouTube it's like, no, I'm doing therapy I don't hire a therapist, I've got all of you listening for free. Yeah, some of you pay to listen. Did you see, so Abigail Shrier was back on Rogan and they were because her new book is like the problem with therapy. Yeah, because she's saying essentially therapy a lot of modern therapy is just you hyper focusing on yourself and your problems constantly and that's not good. Yeah, for you and so, but this is different like this is why the TLC thing is different. I go on there, and I talked for a while. But then I try to open it and have hospitality and I shut up and I talked to other people and I asked them what they think and I don't always just try to insist on my own points and proving everyone wrong at every point I disagree with them. Like that's what TLC is good at. You know, it's creating a space for people to think about what they think and then maybe be honest and actually figure out what they think so that they can believe well which is when they act accordingly. So if you guys had to do a conference to get back to the title of the grift here. If you guys had to do a conference, what would you like to do? Who would you like to have there? What would be sort of your dream? See and that's part of so to sort of pitch Nate when you know when I was sort of dreaming this up with Vendonk the point I made was I didn't want. I didn't want this to be estuary Inc. I want to see people have a vision for a conference and pursue it so like Nate's conference. That's going to be that's going to be very Nate, and it'll be very grail country. And so as the smaller channels sort of develop I want to see I want to see a gris conference and I want to see a grail country conference. I don't see a kale conference. I'm since I don't know that Luke can ever have a conference. I think it's just you ordered. We have a very gifted group up here, but I know I've been waiting, you know, and I know that I've been waiting for the the Minnesota the estuary of Minnesota to sort of, you know, reveal itself to the world. Amazing group and Paul's never going to be with us now on his status rocket after the Jordan Peterson retweet. He's just, you know, Paul won't join our lowly group down here. Don't get you very far. Trust me. I know this. So no, I mean we are we are we're doing your slow ferment Paul where we'll have one eventually, but it'll be very our style. You know, it's not going to probably be big and fancy. Big and fancy. They'll probably intentionally not have big names. I don't know. I mean, for me, I, you know, I would want to run a I part of me wants to be. It might sound silly but practical. So therefore I want to get around get together and read old books together. Right. And, and, and so it's like kind of a defense against the dark arts conference. But I don't know. I mean, can I could you get a bunch of could you get 20 people, you know, together for several days and read the Iliad? You see what I mean? You see that cool. Yeah, no, you know, you'd have to it have to be small. It have to be small. I mean, I've done it like we've, we've, I've done a conference where I've had, you know, 15 teachers and then we've come and we've read like Augustine's confessions together. Right. Yeah. And like, it's amazing to read like one book, just one book go, you know, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, all together. And it's a it's a tremendous experience. And so for me, you know, the hope, of course, is not to sort of cover it all, but to give to generate a kind of shared experience in which you could say, okay, like, there are things here that I need. You know, as as as verveky has quipped, you know, wisdom is not optional. All right, well, then what do we do about it? Yeah. So and I think too often in these sort of thinky talky spaces, you know, the wisdom tends to get translated as philosophy or theology. And, and I, you know, I love that stuff, too. But I'm a lit professor, you know, that's what I do. And so I think that poetry, and I mean, poetry, not just lyric poetry, but poetry, broadly understood and, you know, is is absolutely essential. And I do feel like we are cut off from that. Yeah, that's what I would want my conference to sort of my dream to be about. All right. Well, it's the hive mind is resounding that we have a new we have a new, new guy. So Stephen, what say you? This is a very surreal moment for me. Because I followed the Peterson Peugeot pipeline. Discovered your videos on JP back in 1617. And obviously never interacted online with anybody. But the reason why my story is a little more unique is my godfather is Richard Rowland. That's funny. So, mind you, being a single guy. Five years ago. Hear about orthodoxy do the whole orthodoxy conversion thing. Richard had been gone to the same parish with his family. And the way our relationship started is he caught me reading Matthew Peugeot's Language of Creation book. And that's how our friendship started. Wonderful. And you know, what's really funny is I knew him for years. And just as soon because he had five kids and was established and taller, little more gray, have more gray now. He was older than me. I am six years older than my godfather. But the. It's just a unique experience I had the other day because it's weird following all you online. Hearing conversations with Jordan Peterson, John Peugeot. I have this weird. I'm a nobody. But I have this weird insight looking through my godfather into the hierarchy. So. Unlike other people who are on this online sphere that have formed relationships online. They don't have what Paul talks about. They don't have access to the elites in the. In the specter, which I'm in this weird group where I'm a nobody, but also have this weird. You know, access to the goings on, but it's just surreal. But on your note, Kale, about reading good books. Richard is a lovely, lovely human being. I can't tell you how person he is. And it's just. So the online thing is weird because of the lack of intimacy. Yeah. But when you have a guy like Richard that does the YouTube things. But on Friday nights, he's reading Dante with a small group of people. Yeah. Yeah. You know. And he had I don't know how he we joked that he has 72 hours of the day. Because he has a full time job in five kids and is doing a deaconate program and his research. You know, I don't I don't get how he does it, but I want people to know that. He's a guy that's doing the thing. He's not just doing the online thing. He's doing the hard of it, which is mentoring people and dealing with the muck and the disagreements. And, you know, just he's doing the thing. You know, so it's but it's just so. Go ahead. That shines through. I mean, I've mostly watched his universal history with Peugeot and he is the star of that show. Nothing against Jonathan. But Jonathan knows it. Jonathan's like, here's the platform. And that's exactly what he said when he was on my channel. He says, I'm not going to make a channel. I'm just going to go on other people's channel. I think that's an absolutely great strategy, because once you make a channel, you have to maintain the dumb thing one way or another. It's so why why build your own platform when you when you're invited onto others? And now Richard Richard is by all means the genuine article that that just shines through. But it's also it just makes it the you know, obviously the online criticism and Twitter criticisms. But it's well, no, I just say the symbolic World Summit. And so it's really weird. I think it well, I mean, in the sense of of even people criticizing how much it cost to go. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, that's what I think. That's what I mean. Yeah, no, I get it, because it's like, you know, like we all look all of us go to the grocery store. Right. All of us can tell exactly like what what things cost. And I think what what I get frustrated with with people who will go off on the grip element, you know, like I saw like the symbolic grip and like, ha ha ha. Right. OK. But but but my my problem with that is is that, you know, especially in Christian circles, you know, there's this sort of this weird thing that, you know, apparently the labor is worth as higher only if he doesn't work in the church. Right. Or parachurch type things. And or, you know, these kind of you know, but but you know, pageant is worth his money. Richard's worth his money. Like, you know, these are not, you know, you know, I'd like to think that, you know, the kids who come into my classroom, like I try to be worth the money that I know they pay in order to hear me out and let me work with them and work on their writing with them. And all those kinds of things. And so I get I get frustrated with the grift smear big time. And Paul can tell you that I just it really drives me up the wall. Yeah. But it's it's what I want to say something about conference and cost. Yeah. Because I have walked through. Catherine with the Thunder Bay Conference and John Van Dong with the Chino Conference. It's a terrifying thing, because if you're going to do a conference, it is an enormous financial if you're going to do a big conference, it's an enormous financial risk. Yeah. And, you know, you're sick. You've got to plan this thing like six, eight months in advance minimum. And and there are people that need to be paid. You need to arrange a facility. You need to arrange cat caters. You need a web presence. You need all of these things. And all of this stuff costs money. So then you then you're maybe 20, 30, 40 grand into this thing. And then you have the question, is anyone going to come? And then and then, you know, it used to be, you know, when we did Thunder Bay, we're either John or Jonathan or I going to get speaker fees. We didn't know. Which was fine. But at that point, John had his, you know, university position. I have my church. Jonathan was the only one sort of money. Now, Jonathan has a speaker's fee, which he could waive, of course, but I completely understand. And so there is. But this is this is what happens. And so that if you're going to do a conference, you got to think really seriously, because sometimes you put out the call and people don't come and you take a bath. And if you've got a family, so no. And that's why that this is this is tough, tough stuff. And and it's you can do stuff with no money. But there are there are always costs involved. And so it's wonderful to do things with no money, but there are costs. So I you know, I it's you know, 400. That was a lot. But I don't know what they had to, you know, Chino and Thunder Bay. They basically knew they could if the conference folded, both Catherine and John could say to their churches and the church would be don't worry about it. You know, we haven't incurred any cost. That's right. That's right. But if you're if you don't have like I'm I'm still playing around with should I do a Living Stones conference? It's going to be small because I have a small facility, but I can use the facility. And now if the conference pays off, Living Stones will get a conference fee to pay for the facility. Right. And hopefully there'll be speaker fees. But to plan a conference for 100 people is different than 200 people. And I'm also curious what the top end is, because all of that money is real. So and it's also difficult in this age of online. And this is why I'm sort of giving all this disclaimers with all of my questions. I've got a lot of questions about this conference and I'm not criticizing. I just want to know because what I want to facilitate is Minneapolis doing a conference and Chicago doing another conference. And Nate doing his conference because my vision is I would like to see a lot of conferences, probably most of them smallish. But all of them expressing. So Nate's conference is going to be grail country ish. And the and the VC conference was so cool, but it was totally Roman Catholic. And and so each of the conferences. And so this is this is an Orthodox conference. And I think that's great. And it's just a strange space. It's really, really weird. What do you mean? Well, I mean, Orthodoxy is still such small potatoes in America. Yeah. Yeah. And people don't understand that. Right. Oh, like in this world, they think like a third of the people are Orthodox, like whatever. It's like, no, not really. But honestly, that's why if you are Orthodox, especially a convert, you have to think something strange is going on. Yeah. Because a conference with Orthodox people. You know, yeah, yeah, yeah. But also yesterday I was listening to Joe Rogan and Cat Williams. Yeah, yeah. And Cat Williams brought up the Book of Enoch. Yeah, I know. And they talked about angels and demons and aliens for three hours. In what world? Yeah. But what world do we of course, they are high as a kite at the time, too. I'm not sure what you're doing to but that's weird. That's weird. Well, this is so II've been I haven't done the video yet. I've had anyway but I've been I've been working on my second conversation with Peugeot because he sends a number of one of the nice things about time and having these recordings is you can go back and I we can go back to that moment. We sort of go back to it and a bunch of the things Jonathan Jonathan said in that video are very interesting now and and and one of them is he says well now we can talk about angels and demons and it's like no big deal and it's like yeah and then John Verbeke says Hermes and you know the world loses its mind and on Joe Rogan you got a dude talking about angels and demons and Joe Rogan has you know this so he's talking about John Rogers of all people yeah who has had his own interesting relationship with Angelica. Yeah. So I mean we are we are in a super interesting time but the world is very big and and our our impression so II you know I did a little bit of math and I think basically the as as Luke said the Eastern right evangelical Orthodox that's a smaller group than the Christian Reformed Church and the Christian Reformed Church is not a large denomination and so it's very interesting you know because I would I would imagine that your your immigrant Orthodox communities are they're they're different from now your new American and Canadian and former evangelicals coming into Orthodoxy it's just going to be a different group and you know God bless the Orthodox hierarchy because I'll give you one example that Richard brings up is so Orthodox churches have parish councils that's a Protestant thing Orthodox churches at least in the homeland don't have parish councils right that's like a part of the corporate structure of Protestant style organization structures wow and that's also that kind of that Democratic yeah everybody has a vote kind of thing but on that note in in places like Russia you might have a number of cathedrals a number of churches and you can go to any of them but but there's not a sometimes there's not a meal afterwards or you know you don't you don't have a small town community that interacts you know afterwards or you the whole place is Orthodox you go to this cathedral one Sunday for Divine Liturgy and you go to another for Vespers or whatever but in America guess what we have tight-knit parish communities yep and you know the fan you're saying parish councils are very often women-led so yeah it's it's an interesting point you bring up Stephen because you know the Roman Catholic Church experienced escape velocity from its ethnic roots more totally than then then I see with Orthodox parishes right you know you go to an Orthodox parish and it's like okay I've just landed in Russia or I've just landed in Greece you know whereas you know the Irish and to a lesser extent the Italians but the Irish and the Italians you know you might go to a place that's named after St. Anthony or St. Rock or or what have you but it all feels very American you know you know what I mean like that they blended in in a way that you know the the Orthodox has sort of stayed a little bit more ethnic and I'll be interesting I think Paul's point at least where I'm hearing it is that it'll be interesting to see this influx of Americans you know of all variety of ethnic stripes I'm entering in and you know what's the difference between a Russian thing and an Orthodox thing like what's the difference between a Russian a Greek thing and an Orthodox thing and I think that'll be really interesting to see how that all plays out you know because those roots are deep you know you know because even in little like New England towns up here you know you've got like the Portuguese parish on one side of the village green you've got the Irish parish slash French parish on one side of the village green on the opposite side of the village green you've got the Italian parish you know it's like I thought it was Roman Catholic well yeah but you know it now now in my lifetime all that's gone right in terms of Catholicism there's no such thing as ethnic Catholicism in any sizable way now it's it's more propositionally sorted than it is or or or liturgy style sorted now than it was back you know in the in the 60s and 50s earlier and the Christian Forum Church its entire its entire history from the 20th century on has been a wrestling with this question of ethnicity yeah Paul you grew up in in Patterson like that was a racial reconciliation parish like I mean that right there is my you could argue that it's a sort of it's it's it's already a new church because it's escaping you know it's it's escaping the orbit of ethnicity Dutch ethnicity right yeah and and then the burning the wooden shoes moment for the denomination and it was a Dutch immigrant that of course it was a Dutch immigrant that yeah we should burn the wooden shoes well you as a Dutch immigrant have absolutely no idea as opposed to someone whose family's been in here 75 years longer than yours yeah because as an immigrant in some ways you see ethnicity better but in another way you don't it's all of these you know it's all of these difficult things and and you know so again reading Carlos Carlos Iri's reformations just reading about the medieval Catholic Church and the the secular clergy and the the secular clergy and the regular clergy and and and then then when I remember that because remember that process is we we we tend to think of it like you know the the church existed and then we have all these orders right but it's really kind of the other way around yeah it's really the orders precede the sort of the building out of the structures of secular Catholicism and what I I think that's a that's a an often misunderstood point in fact a lot of my friends believe that that the secular church will will will go away and that it'll be the orders will will rise up again to kind of bridge it bridge the gap you know Paul I've always thought of the reformations idea is is the is the lab leak hypothesis right that that the great failure of of the church with Luther was was Luther left Luther was either Luther left to the lab or was kicked out of the lab because in other words you know if I remember the first time that I read a Protestant history of the church and and I remember just being like what like what are you talking about you know and you know because you know because because when you hear a Catholic tell church history you know it's like we forget about the east for a second right blah blah blah blah and then we get to this this pivotal moment where Martin Luther you know bangs the theses on on on the door and that's when the Protestant Reformation began right and so you know so it's right I mean so this is the way that the story is sort of told and it's like that rascally monk who decided to sort of break ranks and then you read a Protestant history of it you're like well you know for you know many many many you know years and generations before you have all these sort of these versions and this that the other and and if you're an Anglican I remember I it was an it was a it was an Anglican history of the church and so of course who figures prominently in there is the Zwingli and the and the Lawlards and all this I'm like wow they're claiming that you know you know and so if you think about it then if you think of it this way Francis of Assisi could very well have been the first Martin Luther because there were antecedents that I'm sorry precedents of Francis and part of the reason why Francis we've gotten such hot water initially is because the the establishment church was like oh here we go again we've got another organization of the free spirit or what have you and but they were able to keep him in the fold and therefore opponent processed the actual institutional church to rebuild itself and reinvigorate itself with that spirit imagine Paul if if if was it Kajitin if Kajitin and and the boys had actually been able to sort of like you know absorb Luther because again I know I'm gonna put myself in trouble here with my Catholic friends here but you know Luther had some like really important things he had to say they were really true right and so imagine if that had not left left the left out of the lab you know leaked out of the lab but I had rather been you know it's an interesting sort of what if well and the church did that in many other places yep because they had to they had to respond to Luther because they knew I mean they just saw this fire burning and of course the Holy Roman Empire and it would catch in other places and they didn't want to lose Italy and France and Spain and and so you know the church and I think that was great about Carlos Ery's book because he shows basically that you know okay Luther that got unmanageable quickly but in other places they were able to sort of manage this now you had St. Bartholomew's Day of course in France where you know yeah 50,000 people died in one day I mean this is like yeah kill him quick right and squash the but then France sort of pays for it with the French Revolution that's right and so there are realities that that are not finally denied and and so that's what that's where we get to this point now where it's so interesting to watch the Orthodox yeah good yeah on the sea yeah yeah that's what I was going to say which what excites me Stephen is minus the numbers issue you know and Paul that's a fascinating stat I didn't realize that the Orthodox and the C the CFCs are actually larger well the non-immigrant Orthodox right right right okay so so okay that's a different that's a good distinction but I'm I'm fascinated because you know especially with what's going on with the mess of the hierarchy right now in my opinion you know a lot of people like me you know are looking to your church even if you're like when liturgies really good like really really good and they're not scared to be weird and like you know they they care about the ancient roots well if you're me like it sounds like absolutely perfect for me right so so you know so now I'm I'm I'm really hopeful you know what if if we again in sort of this off this model of opponent processing right if this model of opponent processing can sort of really do some work we could have a real generative force here because like in my opinion you know it's like you know I'm Catholic like I am Catholic to this day because an evangelical best friend of mine back in you know 1992 witnessed to me right I you know I was you know and you know I had left the church I was gone but my best friend was like man there's just something so compelling about this figure of Christ in the gospel so you know and I that that struck me in an important moment right so so but so then that was a way that I kind of got a opponent processed you know not it you know maybe from one vantage point it failed because I stayed Catholic or I became or I became Catholic again I guess you know but but what about the ways in which you know I mean I you know I guarantee you if you could sort of send you know you know 50 Catholics to a divine liturgy you know 20 of them would walk out be like man why is my church not like that and I believe it would be that high and if you scaled it by generation I'm 51 I would say that the people my age and younger who still bother to go to Catholic church I bet I bet like 75% of those people be like I like that you know because they're already ready to experience formalized liturgy but what if it was seriously done and then and then we also have Catholics and Orthodox that just they want to go to the megachurch yeah you know I yeah yeah yeah you know it's I regularly run into you know there's a fair there's a decent Greek Orthodox presence here in the Sacramento area area and I regularly run into former Orthodox who I just had to get out of there it was you know it was stifling it was road it was it was all of this stuff that you heard let's say the Jesus movement so in many ways the megachurch is just a product of the Jesus movement in the 60s and 70s and and you know when I see this I just I just see Christ continuing to renew his church and give people you know give give people a way to to come back and even if they're they're coming back in strange ways and yet all of these issues the issues like you know when we're talking about money and many of these other questions the issues don't go away you have to live through them and you have to pay the you have to pay the costs associated with the decisions you make with respect to them but the issues don't go away this and this dispensation so right right any thoughts you had Stephen you know you're you're not at the conference are you no you're at work yep okay any any have you did you get a virtual ticket or have you seen anything on social media now about the conference I will like again part of my story is I was single and beautifully alone in my apartment reading ten books a month to flash forward getting married with two kids and two years so congratulations so my money and my time or my wife and my six month old and my 18 month old as it should be but I'm definitely following it and keeping tabs but on that topic though I think so I like you know Gavin Ortman he has a little bit of a YouTube presence and presence I love following his videos because I I grew up in the Church of Christ is that part of now he's a Baptist he's a Baptist preacher of some sort like that but but I've forgotten Baptist don't know what they're doing but anyway go on I've forgotten the a lot of the ways that my old you know Church of Christ people used to think and see the scriptures and see church and all that so I love watching those videos to remind myself and and in you know actually still man somebody who's still in the tradition but speaking to Kale's point about yeah you take 50 Catholics who are maybe yearning for more traditional liturgy they go to divine liturgy I have a great experience and counter-attack that with all these ortho bros online you know who are going to that same line liturgy and getting on Twitter and having very Protestant conversations yeah but that's but the weird thing being orthodox is you we do have some of us do have the inside knowledge that you can't express online yeah like social media is purely a you can call the Protestant or you just it's it's what vervecki calls the proposition yeah that's the only way you can communicate on Twitter and these conversations and things like that but with orthodoxy there is a miss still a mystery to it and it's still an initiated sacramental right and coming from the Church of Christ to Orthodoxy the the issue that I think a lot of orthodox people have is we do have a genuinely different insiders knowledge of a phenomenon yeah well so and that's so important right because you know it's like the difference between exoteric and esoteric knowledge right you know like I can go and I look I do think this is what I love about poetry just sort of side note you know is that is that orthodox see I mean look religion should be experiential right and and you could abstract out these exoteric things that you could stick on a piece of paper on a spreadsheet but that's ultimately left hemispheric I think what you're pointing to is this notion that you to really know a thing is to live it out right it's like you know it's like you know this is as a married man like to sort of you can know about marriage right you know all day long but now that you're married you've got two kids like what did I think I knew I knew nothing Jon Snow right it's like it's like it's like and now you know like loads right so to me it recaptures this pre-modern sense of knowing right which really gets me to sort of pull your project I mean I think that's what you were really we are really wrestling with here in the corner is we have really shrunken down this conception of knowledge to like just that yeah and like oh it sits on top of a world that you have to ultimately experience yeah you know that that that and I really appreciate that when I listen to to my orthodox friends you know that you know that that is what stressed and I think that's a the greatest thing that a that an orthodox priest can tell to a to a catechumen it would seem to me is it's like just like don't talk for two years it's like me live it out breathe it sweat it you know all that you know and I think I mean the orthodox are having something that a lot of Protestants would call a revival in America right now and that should be celebrated and I celebrate that I and and revivals are great they're exciting they're fun God is doing a work in the church he's bringing in people and it's an orthodox style revival and this is what God uses in times and places to build his church and and they'll be they'll be hard days to come to but it's always I mean the world is so big and these things are always so uneven go ahead kill so so Stephen to your point about this there's a it's an interesting quip from John Paul the second this was years ago and and I can't place it so apologies but he was being asked about pornography something like that and he said you know he said look it's not that pornography shows too much it does of course right but but ultimately it shows too little it can't possibly capture the mystery of embodied you know sex intercourse you know that that that it is sort of lived out you know from from from within it and so I wondered again look what's the most powerful thing on the internet pornography right you know and I think there's a there's the because it can actually it can it can extract an abstract out sort of this sort of very powerful sort of but ultimately very very limited thing that that that like like when I think of my own students for instance who get exposed to pornography too early or what have you you know my concern is that they think they've seen it all and and I know the three of us can say quite clearly and you know it's they they see nothing they they they know nothing ultimately that's the sad part of it yeah I think that's a great illustration kale that they you know and and I often I often oh that that's just the way life is and that's part of what we're dealing with with these screens is there's always an inside and for good and bad because people sometimes they know the inside they want to get the heck out but it's no and I I'm really I'm really happy for this conference and I'm I'm glad they get it and they'll learn some things and I want to I want to keep learning from them and I want to I want to keep it yet it's the product Protestantism is sort of the sort of the experimental wing of the church has long been and and so I think part of what we are wrestling with in this little corner is okay we have these new tools these tools change us so part of part of what you can't deny about and again Carlos Erie sets this up beautifully in his book reformations I mean he begins in 1450 when Nicholas the fifth he's living in the Lateran Palace and he moves over to the Vatican and he has a plan and he wants to he wants to tear down the fourth century st. Peter's and build a new bigger better one and so he gives a plenary indulgence to anyone who does a pilgrimage to Rome and the money rolls in and he's like oh and well that is going to set up a string of events that's gonna lead to you know Tetzel and Luther and you know and people sometimes go to the Vatican they're like wow st. Peter's the Vatican I say yeah it only cost them half a Germany and all of England and yeah etc. So it's history is history is like that and well this is Peterson I mean this is Peterson you know it's like you know nobody ever gets away with anything no you know and that that's a perfect it's a perfect illustration of an unintended cost you know you thought you were building you thought you were buying St. Peter's Basilica you did but you bought something along with it too yeah and and we're in this technological space now then the next chapter he goes into everything that happens he looks at the reformers and they're all born in this tiny little window and he says what's with that yeah yeah yeah what's with that there that's not nothing and you had Columbus and of course and and so you and then the printing I mean Columbus and the printing press together you think about and and we are unconscious of most of ourselves you know I realized this I talked a little bit about the fact that I've had a little bit of I don't have writer's block I get video block sometime and a lot of people are like you sure don't look like you ever have video block but I and I've had it enough I don't have to get it very often but it's usually because something is being birthed in me but I don't my conscious self doesn't know what it is yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah then boom I get to the end of it and I have an insight and a realization and I see something like oh okay now I have to figure out how to how to roll that out but there's tons going on right now yeah I mean think about that though Paul just like you know like oh ho hum you know Columbus discovers is like an entire like half of the globe that we've just have not been conscious of that might have a way of changing things just a little bit right and and you know and it's funny we're we're all so familiar with that is like 1492 we were so all so familiar with it that we just forget wait but like what would that have been like to all of a sudden discover that what you thought was this is this you know I mean it's just it's uh and you know you can you can do a whole reading of the the canon right you know the the the the great books right you could do a whole reading that that is just like a riff on North and South America like this is new right and you know and who's you know Shakespeare is writing at this time you know I mean it's just it's like within that 100 year period I don't know man it's just we underrated oddly enough as much as you know we all know about it we think we know about it but we don't and it was it was almost like if we had gone to the moon and discovered civilizations yeah right right right it'd be like what what and civilizations that were sort of like us they were like us enough that we could have sex and babies with them that's right but almost nothing else sort of works right oh by the way they're still practicing human human sacrifice what's with that and just look at the way that sort of permeates and and of course the Europeans go over there you know the the rest is history just did an excellent um did an excellent series on Cortez and people kind of blamed it was eight series was eight episodes long but what they nicely showed in that series on Cortez was I mean Cortez was a deeply religious man he was also a killer yeah it was also completely mercenary but they'd always had mass on the beach and of course and and then well we have to save their souls well do they even have souls and and how does how does religion and slavery work I mean there are so many issues on the table and now we just go back and say oh we discovered the world obviously no not really obviously they have souls you're like okay but like we kid ourselves look I like I mean I'll I'll insert the the moment here I mean what if the aliens thing is real right and again I know I've just probably like destroyed Paul's channel here but you know but but I mean this is exactly what we're gonna have to face okay so again if we're all about patterns and looking at patterns and navigating patterns and guess what we're about we're about we're staring a new pattern a new iteration of an old pattern right in the face and it's about to blow us all up and and we're you know the printing press I mean Erasmus that book you know Fatal Discord Erasmus said you know just the fact of you've got the Vulgate and then you've got a Greek text and Erasmus's notes next to it and the fact that you don't have to just be some monk somewhere now thousands of people can afford to buy this and of course the Vulgate was divinely inspired but now it's staring you in the face that Jerome you know basically you know massage them things yeah now now Jerome wasn't intending right the whole conceptual philosophical thing and then you know the book that in many ways just sort of blew my mind Brett Sockold's you know transubstantiation book I was reading that it's like oh of course you know of course and and so now the Orthodox are in it so in some ways you know the Orthodoxy although you've made a number of landings if you read Molly Worthen's Apostles of Reason the Orthodox have sort of been pinging the West a number of times but it was the fall of the iron curtain that really brings in both Ukrainian and Russian evangelicals and Charismatics into America into Sacramento but also you know it's not just the Greek Orthodox now it's all these other orthodoxies that were behind the iron curtain and so Paul King's so Paul King's North joins a Romanian monastery in Ireland in Ireland and you know it's it's this kind of little stuff that generates exactly what we're living through so it's really cool time to be alive yes and and so Stephen you know you're you're part of this you're part of this Orthodox revival in America and that's a super cool thing and maybe a hundred years from now Richard Rollins will be you know you know you'll be canonized or whatever they call it in the Orthodox Church or he'll be you know there'll be hagiography that you'll write I was with Richard Rollin and his backyard around the campfire and we were reading you know we were reading Dante and tell me about tell me about Richard Rollin again Stephen yeah this is such a cool time and the thing is that with any significant substantive movement there will always be criticism opposition sniping petty jealousy all of that stuff always comes with anything significant so don't let it bother me we always underestimate just how messy and dirty and icky everything is oh yeah we're we're living the life we're not killing each other over this I mean Luther had to get abducted to save it they knew what to do so well we've gone on for like go ahead Stephen no I mean that's part of the again even it's a blessing and a curse coming from you know long tradition ethnic churches mixing with a people that only been around for a couple hundred years that basically are taught to erase their history every with every birth they have yeah but we're used to speed and you know that evangelical side that wants to make things popular and and more widespread but you know as time goes and father de Young says this all the time maybe in 500 years we might have an American or a British or a you might have an American orthodoxy right right and there's some of us that understand that our roles are so small like and and even speaking with what Luke and everything was talking about Mammon you have to have a good relationship with Mammon because if you if you think you can get out of this world as a pure tenure you can't move you know like every corporation pocket to it well what I mean is like is what's that what do you mean a Puritan well you have I mean just like the conversation of you know even when it comes to like even kale was talking about would it be better if I got a job making three hundred thousand dollars a year or follow meeting do something else or you know how do we how do we handle the fact that churches have to be paid for and some of that money is going to come from the defense industries that our parishioners worked for right right right you know it's like are all of us supposed to quit our jobs because we have to have fewer income sources no it's it's just we live in a weird time we so that we grow up together we have to we have to always remember that yeah and it's not always clear which one is which frankly yep yep but our whole American system is designed for the office life and it commutes and two cars and suburbs so I mean that's just our system and if you want a job and you want a family you want to make some money and raise orthodox kids you're going to work the sales job where you're selling some product that you don't really care about but it makes you a lot of money and it makes the you know Pfizer more profitable or yeah or what have you but guess what that's just your little you know role that you have to swallow and you know go to go to as many services you can during the week and raise orthodox kid you know but well that's why it was so fun to have Rick Walker when he came on the channel it was like everyone just you know I remember that you know a podcast from the mansion and you know I'm on a I'm on a channel together with Donald Trump jr. and I mean oh all formations have I mean to have any reality in this world means there's any boundary is going to have boundaries it's just the latest so alright just the Merc I think it's just the murkiness that some of us orthodox people are we some of us see have a wholesome idealism we kind of see what the world could be or what a good orthodox country could be and and it's true and good and beautiful and wonderful and then we have our day to day lives and it's just a matter of sorting it out you know yep well I am any any last any last thoughts I don't so up cycle I haven't uploaded the the choo-choo yet I sorry I haven't I don't have the choo-choo branding I got to get the choo-choo branding on there so I'm gonna my out co will be I'm gonna go back to dog bark and his someone I found that the other day so dog bark I think has 1415 subscribers and I got to do a randos conversation with Dave so Dave I'll tell you a little bit of Dave's story Dave Dave used to be a painter and he he was involved with a whole bunch of different churches and stuff and then he had heart surgery and he didn't really recover from heart surgery basically had about a dozen years kind of in the twilight a lot of it in bed but just didn't have any strength and about six eight months ago he'd been watching the Freddie and Paul show and leaving comments on the channel and about six eight months ago it was like he he kind of woke up and had strength again and he's like I want to go to church and so he takes an uber to he said where am I gonna go to church well I'll go to Living Stones where we have the Freddie and Paul show so he shows up one day and you know Freddie says dog barks here I said what dog barks I didn't even know he lived in Sacramento and he comes in and so now he's a regular on the Freddie and Paul show and he he obviously loves music and he plays the harmonica and so he just he's putting stuff on his channel he's he he's been twice on Pine Creek who is the guy that Nathan Ormond you know kind of took a than Norman out of Christianity's on Pine Creek a couple times like Pine Creek ain't gonna turn Dave away from Christianity as the not gonna happen but uh so Dave Dave does the you know does a just a beautiful version of Psalm one so I picked it up said ah this is gonna be branding it's gonna be branding so hey Paul just before you sign out here I really do want to talk with you about a TLC defense against the dark arts class okay just at some point because I did get a green light I'm gonna do a senior elective and I want it to be very TLC and I want it to be very TLC inflected so just you want to do that talk online or do you want to do it offline whatever you want I mean if you think I think people might like it but okay I'm happy to do it just bantering back and forth on email too and no big deal okay okay we'll figure that out I'll send you I'll send you an email or a DM in a DM in Twitter it's easier to find in Twitter that's yeah yeah same thank you thanks for letting me bomb your conversation coming on it's great to meet you yeah and it's great to hear a little bit of your story that's I really love it that that some of the other channels are doing Randall's conversations and you know knitting the community together so that's that's what it takes so all right so thank you all and I will I will we will leave here with dog bark and his rendition of someone he does it beautifully yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah fast freddy geek military at all that's my old name gee yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah