https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=6bBSDQ2lGVI

 Hey Paul. Hey Fred, how are you? Welcome to the Freddy and Paula Show. How y'all doing out there? Hope you're doing well in this season. Stay safe and stay bright and you'll be out of sight. Go ahead Mr. Paul. Well Freddy you've had some soda already today. You got some of that caffeine go. Oh yeah man, I'm getting this up man. It's like water to me. Actually this week, Freddy. Cream and juice. Actually somebody asked me, Freddy, this week if you were okay because I hadn't seen the Freddy and Paula Show. I said well yeah you know we've had COVID and so we haven't been able to get together. So they're worried about you. It's a shame. Thank you. Don't be worried. I just haven't been able to come on. We didn't do the show because we weren't able to have a capacity viewers or consumers in the church. They couldn't always come to church. Like today we're a little bit in the distance and that's good. But what about our second of kings? They're doing pretty good. Barnes, Fox, then they got this other guy. Who's that guy? Reggie Williams? Yeah we have a camera crew today. Reggie is our camera crew. He's always great. Why you say he's right side of it? He's a good guy and he's not out of state like the rhythm to the drum. I got to get some if you don't understand then what's up man from the SAC. You know me. They might be funny and it might be funny but when I'm on the mic I'm not honey. Don't you understand my man? Because Pastor Paul does all he can. He preaches to us and gives us the words and yo I don't think that's absurd. Anyways, Seattle Seahawks are out of it finally. Oh yeah? Yeah they lost out on playoff service. Oh I didn't look at any football yesterday. And so you're a little sore at them? Your little sore at the Seahawks? Yeah I'm glad they lost the playoffs. Me and Reggie said that too. We're glad they're not in the playoffs. So the 49ers have a chance if a couple teams lose. The Raiders have a chance maybe but front chance. So I think I'm going for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers all the way. Okay all right. All right Brady. All right. Oh that could be interesting. So we'll have to see. So I'm going to do we three kings of Oregon and all are Reggie and Paul and I'm going to wrap all five verses. So this should be a treat. Why don't you do two? Okay three we'll compromise. We three kings of Oregon are bearing gifts we travel afar field and fountain and moor and mountain and following young to star. Oh star of wonder star with night star with royal beauty right westward leading still proceeding guide us to life perfect life born the king of Bethlehem plain gold I bring to crown again king forever season never over all of terrain oh star of wonder star of night star with beauty royal bright westward leading still proceeding guide us to die perfect light and sacramento all right good to go without a word to say they call me freddy d from the USA last verse is what I have to say frank incense to offer I have I am since almost indeed denied prayer and praising all men raising worship him on high amen we gotta land the plane we have land the plane ready ready one love amen hallelujah all right and transmission all right