https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=9hW1mITVl3Y

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. You got a card from CJ. I got a card from CJ. I got one too. Everybody's boss ballin'. Got a lot of guests today. We got Mr. John. We got Mr. John. We got Mr. John. John the Doc. We got the boy Charles J. The Magic. Anyways, what's really going on? You know what I'm saying? Couple LPs be rolling, we be rolling really tight. Don't you know I'm going to go without a word to say. I'll bring you to a wrap and I'll make you look like you. Hey, you better step back because I'm here to wrap. I'll take idiocy down. That's a fact. But Jesus is the one that wears his crown because I'm his disciple and I'm your frown. Okay. I'm not going to top that. I don't think no one else here is as sexy. The only thing I bring to the table is my loving hands holding small babies. I saw his grandbaby. He's named Andrew Johannes which is named after him. And we are all Dutch. And this is my brother. He's Dutch in another religion. Dutch? You're not Dutch. You're Dutch and we're all Dutch. Nice. I'm Dutch now. And you are Dutch in one religion. You're Captain Morgan so you're like Dutch. Okay, Captain Morgan is Dutch? Yeah. Okay. You say. You don't know. I'm going to let you read. Be tracking here Charles. Be tracking here. I think I was more of a Missing Nigerian than French. But okay. I'm Dutch today. I'm not a good Dutch. Perfect. John, I want to hear you bust some rhyme. Let me hear you. Let me hear a little lyrics off you. I know you got it John. I know you got it in. You're the only Dutchman I know that can rap. No, John's good. Oh really? There's a song that I've taught my grandchildren that is probably important for all of us to know. Please do it. Please do it. And then I'll give a little exegesis afterward. Okay. And I'll sing it to him. Opa betaal de huur. Daar komt de huisbas die kijkt zo zuur. Opa neemt een tafelpoot en slaat de huisbas hal of doek. Opa betaal de huur. Daar komt de huisbas die kijkt zo zuur. Wooo doggy! Nice. I like that one. Now you're going to want to know what that's about, right? Yeah, there you go. I teach this song to my grandchildren, but I'm not so sure that my kids are so enamored with it. But it's Dutch, right? It is Dutch. It means, Opa, Grandpa, pay the rent. Aha! I like that. There comes the landlord. How about- There comes the landlord. He ain't looking very happy. Opa takes a table leg and beats the landlord half to death. Opa betaal de huur. Now, my little four-year-old has learned how to sing that. So now my little four-year-old is singing about- Beating the landlord with a table leg. This is the Dutch. This is the kind of Dutch immigrants we get here that have got enough to netherlands because they're beating up the landlord. You're being gangsta! So do you want to hear another little story about that? Yes. Very similar? Yes. Okay, now it goes like this. I teach my children, or actually my son-in-law taught us all this song. It goes like this. My name is Johnny Soldier. I shot him and he died. I buried him in the ground and he cried and he cried and he cried. I'm not dead yet. Don't bury me in the ground. I'm not dead yet. Don't bury me in the ground. But here comes the clincher. That's so Christian-like. Here comes the clincher. I taught- we taught my little grandson this song and he heard us singing it many times. Now we are at my father-in-law's funeral. And there is the place where the casket goes back into the curse and all the dignitaries, including the bishop of Sacramento County, I mean the diocese, are all using their water thing to sprinkle water on the casket. Meanwhile, my grandson is sitting between my legs because he was getting totally bored. I'm not dead yet. Don't bury me in the ground. Wow. Now this happened at my father-in-law's funeral. Oh my God. And it's all your fault. Thank you. That was deep in the revelation. I'm only saying all this stuff to get my kids to watch the Freddie and Paul show. Yeah. Because now they will. I'm quite sure they will too after the game. Everybody else will too. Alright, we got a rap from Fred, we got a song and a story from John. How about you, Charles? How are you doing? I'm doing just fine. Here we go. Here we go. I'm trying to get- hit him beside my head as I can get buried. That's one thing, latter thing on the Christian that I'm trying not to do. We're in the middle of a podcast. Yeah, there you go. We turn that on later. Alright. But besides that, no, I'm doing just fine. It's been a nice, lovely day. Relatively peaceful. Yeah, Bernie hit me in the eye or something. So yeah, I'm not pretty good. I woke up, I'm living, I'm breathing. It's always good to breathe. I love air, like that dog says in those movies. I love to breathe. Okay, there you go. And I know this fire is just like, wow. And the sky is almost blue. It's kind of a dusty blue today, but not too bad. So we're thankful for that. And we have the fantasy football draft this afternoon. Tonight? Yeah. Oh. So that's a big deal. Big deal for Reggie. And we might have a new segment on the show coming forward. Reggie's draft pick. We will. I talked to Reggie about that, so we'll talk about that. So any local sports we got to cover here, Fred? Oh, the 80s meets the Giants. Oh, my team. I couldn't believe it. Nice. But it's good. I can. And, let's see. Are you having technical difficulties there, Fred? Yeah, it's not working. He's trying to wrap us up. I'm trying to get the music. Can you look at it and see if you can? We'll talk while you're doing it. I don't think I can do that. So Paul, what's your favorite baseball team? The Yankees. Really? Yeah. I grew up in New Jersey. Oh. Loving the Yankees. My mother's favorite baseball team is the Red Sox. So, little tension in the family. But, yeah. Yep, I'm a Yankee fan. Thurman Munson, Chris Chambliss, all those guys. I'm going to do a rap. You're going to do a rap? You got music to go on with your rap? Am I going to get taken down from YouTube or is this... No, no, because I'm not going to edit it. It's just going to be there to listen to. I don't know. We might get taken down from YouTube. John, how often do you go to the... There was. ...Tilleri or whatever. Hardly ever. Oh. Yeah. Philip, have you met my friend Philip, my mom's friend? Phil Fast, the Bible guy. I met him years ago. Oh, yeah. I met him here. Yeah, yeah. He's met Philip. What's going on with John? You don't need that, Fred. Stay tuned for technical difficulties. We got to land the plane here, Fred. I know, but I need a beat. I'm not sure how long this is going to take. If you can't do it, no. Yeah, we can do it. Okay, pause it, please. Pause it. There's no pause on there. I ain't going to edit. All right, let him try two minutes. No. We've already gone on for 10. We've got these songs about beating landlords. This is the longest Freddy and Paula show that I've ever been on. We've got a guy in the ground who isn't dead. Who are you going to play in a football? What? What are you going to get from football? I don't know. I don't know. I think my team is going to be bad again. Reggie's going to win again, I'm afraid. Your mom likes that because I keep trying. Go ahead. No, no. I was going to say about sports. That one thing that I was going to discuss on the show is this Japanese guy who is changing the sports culture in baseball. He hits a home run, and then he apologizes to the opposing team, and then he pitches a guy out, and he apologizes to the pitcher. I have some Japanese friends who were missionaries in Japan, and they say that this guy is completely changing American baseball, adding some civilization to it. Is that true? That's nice. Have you heard that? I want to do a wrap. I'm going to get this to work today. That is not worth it. I would give a week to do this. You want a week to do this. Have it ready for next week. Thank you. Have it ready for next week. All right. You just wrapped it anyway well, though. Sorry. You did. That wasn't long enough. That wasn't long enough. We forgot that you just wrapped. That wasn't long enough. It was long enough. What's a man of ... What's upon a time there was a man named CJ? He buss friends rhymes every day. He's the homeboy like every way. He comes up in his usual way. Got Jesus Christ doing it really big. He wears a crown, and he ain't a pig. He is funky. This is true. Coming kind of funky as we always do. We're the Christians, CRC, if nobody can get us, because we're too much to ask for. I think it's time for a little bit more. Bring it down for me now. Jesus Christ is a man. He's a man, and he makes it something like the design. I like that. Step into the top like Captain Morgan. That's me. Jesus Christ, you're the best. I love you, Jesus, because you're from the west, the south, the north, the east. That's what we do. I like that. This is the end of the song, but that's okay. Land the plane. Amen. There you go. Land it. Okay. All right. Are we all ready? Yeah. One love. Amen. Amen. Hallelujah.