https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=eba5DRyfDjE

 Hey Paul, what's happening? Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. We are in... where are we at? 44. Hold on. I knew it right off the bat. 44. I think it's 45. Okay, 45. Go 45. We're in Golden Corral. We're having our lunch. And I should tell you that one of our fans bought us lunch today. Are you serious? Yeah. Oh, that's awesome. Yeah, sent us a Christmas card and bought us lunch. That is awesome. We really appreciate that. Okay. We're enjoying Golden Corral. Freddie's just finishing up his coffee. There's his coffee. And yeah, so Super Bowl, Eagles and Pats. Yeah. And I'm rooting for the Pats. Paul, I couldn't believe that came because the Jaguars... what's his name again? The quarterback from the Jaguars? Blake Bartles. Bartles, yeah. He was doing very good. They even said at the end of the game that he was very good. And he was consecutive and he was consistent. Yeah, consistent. And their whole season, they only lost a few games because of the quarterback and the receivers and the running backs. And their defense was good. But I felt they should have won that game. But they did. They don't need to feel shameful. No, they played a great game. Because they played a great game and it's okay because you're playing against the New England Patriots, the champions. You guys are the champions, Patriots, even though I'm going for the Eagles. But anyway, anyway, yeah. So, Paul, it's going to be interesting to see what happens in the Super Bowl. It will be. I think the Patriots are going to pull it out. But anything can happen. I know you're rooting for the Eagles. We got to go for the Eagles. They haven't won for 12 years. I don't think they've ever won the Super Bowl. Never? They've been in the championship though, but they never won the Super Bowl. I think the Eagles... because when I watched the Vikings-Eagles game, they said that neither team had ever been to the Super Bowl. Are you serious? They've never won the Super Bowl? I don't know. No, no, no. They said they were in the championship but never won the Super Bowl. But let's go for the Underdogs. Come on, please go for the Underdogs. I got too many connections. Cousin Mel, cousin Mel, my brother-in-law R. Paul, my mom. They won't forgive me. So I got to go for the Patriots. How many minutes are we going? Let's see, we're two minutes in. We can keep going. I just want to let everybody know, I appreciate you tuning into our show. Paul, we got 300 views. Our views are coming up like Disco Queen or something. Anyways, yeah, so everything's pretty lovely. The Kings should be doing better, but we got to give them credit. Give them credit with what credit is due. They'll blossom as their practice business will be good. And high Sacramento State, I watched you guys the other night. You guys played really good though. You played the first place team and you only lost by six. That's pretty good. High Justin Strings, yeah, number three. I'll be seeing you. I'll be at the game February 1. Hopefully I can get an autograph or a picture if you're watching. But I don't think you are. But if you are, you are. Anyways, back to basketball. What about the Warriors? The Warriors are having good work. The Warriors are a great team. Durant, King's Earth last, Draymond Green, and Iguodaga. Yeah, you remember Iguodaga. He's good. And Houston, Harden, and OKC, you got to give it to Westbrook. Ooh, there's this man in college who's going to go pro, Paul. And he's only 19. I forgot what team it is, but what? Get back to you Sunday and I'll know by then. So, no, we're not going to do no rapping here. We'll do that in the car. Yeah, so everybody, thank you. Hi mom. Hi CJ, if you're watching. I can't get my hand in there for the one love. You can do it. You can do it for both of us. OK, let's say a prayer. You can say a prayer. Well, we'll do it in the car. Yeah, there's too many people around here. OK. Anyway, OK, we'll see what happens with the Patriots and see how Justin Timberlake does for the halftime show. OK. And thanks for tuning in at Golden Corral. And your viewing is greatly appreciated. Ready? One love. Alright, good job, Freddy. Amen.