https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=uaZSQCS82w8

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. And as it would be, this week's commandment is you shall not steal. And of course, it's, I started working on this sermon after Tuesday and all of the election back and forth. And so you shall not steal an election. I'm not pointing at one side or the other because there's plenty of finger pointing going both ways, depending on who is declared and by what date. And I don't know if this will be different by Sunday or Saturday when I post this, but we will find out. And usually both sides point to this Trump versus Clinton, Gore versus Bush. But let's pause for a minute and ask, well, look at why we're using this word steal. And is an election a thing? Yeah, it's a thing, but it's a weird thing. It's a sort of thing. And my, you know, I always learn these fancy words from John Verbecky. It's kind of a hyper object. You don't really hold an election in your hand. You participate in it. And it's this, it's this process and it's, it's, it's what realm is an election a thing? Now this is one of those commandments, as I mentioned last week, that everyone looks at and says, well, I know what this means. This is obvious. Just commandments six through nine just seem so obvious. You shall not kill. You shall not commit adultery. You shall not steal. You shall not bear false witness. These are commandments that pretty much everyone agrees on. And you'll find laws against these things on legal books through pretty much throughout human history. And when we think of stealing, we might think of a thief. So I did the Google image zeitgeist search and sure enough, look at the pictures that come up somebody with a ski mask on and a flashlight and a, and a, and a pillowcase and breaking into houses to get your stuff. They might use a gun. They might come at night. They might use a computer and they're looking for money or TVs or, or you name it. They're looking to put it in their bag and take it home. Now the Heidelberg Catechism as usual, and for those of you who know anything about the Christian Reformed Church and know we don't have two services, the regular service and the Heidelberg Catechism service, this is sort of a way of me getting some Heidelberg Catechism sermons in by the end of the year for our CRC quota. What does God forbid in the Eighth Commandment? God forbids not only outright theft and robbery punishable by law, but in God's sight, theft also includes all scheming and swindling in order to get our neighbors' goods for ourselves, whether by force or means that appear legitimate, such as inaccurate measurements of weight, size, or volume. They didn't have all those little stickers in the, during the Reformation period as we have now. They didn't have stickers at all, I would imagine. Haven't yet thought about taking the stuff they're getting out of their newfound printing press and putting sticky stuff on the back and putting it on your gas pump. No gas pumps either. Fraudulent merchandising, counterfeit money, excessive interest, and any other means forbidden by God. In addition, God forbids all greed and pointless squandering of His gifts. And again, as you've noted, many times the Heidelberg Catechism broadens and extends the commandment. And as we've seen with many of the commandments, their original context was quite interesting. Now again, as we've noted, the commandments are ordered. No other gods before me. Don't reduce God to a representation from creation. Don't lift up God's name upon a lie. Keep a weekly witness to the goal of creation, Sabbath rest. Prioritize your love of neighbor to the most godlike neighbor, your parents. Don't commit murder. Don't commit adultery. And now, don't steal. But a number of scholars, and in fact, Jacob on the Discord server said, oh, I know what this commandment means. And I said, what? And sure enough, I'd been reading about this in all my commentaries of scholarly learning that I keep behind me in my little corner studio of my office. Some believe that originally the force of this commandment was against kidnapping, stealing people. And if you look at the order, it actually makes quite a bit of sense. Do not steal a life, which is murder. Do not steal a wife, which is adultery. And do not steal a person. And then you shall not steal a reputation that's bearing false witness. That's next week. And gosh, where am I going to find illustrations of such things? Could they be on Twitter or in the news or just about anywhere around us of any of these things? Now, what happens to this word? And so, you know, in looking at this theory, I start digging into the use of the word in Hebrew and finding that, yeah, the word quite often is used for kidnapping. But it sort of gets extended because we very quickly realize that our life is not really simply contained by our skin. We are creatures who live in an economy of physical needs, food, shelter, security, financial, and physical. And we bond with physical items in this world. There are these sacramental aspect to things and relational aspects to things and nostalgic aspects to things. In fact, we time travel through photographs and tokens. And so things very much matter to us, not only in terms of our sense of physical well-being, but emotional well-being. And that's pretty much true of all of us. Now, what is ownership? It seems pretty much throughout the Old Testament and many of the surrounding cultures, the idea of personal property is pretty much taken for granted. People could own sheep. People could own clothing. People could own a house. They could own property. And we see this pretty much throughout the cultural areas with which the people during The Mosaic Code and throughout in the ancient Near East were pretty much accustomed to. What is interesting, however, is that some of the ideas about wealth sort of change in the Old and New Testament. Access and control of wealth, I'll define as access or control of more than an average amount of the physical world. Now, in the Old Testament, wealth or success is a sign of God's blessing in your life. And you can see that in Abraham, in Isaac, in Jacob, in Job, in David, and Solomon. If you are a wealthy person, it shows that God has smiled upon you and blessed you wealthly. It's in some ways rather karmic. You can infer God's favor upon you. But the Old Testament isn't completely down with that because in many places in the Psalms and in other books from the Hebrew prophets, they wonder with God, now, why have you blurted and blessed these evil people over here? And as Israel is increasingly subjected to the power and wealth of greater empires than her own, who also seem to be morally inferior to Israel's, Israel believing herself to very much be the apple of God's eye, God's chosen people to whom God has given the law, why would God seem to give so much power and wealth to other nations and less so to his chosen people? Now, some of this is worked through in the story of Job where Job has all of this wealth and the Lord says to Satan, who's going to and fro, have you considered my servant Job? And Satan says, well, it's because you bless him so much. And God says, OK, take away the stuff and then take away his health and see what he does. And of course, opens up a whole new conversation. Now the New Testament, you can see this conversation get played with and sort of adapted and adopted in some new ways. Jesus, you know, very much says some things about wealth, which are rather startling from an Old Testament perspective. It's easier for a camel to go through the eye of the needle than a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven. And this takes his disciples by surprise because they, of course, have been paying a lot of attention to the Old Testament. Well, if that's true to the people for whom it seems God has been smiling, well, what chance do those of us who have less stuff have? Jesus is very careful. He says, beware of all kinds of greed. It can lead you astray. And of course, the heideberg catechism has picked up on that. And Jesus is very clear about don't lay up for yourselves treasures heaps on earth where moth and rust can consume. He says to these heaps, and I preached on that back when I was going through the Sermon on the Mount, there's this in the sense about treasures. Well, what are these treasures? It's the same words as heaping up. And it's sort of all this heaping that we do in our life. And the heaps are the accumulation of all of our efforts. It's sort of the materialization of our goals. It's what we pour our life into. And Jesus says, well, all of your heaps, they're subject to thieving and moth and rust. Moth eats clothing. Rust eats metal. And so don't put your heart there, Jesus says. And of course, well, Jesus is sort of the interesting counterpart to Job because if success and affluence and abundance in terms of access and control to the world's goods reveal God's favor, then why was there so little for the soldiers to divvy up when Jesus was crucified and his crucifixion itself? It seemed to be emblematic of God's judgment. And of course, the New Testament plays with these themes over and over to try to make sense of the story of Jesus' divinity and the stuff that Jesus didn't seem to have. Now, often when we look at this, we look at the ends of two ends of a spectrum. We sort of look at the homeless who have very little access or control to things. They're not even sleeping with a roof over their head and the wealthy. And what we find is that it's very interesting the way my experience about a lot of probably not as much experience with the very wealthy as I have had with the very poor in my life because the super wealthy, you know, that we might find wealthy people here relatively. There's a lot of relative when it comes to wealth. So the homeless, the homeless people get very angry when you mess with their stuff. I know this for a fact. And because we'd say, well, quite reasonably, that's all they have. That's what they've invested themselves into. But I've also seen homeless people are sometimes the most generous and sort of like the widows might. They they vary. They can't say no to each other often. And there's a sort of a complex aspect to that in terms of life on the streets. I've seen them share money, food, drugs. That's sort of a code of conduct on the street that you'd better share. Otherwise, people won't share with you. And I often talk to people, homeless people, about this sort of economy of sharing, that they can be extraordinarily generous sometimes with the little that they have. The wealthy, on the other hand, you know, Donald Trump paid seven hundred fifty dollars in taxes one year, at least in income tax. And I thought I paid a lot more than that. And I tend to think Donald Trump with his big jet with Trump on the side of it. You know, once he's either in a few months or a few years when he's done flying around at taxpayers' expense, he'll go back to flying on his own jet again. And it's like, well, wow, wow. But at the same time, I've seen wealthy people be extraordinarily generous. There was there was one man that I knew in the Dominican Republic who who who moved there. And he basically was spending all of his money putting cement floors in poor people's homes. And I sat him down and I talked to him one day and I said, you know, what are you going to do? You're burning through all your all your money just helping these people. And I just kind of under knew I kind of understood the cultural dynamics. I said, you know, you're trying to start a loan program where these poor people are going to, you know, slowly chip back and pay back on that, put more floors and more poor people's houses. But it ain't going to work because they see you as a very wealthy man and they're not going to give you money back. And that's exactly what happened. He spent all his money to move back to the states and get a job. But he said, you know, I don't really care. So what do you mean you don't care? He says, after you've made a million dollars and lost that million dollars, money's just kind of a thing. And so he decided he would spend his life just trying to help poor people have a little better life. And even if it cost him everything, he said, that's OK, I'll go back and get more. And he did. This leads us to the question about what is real. And Jesus challenges his listeners on this more than anyone else. I think what good is it for someone to gain the whole world, the cosmos, all the stuff of this world, and yet forfeit their soul and that's their their suke, their their their psyche, their life, their self. And Jesus says, you know, and he lived this way, he didn't heap up for himself all kinds of wealth or security. When he was crucified, you know, the best he had was one piece of cloth that the soldiers looked at and said, let's not tear this, let's let's cast lots and figure out who gets it. And Jesus very much warns where your heap is, there will your heart be. And so he says, you know, be mindful of the stuff we accumulate. And well, but now we're connecting it to the commandment, do not steal. And the Heideberg catechism says, think about this, because, well, what is really real? What do you spend your life towards heaping up and towards what? And can you keep it? The goals are usually immaterial anyway, their visions of security or prosperity or well-being. And the stuff is usually instrumental to these goals. And what we find from the Heideberg catechism question and answer 111 is very much sort of what is the physical world for this cosmos? What does God require of you in this commandment? That I do whatever I can for my neighbors good, that I treat others as I would like them to treat me. This is, of course, the sermon that Freddie hears every week. If you listen to the Freddie and Paul show, treat others as you'd like to be treated. The golden rule. Freddie, week after week, says, Freddie, what did you hear this week from my sermon? Treat others as you'd like them to be as you'd like to be treated. That's not a bad thing to hear each week. I'm not sure I say it every week, but it's right here. And that I work faithfully so that I might share with those in need. In other words, there's something of a motivation to build your wealth so that you can use your wealth for the benefit of others. Now, this might seem strange because we do live in a world of gigantic wealth inequality. Now, we might look at this just sort of be aghast by it, but it is not new by any means. I would say that it's the world has always been this way. And so here's this one graphic with, you know, these one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight individuals, some of them quite young, like Mark Zuckerberg, Jeff Bezos, who have enormous amounts of wealth. And these are individuals, there are royalty that have masses wealth, wealth, and of course, nations and organizations. And then the poorest 50 percent of the world. And that's just shocking. And this distribution of family wealth in the United States, you know, even if you let's say you own a house in Sacramento that in today's dollars is worth five hundred thousand dollars. It doesn't take a lot of house in Sacramento to be worth five hundred thousand dollars in today's market. That's just the house that doesn't include any savings or retirement that you might have. And, you know, that that puts you that puts you in the 80th percentile just in the United States and the world. That's probably more like the 95 or 97th percentile. In fact, according to one organization, the top point six percent of world population consisting of adults with more than one million dollars in assets. Or the 42 million richest people in the world hold 40 percent of the world's wealth. The next four point four percent three hundred eleven million people, probably a fair number of them in the United States, hold 32 percent of the world's wealth. And the bottom 95 percent of the world's population hold 28 percent of the world's wealth. Wow, that's really unequal. That's really unequal. And so we like to think about equity and well, what if we just divided the whole thing up perfectly equally? Well, if we take 2016 money, that's about 256 trillion dollars and divide it by the number of people. And everybody has sort of thirty four thousand dollars. Now, if you own a house in Sacramento, how much house can thirty four thousand dollars buy you? Nothing. So again, these things are kind of hard to figure out. But would it necessarily be a better world if we just split up all the money and gave everyone thirty four thousand dollars? I've seen what homeless people do with ten thousand dollars. It doesn't last long. Usually the neighborhood drug dealer and the place they buy their alcohol and cigarettes and lottery, ironically, tends to get most of that money pretty fast. So I tend to think that if you actually just sort of spread the money around in the world, I don't know if the world would be a better place in some ways, maybe in some ways, maybe not. But very quickly, the inequality would start to manifest itself almost right away. And would all the money in the world then really actually go for the good of our neighbor? Now, the book of Philippians says the proper way to think about this is how we think about our relationships with one another. And your relationships with one another have the same mindset as Christ Jesus, who being in very nature, God did not consider equality with God as something to be used to his own advantage. Rather, he made himself nothing by taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness and being found in appearance as a man. He humbled himself by becoming obedient to death, even death on a cross. Now, in terms of Jesus' mission, it did not include heaping up wealth. He was buried by Joseph of Arimathea, who had heaped up wealth, and Nicodemus, who was probably more wealthy than average amongst his people too. And Jesus himself lived pretty much from, as the gospel tells us, supported by certain wealthy women who likely were widows, who were probably given in marriage when they were 13 or 15 or 16 years old, probably to men who were in their 30s and 40s, who died sometime in their 40s or 50s, leaving their considerable amount of wealth to their widows, who then went on to use it for Jesus. And this is sort of the way the world works. And so the message here is not necessarily heap up money for yourself or don't heap up money for yourself, but do not steal. How do you manage what God has given you in terms of your agency and control for the good of your neighbor? And the witness that Jesus gives is, that's exactly how he lived. Now, you might not be one of the eight people on this list. My guess is none of these eight people will hear this rough draft for the sermon or the sermon itself. None of these individuals are members of Living Stones Church in Sacramento. I know that may come as a shock, but it's true. Now, God has given you authority and control over a degree of wealth, and some of that wealth might be your time, your money. And the question is, do you bless the world with it? Because that's what it's for. Now, you've been given freedom to do this in lots of different ways. And, you know, because I'm speaking to lots of different people right now, I'm not going to say you do this and you do that and you do this and you do that. You know your situation better than I do. And so I just challenge you to think about it. Each of us will be called to account for what we've done with our health, our wealth, our time, and love the Lord your God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength, and love your neighbor as yourself. And use whatever it is and the way that you move around the things of this world towards that end. And if you think about it not so much as necessarily a burden, but think about it as an exciting experiment or freedom, it can be kind of fun. A little story that Jesus told. Jesus told, again, well, the end of the kingdom, it will be like a man going on a journey who called his servants and entrusted his wealth to them. To one he gave five bags of gold, to another two bags, and to another one bag, each according to his ability. Then he went on his journey. And the man who had received five bags of gold went at once and put his money to work and gained five bags more. And also the one with two bags of gold gained two more. But the one who had received one bag went off, dug a hole in the ground, and hid his master's money. After a long time, the master of those servants returned and settled accounts with them. The man who had received five bags of gold brought the other five. Master, he said, you entrusted with five bags of gold. See, I have gained five more. His master replied, well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful with a few things. I will put you in charge of many things. Come and share your master's happiness. Well, is this just simply acquiring things? Well, this is putting the master's money towards what the master wants to see the money put towards. The man with two bags came and said, master, you entrusted me with two bags of gold. I have gained two more. His master replied, well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful with a few things. I will put you in charge of many things. Come and share your master's happiness. Then a man who received one bag of gold came. Master, he said, I knew that you're a hard man, harvesting where you have not sown and gathering where you have not scattered seed. So I was afraid and I went out and I hid your gold in the ground. See, here is what belongs to you. His master replied, you wicked and lazy servant. So you knew that I harvest where I have not sown and gather where I have not scattered seed. Well, then you should have put my money on deposit with the bankers so that when I returned, I would have at least received it back with interest. So take the bag of gold from him and give it to the one who has 10 bags. For whoever has will be given more and they will have an abundance. Whoever does not have even what they have been given will be taken from them and throw that worthless servant outside into darkness where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Amen.