https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hi8RbG7Dgm4

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through my current edition of my Sunday sermon. Now this week like last week I'm doing this on a Thursday night. It's New Year's Eve and I want to get my sermon at least somewhat done so I can go home and celebrate New Year's, coming in of the New Year's with my family and have a couple of days off with children coming home. So the sermon might change a lot between now and Sunday. It doesn't mean that I come into my office and work. It means that I get a draft done and I just keep working over in my head over the weekend and then Sunday morning I sit down and I work on it some more. And so last week's sermon changed quite a bit from the Rough Draft. And if you ever want to see the final draft, you can find it on the Living Stones YouTube channel where we have those drafts. There used to be Sunday School on the YouTube channel. I really liked that, but COVID kind of scotched that. Lord willing after COVID Sunday School will rise again, but we shall see. This picture here are some of my friends in real life. They're church planters. And an interesting thing about church planters, if you want to plant a church, what you really have to do is hit the coffee shops. Now again, my friend Josiah, who you can meet over on the Discord server, Josiah is trying to plant a church during COVID, which means he can't meet with people. That church planters plant, they have dozens of conversations with random people in the neighborhood of where they want to plant a church to try to get a sense of what's on people's minds. What do they think about God? What do they think about Christianity? What are their needs? What are their desires? What are their wants? What are their biases? Now over the last 300, over the last 300, over the last three years, I've had hundreds of conversations with people all around the world about these topics. It's been really the thrill of a lifetime. I have 304 conversations on the conversation list. Now obviously those are only the conversations that I've posted. Maybe a third are not posted because they just weren't appropriate for posting. There are some doubles and a few more than doubles for a couple of people like Job. But people are across the board. They're atheists, they're Christians, they're spiritual but not religious, they're exploring other religions, they're skeptical, they're feeling like their faith is slipping away or they are sort of coming to faith for the first time and they're curious about God. Now the book of Psalms, Psalm 19 says this, the heavens declare the glory of God. The skies proclaim the work of his hands. Day after day they pour forth speech. Night after night they reveal knowledge. They have no speech, they use no words, no sound is heard from them, yet their voice goes out into all the earth, their words to the end of the world. Now you can see that the psalmist is playing with some things. This week I took a little trip with some members of my family to one of the most special places I know in Northern California. It used to be that when I'd go in the winter we'd have the park mostly to ourselves. A really nice day during a holiday weekend. More people come out even in the winter, in the summer the place is packed. But it's an easy place to feel the glory of God. It's an easy place to feel awe and wonder at El Capitan, at the granite peaks. There's a wonderful picture taking spot as you're leaving the valley on the way out. The pictures just line up because the light is just perfect and you can catch it. Shining off of Bridal Veil Falls or Half Dome and El Capitan and you can see the whole thing reflected on the water. Heavens declare the glory of God, Isaiah says, the whole earth is full of his glory. Now tonight I cruised over to one of the channels that I know and a whole bunch of people up spending the New Year's together sort of always debating is there a God. And people like to debate this. You can find these debates all over YouTube. I found the debate to be relatively pointless because it's poorly formed. People imagine that Christians believe and some do certainly that God is a super thing up in the sky who grants wishes and keeps a list of people who are naughty or nice sort of like Santa Claus. The God of the Bible is a little different. The ideas are formulated than that. Christians and Jews have known this for centuries but sometimes this is a little hard to get out there. Most religions imagine the gods to be superhero type beings within a metadivine realm, sort of like super agents within an arena. But the God of Israel was different. He was categorically different from the other gods. The gods of stone and wood and silver and gold. The gods you can find if you read in the Hebrew the gods the Elohim of the Old Testament they served him the spirits the principalities and powers but not simply as a triumphant peer as you would have other gods serving Marduk. He was in strange and strange way both agentic but also arenic. The Apostle Paul says of him quoting pagan philosophers in him we live and move and have our being and to go into some of the details of this would take a whole lot longer than a rough draft for Sunday can allow. But this idea isn't lost on us. In fact I find people voicing it all the time. One of my favorite illustrations of this is who I call Verizon Lisa and you can find her on Verizon commercials from a number of years back and she does what I find many Northern Californians do they stop and they talk to the universe and they expect that the universe is talking back to them and they want things from the universe and they hope things from the universe sort of like people are wanting and hoping things from years from 2020 or 2021. This idea has sort of filtered down even to our post-Christian age our language betrays us. Verizon Lisa believes that the universe is telling her to get a new smartphone and there's a Verizon store right there to fulfill her needs and the universe seems to have ideas about how her hair and outfit are looking that day and she doesn't seem to be offended by the universe sharing its well wishes to her. Now when people give up on organized religion I find that they usually keep being religious or spiritual of one sort or another usually in a much more disorganized way. Back in the 1990s sociologist Christian Smith set to do a landmark study on the spiritual and religious assumptions of American teenagers and he interviewed teenagers from across the religious spectrum and things began to be clear they had beliefs that were formed in them not necessarily formed by their parents some of their parents were Christians of various stripes Pentecostals Reformed Baptist Roman Catholic some of their parents were Muslims some of their parents were Jews some of their parents didn't believe much of anything at all but the children seemed to have a fairly concrete idea about how they thought the universe worked especially with respect to a god. He coined the term moralistic therapeutic deism and said that seems to be the first draft the basic assumption that many of these teens hold and there were five beliefs a god exists who created and orders the world and watches over life on earth. God wants people to be good nice and fair to each other as taught in the bible and by most world religions. The central goal of life is to be happy and to feel good about oneself. God is not involved in my life except when I need God to resolve a problem and then I'll cry out to the universe or show up at a church or find a fortune teller or do something vaguely spiritual in order for God to somehow break through and get me out of my little mess and then good people go to heaven when they die but you know who are the bad people or the people who don't make the cut and what happens to them? Well we don't talk about them and so you'll find ideas from Christianity and from other religions sort of boiled down into this but you'll find this to be sort of the rough draft or the starting point or the first draft of many Americans religious or spiritual assumptions probably in the 60, 70, 80 percentile mostly among the young. I was talking to a psychologist friend of mine and we were sort of comparing notes on some things and you know most often folks really aren't don't have many of their own ideas until they get up up into or above their 30s but then they do these things and things go wrong in their life. 2020 comes around or the pandemic or a heartbreak or a medical emergency or a job loss or something and what happens when the universe doesn't seem to come through for you or seems to be against you or when even though you're a good person bad things happen to you or to other good people or when the world doesn't seem to be following the arc of justice or landing enough on the right side of history. Atheists sort of jump in to resolve the tension and say there is no meaning and there is no purpose. Ah live free and happy. Well live free and happy if you can because if there is no meaning or no purpose we're sort of scavengers and opportunists rummaging around the surface of the earth trying to do the best that we can. People in their disappointment with the unspoken deal that they decide to sort of get passive aggressive with God and on one hand say you don't exist or I'm angry with you so you're dead to me. I'll deny your existence. Ha take that and you know the God that they've just declared doesn't exist must somehow be offended that they've decided to turn up their nose and walk away and say that the universe is just a product of randomness. Not thinking through the fact that if it's a product of randomness then they're actually going to die cold um dead and they're going to be cold dead and alone and 100 years from now nothing they do will matter at least not to anybody then. And of course they say well we'll use reason to fix this but you know it's not as if we haven't been using reason all along. We usually employ reason when there's something that we want to do or accomplish and then the main obstacle seems to be other people who won't listen to reason. We haven't seemed to been able to fix that matter of people not listening to reason and all the all the yakking atheists just seem to reinforce the point that people won't listen to reason so why do you think they're going to start now? Oh if I say it in just the right way oh okay does language really work that way? And of course I've I've had many conversations with people like Michael here who's you probably recognize from the show and he's on other channels sometimes and he deconstructed but then he started to reconstruct because if the world is just a product of random chance and chaos then how can we account for the fact that we've been graced with goodness and beauty and hope and a sense of meaning? Surely all that good can't simply be accidental. If the calamity isn't accidental then why would the good be accidental? How can we account for the good? This is where Athens and Jerusalem sort of come together because people have been drawn to the greatest conversations that the world has hosted and chaos makes sense but what about order? What about rationality? What about reason? How do we reason and how does it work that would maybe reason itself is an illusion? How is it both that we can accomplish so much and not be able to sustain the goodness and beauty and love? The heavens may declare the glory of God but maybe we need something a little more specific. Maybe we're hard of hearing. Maybe we've got trust issues. Maybe we we look at the world and well we're troubled because there's glory in the world and there's pain in the world. The Gospel of John begins with one of the most amazing lines in the New Testament something which just caught people's attention and lit the ancient world on fire. In the beginning was the word and in Greek that's that funny script along the bottom whole logos in the beginning was the word and the word was with God and the word was God logos word words day after day they pour forth speech words we we need words words words are powerful things if you look at the theological dictionary of the New Testament you'll discover that the basic meaning of Lego which is the verbal form of logos is is to gather it's to assemble the world is too big and there's all these things happening and all these ideas and so actually every time we speak and it took us a few years to learn this if you're like most people every time we speak we have to sort of map the world in our brain and get an idea about how to take all of this stuff and and filter it through a sentence and then a sentence makes a paragraph and it it has to it has to make sense to the listener in order to speak you must select in order to communicate you must gather in order to do this and to make sense to have somebody sort of sort of have the thoughts that you're having at the same time so you can both as we say be on the same page you must do so in a way that relates to a listener now for a long time people why can't God just tell us move around the sand on the beach or the stars of the sky and Frederick Beekner has a great story about that that God just started moving stars around and said I exist God and you know for a month or so people went to church and lived a little better lives and so on and so forth but after a while they just looked up in the sky and shrugged well what would you like him to say to you would you believe him if he spoke to you one of my favorite stories out of out of um I can't think of his name former editor of Christianity Today called it a testimony in reverse he he was a young Christian man and he was in a relationship with a girl and he had to decide whether or not to move across the country and he just prayed and prayed and prayed and he'd God had never spoken to him clearly audibly before and then God spoke to him God said no that wasn't the answer he wanted so he did it anyway he learned something about the world that day he learned something about us is it really just communication is communication really that simple have you ever had a fight with anyone it happens all the time it's not just communication we have wills we have desires we have differences every fight with your family every fight with the loved one look how receptive how receptive do you find people to things they don't want to believe or they have an interest in not believing now this word logos for Greek philosophy became a very important term there are sort of two sides of it first we have a view for the use of logos as word speech utterance revelation not in the sense of something proclaimed or heard but rather that of something displayed clarified recognized and understood often we use a lot of words to get that but if a picture is worth a thousand words how many words is a person worth logos as the rational power of calculation in virtue of what man can see himself and his place in the cosmos logos as the indication of an existing and significant content which is assumed to be intelligible logos as the content itself in terms of its meaning and law its basis and structure but secondly even deeper secondly we have in view logos as a metaphysical reality as an established term in philosophy and theology from which there finally develops in later antiquity under alien influences a cosmological entity and a hypostasis of the deity and then dare he write it in english a deuteros theos deuteros deuteros that sounds like a second a second god but but god is one how can that be john comes out with this radical prologue in the beginning was the word and the word was with god and the word was god he was with god in the beginning through him all things were made without him nothing was made that has been made in him was life and that life was the light of all mankind the light shines in the darkness and the darkness has not overcome it knowledgeable people in the hellenistic world could understand the the philosophical subplot but this revelation didn't require years of study in greek philosophy he endured argumentation he was real he was durable sticks and stones can break bones even his but the words well he would endure them he is more real than that which opposes him the true light that gives light to everyone was coming into the world he was in the world and though the world was made through him the world did not recognize him he came to that which was his own but his own did not receive him yet to all who did receive him to those who believed in his name he gave the right to become children of god children born not of natural descent nor of human decision nor a husband's will but born of god last week we talked about the possibility of the commons where the knowledge of the lord covers the earth like the waters cover the sea people who have a direct relationship with the father the likes of which we wonder about the word became flesh and made his dwelling among us we have seen his glory the glory of the one and only son who came from the father full of grace and truth out of his fullness we have all received in the place of grace already given for the law was given through moses grace and truth came through jesus christ if you remember last week we talked about norms and laws and then deep code it's a deep family code that gets into us that changes us from the inside by which we begin to resemble the one who was the icon the image of the invisible god says colossians 1 15 no one has seen god because it's too big but the one and only son who is himself god and who is in the closest relationship with the father has made him known now still there is darkness in the world world still resists him he still we still imagine ourselves at the center of the story even though we're too small even for the story and the world continues to disappoint but only by the voluntary sacrifice so the gospel of john begins with a book of signs where we begin to recognize him and it culminates in the book of glory and that glory is his crucifixion and then resurrection we begin to see ourselves in his light we begin to see our darkness by his light we begin to trust his goodness we begin to join the cruciform pattern by which neighbors are loved gifts are given gifts are given and death is swallowed up in victory he shows us glory by giving himself we show his glory by giving ourselves on the night he was betrayed he took bread and broke it and said this is my body given for you do this in remembrance of me we become children of the father just as he showed himself to be the son of the father full of grace and truth