https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=zCB8tpa-XNM

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday. And this is going to be a very rough draft just because of the way this week worked out and sometimes drafts are rougher than others and there's more work I have to do on the sermon between Friday and Sunday, but this is part of the process so we're going to do it. It's kind of hard sometimes preaching after you had a sermon that you thought went really well and you do another one and it's like, oh, I want this one to go well too. They don't all go well. Last week we had the woman with the hemorrhage who was picking Jesus' miracle pocket by faith. She heard about Jesus and came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak, for she said, if I but touch his clothes, I will be made well. We wondered, would Jesus respect such a thing? But he turns to her and he says, daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace and be healed from your disease. This woman is using Jesus as a tool to get better and he doesn't express annoyance at that. He welcomes her, which is astoundingly generous. Now, I had a conversation with Paul Anlater. I always put an extra T in there. I don't know why. And we talked about basically modern, charismatic Pentecostal movement and a bunch of the things that go on there. And there's this undertone that happens in this movement that if you're not healed, it's your own fault. That faith is this work that we must accomplish. Otherwise, God can't give us what we need. The flip side of that being, well, if you do believe it hard enough, then God will give you whatever you ask for in the verses of the Bible. That would very much lead you to believe that. And so then God somehow becomes this machine that we can engage. And by doing this little psychological exercise, we can secure for ourselves whatever we want. And it becomes basically a Christian equivalent of all sorts of other ideas often that come from the New Age, the law of attraction, and it's just sort of a Christian version of this. You've got the other side, which are the skeptics and the manual for believing atheists said, Faith is belief without evidence. And there are how many videos where this thing gets trotted out. And a little later in the book, there's this admonition that don't use this word faith in any other way but for religious belief. And that will somehow help the cause of turning people from this mental illness called religion. But that really doesn't work. Fiat currency, every dollar in your pocket works on faith. These are not gold certificates as if gold were belief. Use of money, use of gold for money required any less faith than use of greenbacks. This is faith in the United States government. And you can't point to the United States government. You can point to buildings. You can point to politicians. You can point to documents. But the United States government is not a physical thing. It's a relational thing. And Uncle Sam is a real person like Santa Claus isn't a real person, but he's real enough for you to pay your taxes to. And so, you know, this argument that faith is this thing that's completely alien to us and we don't actually use it every day of our life. And if you follow my other videos, the world is just way too complex to live in without faith in just about everything. It's just how we have to work in this world because of, if you look at the verveky stuff I do, I'm not going to talk about this on Sunday morning, the combinatorial explosion. There's just way too much stuff and you don't have time in your life to figure everything out and deduce everything down to some first principle. Life simply doesn't work that way. Now, this week's story is just as strange as the last story. There's a reason the Bible is so bottomless because all the king's scholars and all the king's men just can't seem to fathom the Bible completely. He, meaning Jesus, left that place and came to his hometown and his disciples followed him. On the Sabbath he began to teach in the synagogue and many who heard him were astounded. They said, Where did this man get all of this? Hearing his words. What is this wisdom that has been given to him? What deeds of power are being done by his hands? Is this not the carpenter? Now, a lot of scholars have detected derision in this. The son of Mary, there's more derision in that because usually the practice was you identify him by the father. And this leads to all sorts of rumors about, well, what are the circumstances about Jesus' birth, really? The son of Mary and the brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon. Now, again, if you needed examples of how commonly repeated names were, there's a string of them. And are not his sisters here with us? And they took offense at him. And a word is used. He becomes a stumbling stone. There's a snare. There's a trap. And we're trying to figure out what exactly is the nature of this trap and whose responsibility is this trap? And why have they fallen into it? And the passage only gets stranger. Then Jesus said to him, Prophets are not without honor except in their hometown and among their own kin and in their own house. This is a proverbial saying. And now Jesus applies it to himself. And he could do no deed of power there, except that he laid his hands on a few sick people and cured them. Well, that's all. But what's going on there? And notice that the people are sick. And so that's important. We're going to pay attention to that. And he was amazed at their unbelief. Now, I shouldn't have taken that slide out. Belief and unbelief come up in Mark and almost right away when they brought the paralytic to Jesus. He saw their faith and he says, Your sins are forgiven. Wow. And of course, the theologians immediately had a problem with that. And they said to him, Why are you afraid? Why are you still afraid? Have you still have no faith? That's what he says to the disciples when they were terrified by the storm on the Sea of Galilee. He said to her daughter, Your faith has made you well go in peace. This is the story we just referenced. He said to them in Chapter 10, Go, your faith has made you well. He says that to lepers. Jesus has faith in Chapter 11. Have faith in God. And faith as a verb again comes up in many of the same stories. Saying to the ruler of the synagogue, Do not fear. Only have faith. It's something it's something he's inviting him to to to generate or and again, we don't want to really necessarily split the whole thing. We don't really necessarily split the psychology from the action here because they're one united thing that Jesus is inviting him into. Jesus said to him, This is this is later with a man who's got a son who's got an impure spirit, an unclean spirit. We've talked about that before in the past thing. And and he says, You know, all things are possible for those who believe. And immediately the father of the child cried out, I believe. Help my unbelief. So so even faith seems to be something we can ask for. Now, this whole business about relegating the word faith to just religious things. Well, they've got a real problem because this word's been used in a particular way for a very, very long time. And and the first instances of the word, at least in Greek, had everything to do with reliability. And it was it was often confidence in a weapon or confidence in skill with a weapon and a faithful. In fact, all of this stuff really comes through today. A faithful servant performs their duty and their obedient. It had to do with the focus that this that this faith was upon the trustworthiness. It was it was sort of a middle space between between the person and the future through someone or something else. Now, now here in the woman with the discharge, Jesus is seen as a reliable tool. And he welcomes that as a starting place. But but notice, he's like, who touched me? He's not about to just be used like that. What he what he'd really like with her is is more of a relationship to know and be known. The relationships should come. Jesus isn't the vending machine. Now, he's teaching on the Sabbath. And and what's amazing is that they take offense at him. And and and he his his growing up with them, his commonality with them, his. This becomes a trap. And he could do no deed of power except lay hands on a few sick people and cure them as if this is a small thing. Now, if we do some theology, he gives no signs of such potential in his youth. This is going to ring a lot of theological bells all over the place about adoptionism and some of these things that church councils and church fathers had worked out. But but this framed him in the minds of the people. And and and what seems to be important is that this framing is communal. Why was he so common? Why the transformation is the transformation part of his story? So now he's famous. And well, do they want to ride his coattails? Is have have they benefited or not benefited from from this? Well, can he do no deeds of power? And so the scholars debate is this can or would. But but the little softener that comes in kind of invites us into this thought experiment. If someone local had suffered the kind of misfortune as Jairus or the woman with the hemorrhage and reached out to Jesus in their pain, could Jesus have healed them? Well, the little softening passage seems to say, well, well, that could happen. And so so is there herd immunity in a situation and only only desperation can overcome this this unbelief with which is sort of sort of the social zeitgeist that they're dealing with. Now, there's irony in this because some of these dynamics still hold today. There's a certain kind of familiarity with Jesus that seems to have a deleterious impact on faith all over the world. If you look at places, certain places in the world, Jesus is crushing it and miracle stories are are all over the place. And they're very common. And they're usually often at the frontiers of historic Christianity where you have these works of power. But it seems that America is weak or Christianity is weak in places like Europe, Europe and America. But the exceptions to this as shown by Chris Arnade's book Dignity, I mean, he's someone from front row America who goes to the homeless and the people living in what he called back row America. And one of the things that really struck him in his journey from front row America from to back row America from sort of middle class to elite front rows form sort of lower middle class, the bottom back row is the ubiquity of faith. Now, that would certainly lead us to believe that faith isn't something like wishful thinking might lead us to believe something like C.S. Lewis's quip that pain is God's megaphone for a deaf world. Might imagine that desperation is something which can actually break through the herd immunity. But now let's put it to the test because we like to test and we usually test things when we're not desperate. We sit in our chair and we look over and we construct mental operations and we ask hard questions and we're we're looking for science here. Is God reliable? Christian people die just like everyone else. How many times don't people come to my offer and office and why isn't God listening to my prayers? Why won't he answer them? Why is this cancer growing? Why has not God not heard my prayers? We're going to apply the scientific method to your supposed solution to our pain. You pray I'll use whatever power I have to deliver myself from the source of pain and we'll see who wins. But be careful. Science requires outcomes that are stipulated before. And they're usually narrow and specific. When the soldiers led him into the courtyard of the palace, that is the governor's headquarters, and they called and they called together the whole cohort and they clothed him in a purple cloth after twisting some thorns into a crown and they put it on him. And they began saluting him. Hail, King of the Jews. And they struck his head with a reed and spat upon him and knelt down in homage to him. What kind of superhero is this Jesus? After mocking him, they stripped him of his purple cloak and put his own clothes on him and they led him out to crucify him. They crucified two rebels with him, two other insurgents who were enemies of the occupation, one on his right and one on his left and probably to the crowd they were indistinguishable. Those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads and saying, So you are going to destroy this temple and build it in three days. Come down from the cross and save yourself. In the same way the chief priests and the teachers of the law mocked him among others. He saved others, they said, but he can't save himself. Surely this is the proof. This is the proof of faith. Surely, faith, if it's the solution to our pain, if it's the solution to our woes, if it's somehow the pathway by which the world gets saved, surely it ought to manifest here. Let this Messiah, this King of Israel, come down from the cross that we may see and believe. Those who crucified him also heaped insults on him. Was Jesus suffering an avenue and an exercise for his own faith in the Father? He quotes Psalm 22, My God, my God, are you reliable? I'm supposed to be your son. And here I am, taken by my political enemies, stretched out naked for the amusement of the crowd. This, this. Well, here's the question. Did the unbelief of the crowd make him unable to do any power? Was it something else that held him back from the displays in the same text? What is it that happened there? Was he saving others? He who couldn't save himself? Or was he staying there, not saving himself, in order to save others? Isn't that the pattern of most things in this world? The parent saves the child at the cost of themselves. We save others by not saving ourselves. We suffer on behalf of the others in small and great ways. Where will this test lead? Faith is about the reliability of its focus. It goes all the way back to the beginning of the use of the word in Greek. Faith is connected with groups on both sides. Isn't that interesting how we're not disconnected from each other. There's a herd immunity on both sides of this, perhaps. Faith is something that can transcend the outcomes you imagine to be essential to your story as you see it. It is not wishful thinking. Faith is a gift that God gives, usually accompanied by pain and loss. You see, in many of these stories, the opportunity for growth of faith is set up by circumstances beyond their control. And I should probably add unwelcome. It is presented as an opportunity to walk through a painful and scary door into something beyond our sight. It's interesting how how Jairus humbled himself for the love of his daughter. How the woman, well, she first kind of stole it, but then she humbles herself to tell the truth to Jesus and is welcomed with relationship. Faith is God's invitation to participate in our transformation and the renewal of the world. Crucifixion and resurrection is that story. Because the story of Jesus' resurrection is not simply the story of one man going coming back to life, even with the story of Lazarus or Jairus' daughter. Those are stories of resuscitation. The Bible very clearly presents Jesus' resurrection as the beginning of creation 2.0. And faith seems integral to that transformation. Faith is how we grow, what we grow and what we become. We become reliable and trustworthy. But faith has everything to do with the target. Faith is this in between space where where things are transformed by faith. The reliability of its focus, which is God in Jesus in these stories, is manifest to the world.