https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=-jmfM87rV_k

 Sure. Well, Jason, you and I have never met and you just said you've this is your first time on Zoom. So you you are blessed. Tell me a little bit about yourself. Well, I've never been on Zoom, but I have used Google Meet before. It used to be Hangouts or whatever. So I have used video teleconferencing, but just just not Zoom itself. But I'm originally from Pittsburgh. My family's my mother's family, my father's family were Catholic. I but when they were like late teenagers, early 20s, they were they were part of the Jesus movement, the late, late hippie Christian kind of kind of situation. They had really cool home meetings and they would meet in the park and they'd have worship services and Bible studies and all that kind of stuff. Really informal, noninstitutional type situation there for a while. And then some folks said, you guys really get into a church. They they started at the A.G. Assembly of God Church when I was a kid and then for that was in Pittsburgh for a while there. And then we we moved to the D.C. area when I was. Finishing high school and so we were at a non-denominational church there, which was very similar, very similar to the type A.G. And we had really good youth pastor there at church. And so at that high school is where I met my wife. We got married after shortly after college. And we moved out further out of the D.C. area. I mean, we're still in the D.C. orbit further out in the interlands. And we were helping out a friend of ours, actually that youth pastor went back to school and he became a Foursquare minister, which is also similar to A.G. Yeah. And Foursquare, he got based out of church in just over the border in West Virginia. They're not too far from where we're at. And we went out there to help him out. And my wife was. She did the music and worship and I was on the council for a while and then eventually the treasurer. And so we had we had a. A really good situation there, a really good learning experience, because we were with people that we knew and we're we're happy to be with and happy to be helping out various ways in the church. And and we got to see a little bit behind the curtain how things work in that world, you know, in the in the church, in the in the church itself, the denomination and the, you know, the how things operated institutionally. Oh, and then I started reading. I hadn't really been a reader. I was math, science and I'm a software engineer by trade and, you know, sports and and math and science for my thing. I really wasn't into reading or, you know, side of the brain that what really wasn't for me. I thought so. I really started having a pretty good time reading. I mean, it took me a while to get into it because all through school, it's mostly the it's mostly the fiction, you know, when you're when you're a young child, it's obviously fiction. And then even if you get a little older, even through high school, it's mostly fiction. I mean, you're reading some nonfiction, but I just had just had and had the experience of getting into types of girl that I would have been interested in. So I started with the math, the not math, scientific, the Bible and science and that whole debate on various topics within that, you know, realm. And I had always I had always wondered why there was such a problem for a lot of people, why why there was so many, you know, people debating, you know, there's certain strains of Christians were hating, you know, people on these topics about the age of the earth or evolution or, you know, there's lots of other types of topics that hit that range. So and because it's related to science and something that I interested in generally, you know, or at least have a mind for somewhat, I figured, well, let me let me look at this as a way into reading, as a way into learning how to read, becoming disciplined enough to actually understand what I'm reading, get into a chapter and finish it and remember what I started reading about. And so so that was fascinating. I was eye opening. I eventually became more fluid at reading and and got to the point where I could actually make it through a whole book. And man, I caught fire. I read a lot. And I read, you know, different people's reconciliation of their faith with with with, you know, their profession in a lot of cases. So there was I read about young earth creationist, older creationist, it's like evolution or or, you know, all those different types of perspectives. Q Ross was one of the big ones. And Francis Collins, the head of NIH, he worked on the Human Genome Project. And he had a he had a really cool book he came out with. And, you know, talking about his perspective and so that that got me into reading generally. And then I started getting into I saw a video of someone had come by the church and had this video and thought I might be interested. I looked at it. It was Michael Frost. He was talking to a group in I think Minnesota or somewhere in the US. He's Australian. And he was talking about mission and a lot more than just about that. I like the introduction to that. So I started reading a lot on Michael Frost and Alan Hirsch and talking about missional perspectives in the faith and, you know, living in a post-Christian, you know, context, whether it's Europe or in their case, Australia and, you know, being able to reach out to people and, you know, in that context and be able to, you know, what do we do? What do we do as people of faith, as Christians, as people want to share our faith and in a place where it's no longer, you know, people no longer come to us, so to speak. Yeah. So and it was it was funny. You just had a discussion with David from Germany. Yeah. Yeah. A lot of this type of thing. And it was funny because I had signed up before that before you had released that. So I didn't know you were going to talk with him about that. And I was like, oh, this is like all the stuff I wanted to talk about. I just I just finished a very interesting conversation about creation science stuff. So that'll be on the channel, too. So keep going. Keep going. You're doing great. Yeah. So so the missional stuff and then how we do church, which follows on from that ecclesiology. And I really I really had a very good experience as a young child. With my folks having a very non institutional, informal situation, you know, with their their ecclesiology. And and I also was a part of an institutional and understood how that worked a little bit and kind of kind of was kind of been in the in the mode of going in the non institutional route. Yeah. And and so we moved back from West Virginia to Maryland. And my wife and I have been involved in various projects in the past 12 years or so. And, you know, really have, you know, I've I've kind of had you know, kind of kind of a. I don't want to talk things out with someone like yourself who has who has the institutional perspective and, you know, can can and is also open, you know, and and is willing to talk with someone who who may may be coming from a different perspective than they are coming from. So and it's hard to talk to people in churches like that, especially clergy, because because they're quite often quite often will be, you know, defensive or or or, you know, whatever, just, you know, it's it's it can be it can be a threatening topic. Yeah. Oh, absolutely. It drives their living. That's right. You're threatening their livelihood. You know, all those software engineers, they're destroying the world. Why don't we ban them? Right. Right. Exactly. And I get that. I get that. And and I'm I really was coming from a place where I had a fantastic, a fantastic example of a pastor and some good people within the institution. And so I so there's very good people within all the different flavors of Christianity. And and but I do I still do hold hold that the institution itself, I think, is can be a can be a hindrance to the faith rather than a help. And I know your perspective is that, you know, you need that long term that long term vehicle, so to speak, to be able to keep the keep the thing going or keep the, you know, to have various things that will help in long term, the long term perspective and so forth. And, you know, the ossification and the preservation are deeply tied here, right? Or tuitions, the plus and the minus. Yeah, that's plus and the minus. They're almost always together. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And I mean, I just as I read the Bible, as I see, you know, the early history of the church, I just, you know, I don't see a lot of that, you know, the institutional part of it, you know, and, you know, I know, I know it's for a lot of people. It's very easy to say, oh, the, you know, once the the edict of Milan happened in the end, you know, once, you know, Catholicism started and all that kind of stuff. That's the bad, bad part or whatever. And, you know, I, I, I realized there's history before that. There is some institutional organization history that preceded that. It's not, you know, there's not some some magic that happened there that messed everything up. There was a meeting that's reflected by Axe 15. They did have a meeting. Yeah. Yeah. So I do realize there's it's more complicated than than a lot of people would let on. But but yeah, I still, you know, I think there's just, you know, and another thing I should mention about my reading is my wife and I homeschooled our children. We have kids and we. So I read a lot in that area to to prepare for that. And we read John Holt and John Taylor Gatto and Yvonne Illich. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Oh, boy. Yeah. There's I thought it was just one of my favorites. Yeah. Yeah. So you can see where my my some of my influence comes from. Very, very non institutional. And so I've very much appreciated reading and listening to him. Basically everything he's done. And also, because I was in the frost and herch, I picked up on the line that they were in. They would reference Leslie Newbegin. Yeah. David Bosch and T. Wright, various people like that. And so I started reading that at Bain, too. And so. Like another one that they mentioned. And I'm really interested to hear what Verbecki was talking about with with Tillich, because his his interpretation of Tillich, I think is a little different than my. You know, I've read Tillich extensively, and that's kind of a I I don't know if I don't know if I get Tillich the same way he's getting to. You know, I mean, right now I'm reading with us, with the small group we have on Sunday nights, we meet, you know, we worked for us. And the small group, we're going through Tillich sermons, a book of sermons. I've read I've read his academic work, but going through the sermons, it's hard to see how you would get to where Verbecki gets to with Tillich, you know, being from the non theist, you know, where he gets the non theist perspective from him. But oh, that's interesting. Yeah. So there are there are volumes of some of there are some collected sermons of Tillich's that are out there in publication. Oh, yeah. Yeah. And they're fantastic. And they're really good. They're really good for right now. A lot of it like shaking the shaking of the foundations would be would be great to read right now. You know, he's he's a little bit difficult, you know, reading wise. Yeah. He's his academic work very difficult. Yeah. And but but his sermons are obviously. Yeah. Well, you have to write. Oh, right. You got to you got to talk to somebody outside the academy. All types have to be in the audience there. So, yeah, I understand that. But yeah, I understand. Definitely shaking the foundations. And there's another one that we're reading after that. The new new being, I think, maybe I can't remember the name of the books. We haven't read it yet, but very good stuff. And now he does look does get into at the end of the courage to be, I think, is the one where he talks about the God beyond the God of Theism. And so in that in that really, you know, in that space, I can see where he might be getting to a non theist understanding. But but having read the whole book up to that, I I just take it differently than you take it, maybe perhaps, you know, perhaps there's something I'm not getting. But, you know, we you know, I did a little dive into Nietzsche this week and read how people read Nietzsche varies tremendously. And so, I mean, we human beings are pretty mysterious creatures. And we get someone as deep and complex as as Paul Tillich. Yeah. You know, two people reading him aren't going to come away saying, oh, yeah, this is him. I mean, it's it's gonna it's it's because you're it's you reading Tillich. It's not just, you know, the a monarchical vision of Paul Tillich. And so how John Vervecki comes at this again with all of his story. And I mean, we again, this is part of the the reintegration of the subject. That's I mean, that's where we're at. So. Right. Right. And I am. I also I should tell you how I came about Kush, a church channel. My my brother sent me Jordan Peterson, the Bible series. He sent me an email, I guess, with a of 17, somewhere in that range. And he sent me a link of Peterson doing the first. I think it was the first Bible series talk. And I got told that I was like, wow, yeah, this is some interesting material to sit through. And and then shortly after that, I saw you. And so I've been watching a lot of your stuff for a while. Well, thank you. Yeah. Well, thank you. Thank you. I really appreciate what you're doing with the estuary. And I I really I really I get that. I think that's awesome. And you know, it's it's it's kind of the type of of missional projects that I've been trying to do. My wife and I've been trying to do in our context for a while now. And and I really I really think that's a way to go. Well, thank you. Yeah, it's it's yeah. Boy, oh, there's so much there because, you know, especially when you come to institutions. There's so before, oh, gosh, when I first came to Sacramento, away from the mission field. So in the mission field, I mostly worked with small churches, you know, very small churches needed 10 baptized individuals to have a church. So the churches are very small. And there are a lot of basically to make calm chapels. They called them Campo Blancos, you know, white fields. And there are a lot of preachers in those places. And so that's how the mission field works. And then I came back to North America and I accepted the call to this church. And the whole class was going out to Willow Creek for something to learn from the megachurch movement. And, you know, that was not going to work at Living Stones. I mean, we've got way too much authenticity to be branded for a broad audience. That became abundantly clear. And then we and then we started to work on the church. And I think that's the most important thing. That became abundantly clear. And then we and so instead of really going mega, I really turned to church more towards small group stuff. And then I read, you know, a bunch of the house church literature. And at that point in the I mean, the the seeker movement was dying. And one of the one of the enduring areas that the seeker movement sort of seeded a little bit was the cell church movement. And the idea that what if what if the primary what if the primary instantiation of church were house churches instead of these? You know, because once you get up to scale, then you're going to get the institutional dynamics and a bunch of the corruption and let's say Veritas lubrication that that goes along with scale. But in a in a in a group of people meeting in a home of, you know, less than 10 or 15 people face to face, life on life. And that became a big thing at the beginning of the at the beginning of the 21st the 21st century. And that kind of receded partly because. It's very difficult to actually maintain that long term. And it's some of those value added that institutions offer that sort of allow individuals to shirk a bit of responsibility and formalize it in an institution. There's just nowhere to hide in that small setting, which makes it incredibly fruitful, but also pretty significantly demanding. And if in your small group, you're reading Paul Tillich's sermons, you got a pretty you got a you got a pretty impressive little clump there. These aren't these aren't people you randomly pick out of a church or off the street that can, you know, that can go with that. And I think about Nate Hile. I don't know if you've come across him, but Nate Hiles kind of in that same boat. I haven't heard of him. Yeah, he's got a he's got a little YouTube channel, Grail Country. And I haven't done a conversation with him yet. I really have to. He's one of those people on my list. It's like, yeah, I got to talk to me. But he too is he's he's in one of the have you talked to John Van Donk at all about getting in the estuary support network? No, you should talk to John Van Donk and Nate's in one of those groups. And so it's you know, part of how I've sort of pitched estuary to churches is downstream. And I've been reticent about pitching estuary as church for reasons. I'm sure you can understand giving the seats I sit in. But I very much understand how you see it that way, given the cell church, home church model. Yeah, it's you know, there's there's a lot of the institutional features that that. You know, just just really rubbed me the wrong way when I was in when I was in it, kind of on that side, on the other side of it, you know, behind the curtain, so to speak. You know, you're you're reporting all the numbers up to the denomination and the money and the you know, all that kind of stuff. And and, you know, every once in a while, there'll be something coming down for you. You know, the OK, we're doing this now. We're doing you know, we're doing this growth movement thing or whatever. You know, not necessarily that. But I'm just saying one, you know, the types of things that might be coming your way. You know, whatever the various things. I mean, you're in it. So, you know, you know what you get. But, you know, what you have to do both directions. And and while like I said, while I believe there are great people in in the institutions, I just think that I just saw so many things were like, man. This is this is unfortunate. This is this is really unfortunate. And I I think it, you know, I think it really. I don't know. It's it's like you said, there's pluses and minuses. And it's just hard for me, hard for me to go in that direction. So well, I just went to a Rod Rear event here in Sacramento. And Rod can tend to get a little apocalyptic. And so if he's right, you're in good shape because, you know, if if if if the if the big bad government is going to really crack down on churches, you're really under the radar. And anybody with a building and a sign is going to be right in their crosshairs. So right, right. Well, I mean, a lot of a lot of the culture war stuff, I think, is it depends on institutions. Because if there's not an institution to go into and cause problems in, then if there's no seat of power to try to take over, you know, then then there's I mean, the the the cultural warriors really are going after the the what they want is power. It has nothing to do with in my opinion, has nothing to do with whatever tools they're using, whether that be the SJW stuff or whatever. Those are just vehicles towards what they want. And the power that they want is I mean, you've you've been very open about what you're talking about in your own church with a marriage thing, I think is what it is. And there's there's people who there's people in your. Domination, who I'm thinking, you know, I don't know these people, I'm just guessing who who who might want to who might want to have this go over in a certain way, because they view it as a power play. You know, they view it as they view it as OK. Once once we can be shown to have had it made work here, you know, this will be for our cause or whatever. And I really think that that's that's one of those things with institutions and, you know, whether it's the schools, you know, because, you know, a lot of my reading has been in that way. God, oh, I mean, when my wife and I homeschooled and, you know, she remember when she brought God, oh, home and it's like, wow. You said your wife's a teacher, too. Yeah, she's a cheese in the system. Well, that's well. So part of, you know, where we got here was she we were homeschooling. And, you know, for a while, the, you know, the state board of education was getting a little bit more tyrannical and threatening to crack down on homeschoolers. And so she said, well, I better get my teaching credential. So if I have a teaching credential, that was sort of the avenue. If I'm a credentialed teacher, the state can't really get at me in terms of my children are not being educated. But in order to get a teaching credential, she entered into that system. Right. And then, you know, and then so for a while, I was homeschooling while she was teaching in a in a regular school. Right. And so, you know, it's it's kind of crazy. Yeah. My mom was a teacher for many years and eventually went went back to school and got into the administration end of it. And she wrote a book not too long ago when she retired. And really, I mean, she was, you know, she's coming from the same perspective as as as I am. And in that, you know, she she just saw how how much wrong was done in the system in the name of educating. But it really was about is about something totally different. Yeah. And and that her book was, you know, actually, she was out in your area. She retired, I guess, five or six years ago, and we moved her back this way. My brother and I load up all her stuff and drove across the country. And she yeah, she was in the Rock, Rockland, Roseville. Oh, yeah, yeah. Somewhere suburb of Sacramento. I used to come through Sacramento once a year to to to I used to take kids one of the time to see her, you know, for little trips, little special trips with Grammy and and, you know, so so so it's been a it was a couple of years after that that I discovered you or else I could have stopped my dirt and said I on my way through. But yeah, but but my mother has, you know, a very interesting perspective, having worked as a teacher in three different states and as an administrator in two more different states. So Pennsylvania, Maryland and California for a good chunk of years in each one. So well, the you know, part of what my wife is seeing when that when Covid hit, my wife, who was very popular with homeschool, you know, really loved homeschooling. She saw the first year of Covid when they shut down the schools as this big opportunity to really help parents homeschool their children and what the message she got back, both from the institution, but also from the parents. Was I don't want to spend all day with these kids. Right. Right. And that that just breaks my wife's heart. So she's a she's a Waldorf teacher, which means that she loops up with the kids. So she spends eight years with this group of 25 kids. And they really become her kids. Some of these kids are spending more time with her than they are with their parents. And so, you know, the first class that she brought through, when she had to sort of relinquish them to the world, it just broke her heart because they were her kids and she's an amazing teacher, an amazing mother. So that breaks my mom's heart, breaks my wife's heart when she when they hear hear parents, you know, not wanting to spend time with their kids. Well, it's very similar with churches. So one of our church plants was was going to go the pure cell model. It's life on life. They had developed curriculum for for faith formation. They did all of that. And so they went, you know, often with the church plant, you'll start with the core group very quickly. You'll get up to the worshipping community and then up from there because you want to get up over 200 within the first two years. Otherwise, you never really break the atmosphere, as it were. But they decided, no, they were they were going to be a cell group and just have maybe quarterly celebration services where they bring them all together, something like that. And basically what they learned was the people didn't want it. They wanted, you know, analogous to the schools, they wanted the big institution that was going to feed them. And and they would, you know, they did all of this work with the people, you know, explaining their vision, explaining their missions is life on life. What we're doing here in the living room is really the church. When we eventually do gather and do singing and celebration that that will be sort of a that'll be a celebratory other. But what we really do right here is is a church. And for the most part, people said, I don't want that. All right. I want an event I can come to and sit there and be fairly passive and enjoy it and feel like I've gotten a little formation in me and then go back to my life. And I'd really like to keep it within an hour. Thank you. No, no, you're absolutely right. And I think that's that's my theory is that it comes from school and in our context, the American context, are the the evangelical church or the Protestant folks of the Protestant varieties of church. That's what it is. Well, Catholic and Orthodox, too. I mean, it's inherited this. And in many ways, the Reformation was, you know, fueled by these little these little, you know, conventicles, these little tiny little small groups, essentially. They were that they were the vanguard of the Reformation because they were the cells, the revolutionary cells. So, yeah. Well, what I'm saying is, is that they they have a little different flavor. What I'm saying is, is that the flavor you see in the in most Protestant churches in America specifically is that that consumeristic flavor of church is, I think, a product of the schooling that we got. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And I think you're right. We're reflecting what we what we were raised in, you know, four or five generations now schooling where it's, you know, that that passive mode where you're where you're sitting back and you're part of the audience. So we're you know, we're an audience in front of the movie screen, the TV screen, the basketball game, the football game. We're we're we're an audience at church. Yeah. And I think that's part of the problem. And I mean, you know, you know that, you're, you know, trying to get people to do stuff in the church, you know, to try to participate. You know, I know it's killer for some pastors, you know, to have people want to be, you know, to help you out, to be involved, to do stuff, you know, whether it be in the church or in the community. It's it's it's tough to get that to switch, switch people out of that mindset, that psychological passive mindset into an active mode and into production mode. And some not not saying not saying everyone, some leadership, you know, exacerbate that. Well, we don't we don't want you, you know, we don't want you doing any of this up here, you know, we don't actually. I mean, you can, you know, do stuff in the church with each other, you know, you know, be the Sunday school teacher, be the whatever. You could do those different things. We don't want you actually doing anything that's, you know, the production. Where are the professionals? Where are the professionals? Exactly. To the script. And it's, you know, you know, you read Gato and others, you know, it's it's fundamentally an industrialized model. And in that sense, do we, you know, not only shape the schools, but eventually came around to shape the churches, too. That's what I think. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I think I think it's definitely a problem. And so I I think that. You know, that the estuary type thing you're doing and and, you know, getting getting outside the church really is is that that's the missional end of it is really because in that consumeristic model mode, you know, people are told to bring people to the church. That's that's what what has gone for many years as the as as missions. Go get some people, bring them into the church. And that's really expecting people to come on to our territory and our turf. And they're they're in an uncomfortable setting and they're in they're in an uncomfortable place. And we really need to be we need to be the ones who are. Yeah. And even the issues of. You know, the same sex marriage issue that, you know, is destroying my denomination in many ways, that's far better addressed in a small setting, because then it's face to face. And you actually have what once you once you level up into the industrialized region, now you've got issues of credentialing and standardization and basically behavioral management. I mean, in that sense, the entire all of this modern machinery enters into the church. And many of the issues that we're dealing with are caused by that modernist industrial framework that the church has completely. Bought into to the degree that it doesn't really know how to live without. Right. Yeah, that relational relational accountability that you have in a small group, like you said, dealing with that very sensitive, very personal issue face to face. I mean, that's the only way to do it is with relational accountability. If you're at the relational scale, you know, there's there's a lot of things that could go where you can't do it at a non relational scale. That Dunbar number, you know, the one one forty eight or one fifty or whatever, having those those ties that you have within the you know, your your network is once you get outside of that, you're it's anonymizing, you know, and the bigger you get, the more anonymous it is and the more I think not just corruption, which is obviously a problem in any institution, but but not even on the corruption end, but just the you know, starting to be inhuman to one another, like like there is online, you know, people online are very they say things that they would never say to someone in real life. Well, I think that also gets into the. You know, the the the crisis of the crisis of the person where we're at now is also partly caused by this, because, you know, I experienced that very quickly. When my channel got up above a thousand subs, because when the channel was smaller, which unfortunately was only for about a week because it just I mean, YouTube just kind of whoosh. And what that meant was, yeah, my Dunbar number was just exploded very quickly, which it hadn't been basically because of how small this church was. And and that's the reason why I think that's the reason why I think that's and and that sort of protected me for a long time in many ways. But suddenly, very quickly, the channel got beyond, you know, my capacity to to remember everybody, to remember everybody's names, to remember everybody's story. I've got a pretty good memory. And so, you know, I can fake it fairly well in some cases. But there are there are people out there who have been, you know, hurt and disappointed by me, basically because in this modern frame, I can't I can't value them as a person, as an individual, because I'm I'm simply dealing with too many people. Sure, sure. And it's you know, I lament that, but I'm. I'm sort of trapped in it and you say, well, you can you can destroy the trap by shutting down the channel and by, you know, turning off YouTube and, you know, changing my email address and getting off Twitter and going getting back under the radar and saying no more of that. If you want to find me, you got to find me. And but but even then, you know, maybe after two, three years, people would forget about me. But. Is that the best thing to do now? Well, I don't know. Well, see, that's it's funny you mentioned that because because that's that's kind of, you know, kind of a pull in me, you know, localism, which is which is, you know, what my whole thing is, is, you know, but but then I looked at video of, you know, Jordan Peterson talking about the biblical series, and that was valuable to me. Yeah. And and and then I met, you know, met your channel and have have learned many things. And, you know, it's it's that it's that thing is that pull. It's like. I think only the in-person stuff is the real stuff, and that's the stuff we should focus on. But then also, you know, I read I read Tillich, you know, for example, other books, Gatto, Illich, books themselves. Right. Right. So, yeah. There was once you have a book, that book breaks that Dunbar number. Right. If it's in any way successful at all. And yeah, so we are. So I think probably it's a balance and it looks like you're you're pulling it off so far. You know, I am, you know, and it's you know, I'm at a war inside myself because on one hand, you know, people will say things like, well, if your channel grows, you can help more people. Oh, OK. I guess that's true. But if my my channel is already of decent enough size that and it's a small channel, you know, given I mean, I started roughly about the same time as Jonathan Peugeot or Rebel Wisdom and roughly the same little corner of the Internet. I mean, even John Verbeke's channel started later than mine. I mean, his channel is, you know, two, three times the size of mine in terms of subscribers and, you know, knowing something about metrics in the Internet, subscribers are by no means the only metric. I mean, someone commented this morning on a video, he said, given the number of likes and the size of your channel, you have a you have a very you have a fairly determined audience. Yeah. And that's true, a fairly devoted audience. And but still, the audience is kind of big. So and you know, Jesus struggled with this because on one hand, you have his Galilean ministry, which, you know, in the Gospels, in both the Synoptic and in John's Gospel, he gets to a point with the Galilean ministry that he basically decries it in some ways, turns on the mob and says to the mob, you know, you're following me, but you're not following me. Right. And if you really were following me, things would be different. And and, you know, in the Gospel of Matthew, he basically says to the mob on Judgment Day, it's going to be worse for you than for Sodom and Gomorrah or Nineveh. And it's like, oh, I'm amazed you didn't die right there because. And so then he goes down to Jerusalem and it's somewhere between 12 and 72. Again, is within his Dunbar number and in Jerusalem is where the you know, the climax of the story gets reached. So these are these are tricky, tricky things that we're dealing with in terms of size. Yeah. Yeah, that that that smaller but more intense discipleship, you know, that that that model is is, you know, this low evangelism, the the key ecclesiology of the small, you know, that these are the types of things that that that makes me think of, you know, the just just the just the perspective you just shared. You know, it's it's you know, should we be focusing on. Disciple and less, you know, less folks. And and. You know, I don't know, you know, making more disciples, but, you know, less deeply, you know, what happens a lot in the mega churches and things like that, I think. You know, who knows? Yeah, yeah. You know, and at the same time, you know, I've read James Welman's book, I really should talk to him. He you know, some of the points he made in defense of the mega churches, you can do some things. I mean, this is sort of where sort of the cell model arose and why, you know, my friends, you know, try to try to plant that because they they wanted a hybrid system or both. And yeah, yeah. And there's a lot to be said for that. But in the end, the consumers want right because the consumers were paying that in an industrial, you know, my our friends came to a meeting myself in the past, actually, I passed my fat pastor friend in the Rockland area. We were starting this cluster and then these two young idealistic church planters were like, we don't really think of ourselves as an institution. It's much more of a movement. And my friend says, does your movement have a budget? Will your movement pay you a salary? And, you know, it's that way in which we're all connected into this this giant. You know, it's this it's the it's giant beast in a sense that you don't really escape. Yeah. Yeah. There's weeds and we in the church and there's weeds and we outside of. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we only have we only have about 10 more minutes yet. Is there any I mean, is there anything you wanted to get to that we haven't gotten to? No, I think I think we ended up at several different points. We ended up at the places I was hoping to get to all along. So that was was a good discussion. Well, let me ask you this question. Where would you like to see this channel go, given all of its because you see it through it, I mean, you you see. I've I've got inside of me, you know, all of these conflicts. Yeah, right. You know, in some ways, I mean, my channel couldn't be if my church had three, four or five hundred people. Yeah, you would not be on here. Yeah, I would not be here. I simply could not. I would be right. I would having to be. But now, especially after covid, the church is tiny. Right. And. You know, can I visit people, especially when they're 80, 90 years old and, you know, yeah, so. No, you're you're if you want to talk in Christian ease, but in the in the YouTube world, it's you've made disciples. I mean, you have a whole bunch of little YouTube channels that have spun off of yours. So in a way, you know, you have it's it's kind of gross to talk about in that way. But you know, it's like if you were to look at the YouTube landscape in the in the context of or way in which some people look at the church, you have, you know, a podcast that have been started through your movement, so to speak, if you want to use that, you know, you need to talk and and so, you know, more power to you. Well, and, you know, part of, you know, in a weird way, this is sort of YouTube on the other side of the Dunbar number, because one of the things that became apparent very early on was people who are following my YouTube channel slash podcast, because the audio, it's been interesting watching the numbers on the YouTube channel, the numbers on the audio podcast, because the audio podcast keeps growing. But that's invisible to people coming to the YouTube channel. Sure, sure. So now the audio podcast, which was just kind of an add on, is about a third of the size of the YouTube channel, a third to a half, depending on the video of the of the reach that the podcast doesn't scale up like YouTube can, because it doesn't fueled by this algorithm. But, you know, people, it became apparent to me fairly quickly that anybody who follows my channel gets more of me than most of the people in the church in a certain way. Right. Because what you know, what do I have to do on a Sunday morning? If they're only coming to the worship service, they're getting 20 to 30 minutes. You know, I put in 10 hours during the week and it's coming every day. And if they're going to the Sunday school class, well, then they get another hour, maybe. But in the Sunday school class is much more. I mean, now I've been putting my Sunday school class on this channel, too. And that's much more like my YouTube channel than a formal sermon, because a sermon, just like with Paul Delac, you have to take all of this stuff and try and get it into a tiny little thing. A very general audience. And right. And you're in the broadcast mode rather than the dialogical mode, as we are. You know, exactly. Right. So so in some ways, YouTube sort of flips over the Dunbar number and. You know, a couple of thousand people, probably between two and four thousand people listen to me three to three to seven days a week. And that's yeah, that's pretty intensive discipleship, which is only facilitated by this medium. Right. And yet, like like John Lejeu talked with Peterson about the people out there are not saying that's right. Disciples in real life. That's right. That's right. And and on, you know, on the original side of it, Jesus spending, you know, he had 12 apostles, but, you know, close to the end of the close reading and reading of the tradition says, you know, there's probably this group of 50 to 100 that were really sort of on the inside. You know, they lived with him. They I mean, they had him more hours in a day than even my rather oppressive volume that I put out can afford and a much richer because, you know, again, people will say, you're my pastor, I can't be your pastor this way. Not really. Right. Right. Because you're not you're only seeing me through this dark mirror. And if you know the people in my church, part of the reason they don't watch my YouTube channel is in some ways they know me better. But it's a different me that they know. Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy making. Yeah. Yeah. Well, God bless you and your and your work. Oh, thank you. This is wonderful. Is this something that you'd be do you want to watch it before I share it? Or what would you like me to do with this? Yeah. If you don't mind, I just want to make sure I hadn't mentioned something and and forgot that I shouldn't have mentioned that or something. No, absolutely. And, you know, sometimes what people have done, actually, and because you're a computer guy, sometimes what people have done actually is edited the video and sent it back to me because there was a couple of things that they said that I really shouldn't have said that that's that's totally OK. And it's also OK to not share it. But I, you know, I liked I liked a bunch of the stuff that we talked about today. And I think it. You know, I wrestle, too, because I, you know, obviously, on this side of YouTube, I see the analytics and the. You know, the conversations with randos never get the views that conversation with Peugeot or Verbecky or or some of the some of the monologue or commentary videos with a hot title will get. But these are in many ways, I think in some ways the real channel and the real where that where the real work is being done in the channel. Sure, sure. Yep. Anyway. So thank you, Jason. This has been a pleasure. So I will I will send this to you and you can decide if this is something that you'd like to keep for yourself or if you'd be OK sharing it, et cetera, et cetera. Thanks, Paul. Great. It's great to die. And hopefully, if I ever get the estuary tour back up and going, if COVID sort of stops disrupting plans, maybe I'll maybe I'll get out to the I've got some friends in the DC area. So, oh, cool. Yeah, definitely. I'd like to get out there. So, yeah, it'd be cool to catch up. Yeah. Thank you, Jason. Thank you, Paul. Talk to you later. OK. Bye bye.