https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=fjXyjyTwbmA

 Hi, this is Paul. One of the TV programs I like to watch, just because I like to watch it, is Alone on the History Channel. And there is in Seven. The format of Alone is that they send ten or so adults, survivalists, out into the wilderness. And they see who can outlast one another. They've had various different configurations over the years. Season Seven is pretty standard. Lately they've been up by Great Slave Lake, way up in the Canadian Arctic. Beautiful country. There's no camera people. The people have to have all this camera equipment with them and make these little videos as they stay up there. They get medical checks every now and then. And I'm sure there's other elements to the show that are sort of reality TV-ish. But it's a cool show. I enjoy watching it. I enjoy watching the people reflect on their experience as they do this thing. Now for the most part, the show sort of goes until they kind of starve themselves out. And it's usually the individuals that can manage to keep themselves fed and keep themselves warm and not have any medical mishaps that can outlast. And in Season Seven, at least, if they can go 100 days, they can enjoy a $1 million prize. Now there are all sorts of interesting levels to this. But one of the aspects that continues to fascinate me is, in some ways, the religion of Alone. Now you'll see the people are obviously talking to the camera. And I understand a little something about talking to cameras when you're alone in your office at work. But they do a lot of talking to the animals. They talk to the weather. They talk to the natural elements. Now, of course, you're only getting a highly edited, selective view of all the hours and hours of video I'm sure these people are taking. The editors of the program catch the elements that would be most interesting to us. But part of what intrigues me often by the participants are the prayers of sorts. And where they'll often express deep gratitude to the animal that, through no cooperation of their own, have found themselves into their gill net or their snare or at the end of their bow and arrow and has become food. And so it's almost a ritual on the show that the individuals thank the dead animal for involuntarily offering up their lives so that the game show participant can eat. And Alone is really fun because they have all these little tidbits of information about how many calories and what vitamins and little tidbits about the animals that are down there. And I'm sort of fascinated by the program and all of the framing that that's within the program. And thinking about this, you have a very much have a sense of the adaptive nature of religion. Is religion an adaptive mode to our contexts? Some of the people express will afford a little bit of information about their religious perspectives or lack of religious perspectives. But it seems there are no atheists on Alone in the sense that they're all talking to dead animals and they're talking to the wind and they're talking to nature or they're praying to God or one way or another. They all act pretty religiously on Alone. You don't you don't find people that at least that participate in a program like this that are just sort of even they're always they're always talking about food as fuel and they use this scientific mechanistic frames. But it's it's it's quite striking how many of them willingly express their quasi at least quasi religious attitudes and behaviors here on the show. It makes me ponder the way we look at ourselves in a in a secular frame. We look at ourselves as possessing a monarchical vision as if we stand outside of nature. And if you listen to how we use the word, I mean, natural global warming, if if human beings are simply a part of nature, then there's no point to the word natural and how we use it most of the time. We exclude ourselves from nature and and nature is this wilderness that we go out into where there are these processes. But but yet, you know, of course, whether an animal comes into a snare or doesn't come into a snare, how well will the gill network now? Obviously, experts on fishing and trapping will will say, well, you could do it better this way. Well, you could do it better that way. Well, it's sort of the luck of the draw, which part of the Great Slave Lake they they dropped you down into. And just too bad you twisted your ankle or or ate that or ate that funky squirrel. And now you've got digestion problems and you're rapidly dehydrating. And so, you know, hit the satellite phone and tap out. It's a it's a it's sort of a fun study on on what on earth we are that all of us urbanites or suburbanites are watching these people. And of course, there's this all of these now there's own there's folklore around the show as well. But the deep irony of the show is that even though folks go out there saying, well, this is the opportunity of a lifetime, this is this is wonderful that I get to do it. Well, you could kind of do it for nothing. But all the warnings on the show say, don't don't do it. Don't do it on your own. Go out with the satellite phone and tap out. We don't want to be responsible for anybody doing an into the wild thing. But almost everybody who goes on this show at this point are are, you know, deeply experienced people in the wilderness and have years of training and experience trying to do this rather crazy thing of an of existing in the Arctic all by yourself. One of the elements that the show really highlights for me is is just how dependent we are on one another. I'm making my way through season seven. Most of them have been built up on my DVR before I started watching them here in California between the the fires. Covid sort of sent us all outside. And now the fires are sending us back inside of the smoke and bad air from the fire. So I'm watching alone about pristine northern Canada. There's some layers of psychology going on there, too. But, yeah, you know, they all go out there because they want to win a million dollars and they want to win a million dollars because in some ways many of them say it will free up their families from the kind of mundane work as a diesel mechanic or or as something else they have to do to to make it work. To make money in the civilized world so that they can go out and live in the uncivilized world. And maybe maybe we only see ourselves in this way when we feel ourselves safe from it and independent of of nature. And and and right there when you when you look at the show is is nature God? Is it is a small g God or or is it a machine? There's going to be a lot of summary lessons in this video about things that I've sort of discovered and thought about over the last three years. And those of you who've been watching my videos religiously will hear a certain degree of repetition, but maybe the repetition will serve to to reinforce and go back over the some of these things. I remember my my conversation with John Verbeke about God being the the ancient solution to the frame problem. There's a there's a deep acting as if going on with human beings. We've got the spirit of finesse and the spirit of geometry. We've got Group A and Group B. We've got status rules of secularity. There's a new twist on that and I'll define that as we go. And we've got posture towards personal agents. I remember Jordan Peterson talking to Matt Dillahunty and and and noting to Dillahunty that you know you talk to your car and you talk to your lawnmower. Why? Why? Why? Why do we do this? What I did in this video was I discovered a bunch of a bunch of slides that I had made for a video that I never never actually made. And one of them was this very interesting conversation between God Saad and and David Sloan Wilson. And because it was here, I thought, well, if I'm going to use this still, I should probably go back and see what the video was about, because it was a while ago now that I don't remember it. So I made a little clip. I have a little clips channel now and someone said, well, DMCA might have you take that down. We'll see. You know, it's not monetized and it's sort of it's sort of just a way for me to source. Anyway, get distracted by a family message. Fascinating conversation about religion and how religion works from an evolutionary biologist, David Sloan Wilson. And very, very, very interesting about religion and symbols and very much following the Bret Weinstein track of we have on one hand this genetic code, but then we have the symbolic code, which is really the religious layer. And that that moves so much more quickly. And and the two codes intermingle as we go through history. And they talked about, you know, the tell developing lactose tolerance after human beings domesticate cattle and then begin to live off their milk. But but there still is within I don't know David Sloan Wilson's religious beliefs. But God said certainly is is one on YouTube who who sort of a, you know, B level celebrity atheist in terms of his his constant repetition about religion. There's this there's this sort of secular status line that if you if you start imagining certain things, you lose status and the secular frame of no supernatural agents. And now where where most will agree that the scientific method is a certain approach to information, an approach to the natural world or at least an approach to the regularity of the world. We proceed as if there is no supernatural agency going on in this that for all intents and purposes, the kinds of processes that we are attempting to come to terms with and record and and leverage for technological purposes often that these things are consistent enough that they are in they are in viable. Even if you know, we don't know why, but we just know that the patterns are repeated enough, at least within certain limitations of variables that we can count on them and count on them for a whole variety of things. And so we we proceed as if there are no agents above us or beyond us, because well, you can't really know if there isn't. And and it's all sort of an article of faith. Again, I go back to the example of Frodo and Tolkien. Would there be a way for Frodo to discern the presence of Tolkien and Frodo's little life, the creator of his world? Well, Tolkien would have to write himself into the story in a in a way that Frodo could understand. So, I mean, this is this is part of the question of knowledge with respect to we certainly follow the patterns and watch the patterns. But the source of the patterns. It's it's it's it's it's in a it's in a realm beyond which our tools can't penetrate. Now. One, you know, only one agent to deal with this comes up in. I want to take some clips of that comment in my clips channel. Maybe think, well, maybe I'm going to have to do little verbal preambles. But problem with me, if I turn on a camel and I start doing a preamble of something with a Tom Holland video, it might have a one hour long preamble for a five minute clip. I'm sure it's a moral failure on my part. But, you know, the Hebrews, in a sense, you don't talk to the sun, you don't talk to the earth, you don't talk to the animals, you don't talk to all of that. There's this there's this there's this God that is in some ways agent and arena. And in many ways, the Hebrews are on to something that the that the Romans figured out later with Constantine when as Tom Holland notes, they were trying out all these different gods because the the cultic workload of keeping all of those gods happy was just too costly for the society. All of those sacrifices, all of the temples, all of the worry about, you know, offending some god somewhere. If you can have one lord who conquers all the other gods or one one god who is on top of all the other gods, then you just deal with you just deal with the head one. And, you know, he'll sort out everything else that's going going on below. It's a tremendously economic and an efficient way of of going about it. And of course, we've got Group A and Group B, which is a concept that I've put in my videos a couple of years ago. Group A are elements of our world that we respond that that respond predictably. These are the kinds of things that science likes to likes to discover and systematize and rely upon and figure out ways that we can wield them. It's in a sense agency free. We don't we don't talk to the water and ask the water, would you be willing to give up hydrogen and oxygen if we run an electrical current through you? Little bunny, would you be willing to give up your life if I if I look sufficiently hungry? These are, in a sense, agency free. The animals do what they do. Water does what it does. This this I think in many ways again, an ongoing evolutionary product of of of deistic of deistic theology, where where beforehand there were quite a few caught there were quite a few statements in in theological documents about God's faithfulness now suddenly becomes mechanistic. You take the conscious agent out of it. You can find statements in the Belgian Confession or the Heideberg Catechism that essentially say if you know if God were to for a moment, in a sense, remove his consciousness and uphold the earth by his presence, it would all fly away. These are built on ideas found in the Bible. And in a sense, what happens in deism is that the earth has a has a nature of its own independent from any conscious being. And of course, when when God saw it and David Sloan Wilson talk about it, they're they're making that assumption. They're living within that assumption. Now, of course, it's an assumption that if you introduce something like a simulation theory or or Tolkien and Frodo that you start you start having to admit. Yeah, it's it's an assumption. And you might believe in the assumption. You might act as if the assumption is real. But there's there's the assumption. And so Group A is C.S. Lewis is the whole show. Now, what happens if if we ourselves also are simply a product or are part of Group A, you get something like Sam Harris's determinism where we're watching a movie, but it's only those unlucky, really brilliant people that realize that even me watching the movie is just a tremendously intricate set of relationships of cause and effect relationships. And it's it's simply the whole show. And where even our experience of conscious freedom is a loser, that there's no there's no real freedom in there. Now, once you get to Group B, Group B are elements of our world that that challenge our capacity to predict. Now, are they really free or or do they just have mechanisms that we haven't discovered yet? Or do they have mechanisms that are, in fact, not knowable by human beings? And and we're simply left to wonder about them. And so everyone goes off into the wilderness. And why do mice? Why are my snares not working? Well, maybe it was a low rabbit year or maybe you're just bad at snares or or maybe the foxes in your area are are particularly numerous and they're eating all the rabbits before you can get to them. Or or or or or or the situation is just is just too complex for you to are too complicated for you to actually be able to to discern. But to you, it's a mystery. And so you you pray to the gods, you pray to the rabbit gods to to bring the rabbits. I was again reading. Oh, it was in that it was in that course on American history where where they were talking about the Native Americans and they almost you know, they have the idea that there was maybe one large god rabbit and all the other little rabbits and you had to basically cut a deal with the large god rabbit so that he would give up all his little underling rabbits. And if you if you create a bad relationship with that god rabbit, well, you know, there you have it. It's it's going to be a problem. So so group B are those agents that we that we see or imagine agents like ourselves because we imagine ourselves to have to have agency. And we don't when we don't imagine ourselves to actually be agents or have agents, then we have one heck of a meaning crisis. And we say, ah, who cares? And and Sam Harris's admonitions will just enjoy the movie. Well, what if the movie isn't enjoyable life? You know, talk to Jordan B. Peterson, who man who you know, you got to feel sorry for the guy. Didn't necessarily have that easy of a life. He had a daughter with a severe medical condition. And if there's one way to torture parents, have a have a have a have a kid with a severe medical condition. And that can be tremendously trying for parents. Well, if you don't like the movie, get out of it. But what if other people that you love are dependent on you operating within the movie? Well, what are you going to do? Just give it up anyway. So when we talk about the scientific image, which is sort of maps onto Group A and the manifest image was sort of maps onto Group B. If as long as you have Group A nested within Group B, you're probably going to be OK. Once you have Group B nested in Group A, well, then there is only Group A. And then, of course, you're going to stimulate a meaning crisis. You're going to. That's it's basically, I think, what we've been seeing. And then, of course, there's emergence. And once you start talking emergence, well, then you're sort of trying to figure out the relationship with Group A and Group B and maybe not have a meaning crisis within Group B, but still saying by faith that everything is is Group A and there is no conscious agency. There is no purpose. There is no telos and anything that's going around. And of course, it talked about Pascal and the spirit of geometry versus the spirit of fitness. Once you know things are in Group A, approach them with the spirit of geometry. You don't necessarily have to respect them, even though everyone on a loan is respecting the little rabbit and the moose. Well, you respect the moose because the moose can take your life. The bunny. Well, not so much the bunny. You're in competition with the berries and some of the other things that the bunnies are eating. But you approach things and elements in Group A with the spirit of geometry. It's math. It's science. You just this is just the operations. This is just how it goes. Good, bad, right or wrong. There's no there's no right or wrong to it. It just it just is. You have this confident approach to nature. And we have these ambitions of control of human or of human individual or principalities over nature to achieve these desired outcomes. But again, once you once you start doing that, you really sort of have to sort of buy into Group B that you're a part of Group B, that values are real and not just preferences and. Approach it with the spirit of geometry. Then there's the spirit of finesse, which is why you talk to your car or your lawnmower and why everyone on on alone is talking to the weather and the and the animals and everything around them, because it's in some ways too big and too mysterious and and they're too small and they're too dependent. And so this is how we approach the unknown. This is how you approach another human being. This is how you approach a government official. This is how you approach a police officer. This is how you approach a shark. This is how you approach a moose, because the situation is too dynamic and you don't have mastery over it. You don't have geometry mastery over it. So you approach it with the spirit of finesse. And that's actually the proper way to approach it, because you understand that not knowing what you don't know can can get you dead. And so this is how we approach elements of Group B. This is this is why everyone on alone is talking to everything the whole time. Of course, the celebrity atheists will talk about agency detection. We have overactive agency detection. But as they will admit, overactive agency detection is what keeps us alive. And that's where the power of the spirit of finesse comes from. And what you find in religion is just simply full of the spirit of finesse. The survival advantage to to over assume agency in the context of the unknown and the dangerous. Again, this was a used slide and every now and then I'll catch one of Poe the person's videos and especially when she does religious topics or God and you know what is God and Poe is Poe remains sort of an atheist, but she's exploring these very much in the following of Jordan Peterson. And what is God? Well, God is the system of all systems, you know, Group A. God is the the person of all persons. Group A. The whole earth is full of his glory. Everythingness. And God number two, the holy, holy, holy. Everything. Everything can only get you so far. There's more to God. He is the is so you've sort of got a you've got sort of got some vervekian moreness and suchness going on there in that in that conversation. But then, of course, when we have the culture track and the and the genetic track, you get into the realities of that Jordan Peterson, I think, articulated well in his Easter 2018 video when he talks about the you know, why do sacrifices work? Well, the past is is simply so full of human beings and the future is so full of human beings and the present is so full of human beings that Jordan Peterson sort of offers a a a scientistic justification of the value of sacrifice that well, if we're surrounded by the spirit of finesse, then then it might be a good bet to wager self denial and individual sacrifice for the sake of others actually promotes not just you, but this this symbolic imaginative construct that you that you have this principality that you develop that when you say humanity must be preserved. Well, what is humanity? Well, John Gray is quite clear atheist, though he is that humanity is this mental construct. But then we begin to recognize that human beings are watch alone. Human beings are not what they seem to be. We look at human beings as individuals as these as these creatures that are bordered by skin. But very quickly, once they once you open your mouth, we find out that we seem to have our fathers in us and our grandfathers and our great grandfathers and our mothers and our grandmothers and our great grandmothers, twice as many female twice as many female ancestors as male ancestors, which of course, every time you say that it's like, well, how does that math work out? But, you know, go ahead and research that it's kind of a fun little Google and Google exercise to to dive into that assertion that Jordan P Peterson made. Why do sacrifices work? Well, the future is so full of people. And so, you know, we don't value and if we don't value the the the individual selfish jerks who lived at the expense of everyone else and we we value those who gave their lives for the welfare of us, even if us is the future. The past is this mental construct that we have. The past is so full of people, group B elements so that you have mate selection and that shapes biology and and Brett Weinstein's culture track. So that's why it works. So there's there's lots of agents trying to manage group A and we have a bias for seeing the world as group A because well, if there's less group B and more group A, then maybe I can get closer to the top and and get my desires filled and get my way. We prefer to imagine ourselves as the only agents that it makes science easier. In fact, it makes science possible. But the world is so full of other people group B. Well, how do you approach the world in its totality? It's just so enormously large and enormously complex that you have to use all of these tricks. You know, Don Hoffman talks about these tricks and cheats in order to actually be productive in the world. There's there's no other way around it. And I know that really irks the the gad sad scientific. Well, I'm down with truth. Well, you can't know the truth. You can only know your schemas of the truth. And and those are always too short. So what do you have left there? And that's where David Sloan Wilson's argument is is pretty powerful in there. Now, in a way, we've been talking imagining that there's religion and non religion. And part of the thesis is that, well, it's probably always religion because you're always using the symbols in this world to sort of figure everything out. And and and you're not going to get beyond the symbols because you need to in order to actually productively work with other human beings. And again, if you watch alone, maybe you need that whole symbolic world to actually work even without human beings just out there in the wilderness. You you need that world to to actually survive. You can't do it without it. And and so this is where Stephen Smith comes along with his reframing. And now the book came and his pie Erdmann's no wonder Erdmann's put it put it out them culture war from The Tiber to the Potomac, Stephen D. Smith. So looking forward to to getting into this, just kind of taking a taking a gander at it. It looks it looks good. Lots of juicy footnotes. That'll probably go right here on my stack of books that I pick up and wave in front of you regularly. But he asked the question, well, you know, we sort of keep talking about secularity as this as this subtraction story. Why don't we look at it in kind of a different way? I mean, the old frame says, well, secularity is no permitted conscious agents above or apart from human beings. And then we imagine ourselves as individual buffered selves. And of course, anybody who has a sufficient map of modernity will say, yeah, this, you know, modernity is all over this frame. And, you know, my last video that quite a few people watched probably because of the the title. Well, I'm sticking behind the idea that modernity is passing away. It doesn't mean that everything that we have learned within modernity will pass away. But the dominance of the framework will pass away. And that's my best understanding of of watching what's happening in the culture. And, you know, I think it's fair to lament the passing of modernity, just like Christians lament the passing of Christendom sometimes. Because modernity brought a lot of different things. And it's sort of nice when you're living in a period of time when there's broad consensus about the way the world is because you have less violence and less conflict. And we seem to be moving into an epoch where we're going to have more conflict. But and it doesn't mean because modernity as a totalizing framework around which there's broad consensus because that's passing away that all the modernists will go away. Just like, you know, now we're just going to have to call them modernist fundamentalists because they continue to double down on the tenets of modernism. Just like Christian fundamentalists double down on the tenets of Christianity. And many conservative Christians are deep, deep modernists. So and again, that's not to say that modernity didn't offer us tremendous advantages and tremendous power and tremendous knowledge. You know, NT Wright in one of his videos says, you know, I wouldn't I wouldn't want a pre-modern dentist nor a post-modern dentist. I want a modernist dentist because when it comes to group A elements in the spirit of geometry, well, you want your math right and you want it to work right. But we're talking when we're talking about modernism in this way, we're talking about the overall framework. And in all fairness, you know, modernity has been receding for 100 years already. And there's going to be, you know, these things take a long time to pass. They take a long time to build and they take a long time to pass. And you never quite know what's going to replace them. And and actually things don't disappear. Christians continue to be around. And even though we were living within modernity and modernity, I think, was deeply indebted to Christianity. And so what comes after it? Well, it's kind of hard. But back to back to Stephen Smith, secularity is, you know, no permitted conscious agent above or apart from human beings. You have the buffered self. You have aliens and superheroes are sort of like pagan gods. They're subject to the rules of of of the meta divine realm, even more powerful, but not not possessing the omnis. Well, maybe I'll do with some of these clips if you know, if I get in trouble for just having naked clips, not clips of nakedness, but naked clips. Fall wells. Maybe I'll stick them in the videos here just as they are instead of doing the commentary. The commentary always takes longer for me, but it does explode the length of the video. And if I stick them in the video, I'm going to have to do some editing and worry about sound levels, etc, etc. Well, we'll see what I do. But aliens and superheroes are sort of like pagan gods. But when Stephen Smith talks to his colleagues about their paganism, they're like, we don't sacrifice bulls or anything like that. We're modernists. And so Stephen Smith is trying to come to terms with, well, if it isn't religion and non religion, that's really the term. Maybe it's the maybe it's the imminent versus the transcendent. Because the, you know, his colleagues, his colleagues have their own omnis. You don't have an omnipresent God or an omniscient God or an omnipotent God. But in some ways, the monarchical realm sort of stands in as as a deistic God of omnis. And you can see sort of a scientific pantheism where where God is the system of all systems and there's no group B God. And I think it's then this way that in some ways, God number one sneaks back into the system with with Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris. And so with reframing the secular, the secularized the secularization thesis as a subtraction story has really failed. And I think Stephen Smith makes a good point in that that this people aren't becoming less religious and more rational. That's why Tara Isabella Burton is in that conversation. They're they're actually becoming quite a bit more superstitious. They're back into astrology and divination. And and maybe they believe that that aliens were out there. But you're starting to fudge the lines of the of the secular status symbol system that you've got going. You know, human beings aren't evolving out of superstition. Most most really can't live solely within the scientific frame. And and David Sloan Wilson makes that point quite penetratingly to to God's side. So the scientific frame sort of dissolves secular humanism. And that's that's what a lot of people are afraid of. And we pretty much see that with Nazis, with their with their naturalism. Well, if the scientific frame dissolves secular humanism, well, then let's pull all of the restraints off and let let biology have its day. Now, now, by this point, the Nazi naturalism wasn't particularly good science, nor was it particularly good religion either. But their their scientism sort of becomes a religion and communist scientism sort of becomes a religion. And so when when Sam Harris says, no, scientists, scientists, you know, communists were religious. It's like, yeah, but so are you. There's this. And so Stephen Smith is basically saying there's sort of a neo paganism that's that's coming in now. But it's not with with sort of the old way we're seeing everything is group B. But it's it's sort of an immanentism. And so he tries a new definition of secular. And there are some issues with this. I mean, give the guy a break. He's he's breaking new ground here. And I think he's got some real points to make. Whether his his framework will finally hold isn't as important as whether his framework actually affords new light and new ideas. So his contrast is imminent religiosity versus transcendental religiosity. Now, anybody paying attention to my God number one and God number two will say, oh, well, that certainly maps in the pagan is imminent. And so now pagan is a very peculiar word. Paganos, that's people of the country. And now we're back to a lone spirituality, a lone religiosity. People of the country. Well, they're they're they're very imminent. And and it's the urban people that Christianity really conquered the cities first. And part of their capture of the Roman Empire was the relationship between country and city in the Roman Empire. You'll see that one map of the Roman Empire that basically shows all the cities and and the lines connecting them. Now, if you read Peter Brown's book on the fourth century and money, you'll see that the relationship between the country and the city was was pretty profound. But the cities were were focal points. And as as Christianity begins to dominate the cities, that's where pagans are the are the old pagans. But Christianity is this very transcendental religion that basically says things like, well, all the suffering and and trials we see here pay off in the age to come. And, you know, is it another world or is the next is it the next age in this world? We have the new heavens and the new earth coming down as a bridegroom in the book of Revelation. So the Abrahamic religions are highly transcendental. And and we have these other religions. And basically, the question is, where is the telos located? Is is the telos located in the in the imminent frame? Is are all of our goods coming here? And right there now we can begin to sense the the alignment with the secular because that's the seculum. It's the it's the hundred years it's below or is our our telos coming in an age to come or in another world? And and maybe this actually see it maps on to Tom Holland's point. This this this actually then becomes the secular is really a neo pagan. And this lines up with Tara Isabella Burton's journalism where she's studying all of these people who are, you know, opting out of Christianity and and even their you know, if you start talking to real Buddhists instead of the sort of American ones who are, you know, picking and choosing as the buffet Buddhists, just like the buffet Christians. Well, it's all secular. It's imminent. OK, and so the paganism, the pagan label doesn't necessarily work. It only works because historically people understand paganism to mean that thing that Christianity replaced. And Stephen says, well, it didn't really replace it because again, my God, number one and the God, number two, Christianity is both tries to be both imminent and and and transcendental. But now Stephen Smith comes from a Mormon background, which theologically that gets quite interesting because you notice the the emphasis in Christianity very much in Mormonism of, well, you know, seal those wives here, baby, because they need a they need a covering for the worlds that that y'all are going to be managing in the next life. And so one of my homeless people is a he's taught me a ton about Mormonism. We'll have to see if it's all right. I should probably talk to his his I should probably talk to his father. I facilitate those phone calls often as fathers in his 90s. But my friend is always bragging about what a good Mormon his father is and how much he knows about Mormonism. And it's a very interesting religion when it comes to some of these things. And when you study, you know, the kind of Christian ideas that were floating around at the beginning of the 19th century in upstate New York, you can sort of see where all many of these things come from. But but but Christianity very much has this transcendental. And basically, Christianity is an extremely adaptive religion. Basically, what you see with with prosperity gospels, it keeps inverting the imminent and the transcendental. So so push prosperity gospel is an emphasis on the here and now where make me rich. Jesus, take the wheel into my into my land of plenty. And so Christianity is a very powerful religion in terms of being highly adaptive and taking these threads and and having them weave back and forth. Whereas, you know, if you're a pagan, well, it's sort of your best life now, because when you when you talk to poor when you talk to poor Achilles down in down in Hades, well, he'd rather he'd rather, you know, be a surf on earth than rain in Hades because Hades is no fun at all. And of course, Christianity takes that. And now there's a new age and there's a real power to transcendental religions. And of course, secularity sort of cuts that off and says, OK, well, for the sake of public discourse and religious plurality, we're going to frame it down here. You can believe what you want to later. But of course, when when neo-traditional Islamists drive airplanes into buildings shouting religious slogans, well, that's tends to unnerve the secularists because now they're beginning to see some of the power of that transcendental to mold human beings. And that's sort of some of what Gad Saad is is worried about. And again, Gad Saad, who who left the the Near East out of religious threats from religious people. You know, it's forgivable for him to have a little bit of post-traumatic religious syndrome and wanting to get away from religious people. And so the real question is the location of the telos. Is it in this world and my individual life? Is it is it is it experiential? You know, I'm oppressed, therefore I am. I want my best life now. And it's the job of the government to give me my best life now. It's very manifest image, though. And then, again, science and technology become a tool in order to deploy my best life now and sort of the the naive, the naive, the naive posture of the new atheists tends to be. It's a fascinating conversation between Gad Saad and David Sloan because David Sloan basically calls Saad and says, you know, you don't get values from science. Science tells you what is. That's the scientific frame. But but very quickly you start talking about what's good and and what's bad. And you've left the scientific frame there. Oh, no, no, no. Well, science will tell us what's good. No, science will tell you how to get what you want. But when you just take what you want and you call it what's good, that's a pretty that's a it's a very common human problem. But it's a it's not one that's hard to spot. I just take what my preference is and call them good. I mean, lots of atheists have been calling that thing out for years. So it's the location of the telos telos. It's meaning. What is this all for? What are the symbols for? What is meaning for? And we got Struan and Vervecky and Struan keeps sending me messages. And I'm glad he's he's found a friend in John because Struan would send me all this philosophy. It's like, Struan, I'm not a philosopher. And and in a lot of ways, John's a better conversation partner than I am. And Struan can keep you busy. But at the beginning of the the August 10 question and answer, Struan will often send me the links to to when he gets his questions asked because I like Struan. We have we have a good time. But part of the the interesting conversation sort of you got Peugeot and I as the Christians, we got me the Protestant. So deep modernistic influences in me. You know, the Protestantism that I was raised in wrote systematic theology. And and these systematic theologies are attempts to try to take Christianity and modernity and and fit them together in a system that makes sense. You really only theologically you really only find systematic theologies within modernism. It's kind of the height of theological modernism. Of course, Jonathan Peugeot leaving evangelicalism and is now a you know, a neotrad. And so he's a I mean, orthodoxy. That's about as traditional as you go. And and then Verbeke. And now John is sort of, you know, well, let's let's let's take a let's take a look at narrative and tell us. And can these things are these things so foundational and enduring as they are in religions or or or or must we dispense with them? And if maybe by dispensing with them, we can see more truth. Those are the questions. But look at the conversation that Jonathan had with John about about tell us and and and the personal because the point that Jonathan Peugeot was saying, even if you get to a certain point and you lose the tell us and you lose the personal, it's that way up and it's that way down upon that point. And it's it's sort of imagining Princess Leah floating through space without a spacesuit. And yeah, maybe in the movies. But for human beings, we sort of live here in the oxygen of tell us and and persons. And and maybe there are a few really smart people who can go off and imagine the world without tell us and the world without narrative. But but even the experimentations and post modernities just seem to confer that everyone keeps deconstructing narrative and tell us only to smuggle it in at the bottom again, because that's the oxygen within which people live. And and you're not going to have a system that scales. Now, one of the really interesting things about human beings is that it seems we we we generate the culture from each other about what is believable. And that makes perfect sense. We we only believe in communities, which is why if you leave the church, you'll start not believing like church and you'll start believing like the other communities that you hang out with. This seems to be very much a function of human beings. Now, this could cause its own meaning crises say, oh, my beliefs are all part of Group A. I only believe what everyone else believes around me. I have no choice in it. I am not a person. And so then we go back to Dostoevsky and smash the piano keys. I am somebody smash. See, it makes no sense for me to commit suicide, but I'll kill myself to show that I have agency. Is that one reason why suicide and the meaning crisis coincide? Because this is the one way to to finally announce your agency in the most most final and ironic way in a secular society. It's the one way to to denounce imminent religiosity where the tell us is local to say, I am finally free when I kill myself. Now we're paging the existentialists. Can it afford cooperative, collaborative, horizontal, temporal horizontal, which is the now and temporal vertical, which is over time because, you know, the equilibrated state, it's now and it's over time. Can we actually do this without narrative and tell us I'm dubious, I'm skeptical, I'm deeply skeptical hasn't been done. Now maybe you're you've all Harari and you're saying, well, the kind of human beings we're seeing have got to pass away. And now in all fairness, human beings do change over time. We're that programmable with respect to culture. But we don't know the limits of that. So again, I think narrative and tell us not going away in my lifetime. Maybe you can sort of hold your breath and get up there high enough, you know, climb to the town of Mount Everest and you're not going to be up there very long. You'll be scooching right down. And from what I hear, Everest is littered with bodies that aren't really decomposing very much because the air is thin. And yeah, philosophers go up there where the air is thin. But we're all living down here and we're all living down here together. And human beings, the past and the future is really full of us. Fascinating little video on rebel wisdom with I didn't watch the whole thing. Tykan, Yonkha, Yonkha Sparta. Interesting, I guess you wrote a book that that's the good people talking. But again, this is back into the, you know, when we're leaving modernity, now we're looking back on the menu. And what we're seeing is that whole bunches of us, well, we learned modernity, we've learned the language of post-modernity, we've learned structuralism and deconstruction and all of these things. And so now the neo-trads come sporting all the language of the post-moderns. Well, that's interesting. Learn to employ the new terminology. But the difficulty is that it's tough to re-submerge into a new naivetivity, a new naivete. Because once you've read Foucault, how are you going to stay who you were? Now you're reconstructed. But reconstructed and naïve are two very different things because now, in a sense, you're full of group B-ness because you've used all your agency to reconstruct yourself. But did I reconstruct myself because that's simply the next process of human evolution? And is it really group A? I mean, we don't escape these questions. So who is really alone? You've got John Krakow's Chris McCandless going up there into Alaska and dying. And you've got all these other folks, survivalists who are expert in it, looking to earn a million dollars because it's just, the ironies just keep turning round and round and round and round. And then we watch them. And what's going on in our little brains when I watch? What's going on? And I'll apply it to myself. What's going on in my little brain when I'm fascinated watching them? You know, oh, are they going to get that bunny? Oh, the bears are stealing their food. Oh, the Wolverines are eating all their fat. And, you know, here I'm trying to limit my amount of carbs and I'm fascinating watching people starve themselves for a million dollars. It is the Hunger Games in some strange way. We're strange creatures. We don't see ourselves. We don't know ourselves. Maybe we'll learn.