https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=hqIljY2Ca4w

 Ready. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hey Paul how the heck are you, puggy? Anyways what's going on man? I'm doing good Fred. I saw my cousin today and he saw... Is your mic on? Yeah. My mic on? I'm trying these mics. We're getting signal on there? Hello? Okay. You see me? Okay. You saw your cousin today? Yeah, cousin Mark. Cousin Mark. He was on the show a couple weeks ago. Yeah but he is going to Golden Corral with me. He's taking me to Golden Corral. Really? Like you used to do. Because we go way back but you're going to do it again. We'll do it again. I know as soon as I get my vaccination. Gotta get that vaccination. I'm gonna do that next week, next Friday probably. This Friday coming up. Okay, okay good. Could you take me maybe? Not on Friday. What day? Friday's a busy day for me. Okay. Anyways so, oh I wanted to tell you the Bucks and the Nets play tonight on NBA. And the Lakers and the Clippers play. Okay. And it's do or go home. Win or go home. Win or go home. Whoever. No if the Lakers lose. Who do you want to win? The Lakers or the Clippers? Clippers of course. I don't like the Lakers. Don't like The only guy I like on the Lakers is LeBron. You like LeBron? LeBron. Oh yeah, I'll try to play for the Lakers. He's alright. Yeah I gotta give props to LeBron. LeBron. Okay now we gotta come back. T Grizzly. Yeah he's doing more music. T Grizzly's doing more music. He and Charles did ten tracks man. Oh that's good. We were in one studio and another one and then he put it on YouTube and it was so amazing. Anyways and it was cool and you check it out if you want to and it's under the Charles Tinnies channel. Hi Charles you're at work today but when you get home you can watch this. Anyways Tweety Bird coming out with new stuff. I checked her out on YouTube. Oh yeah she's tied on. She don't cuss. She don't cuss and she don't miss no bus. She don't cuss and she don't miss no bus. Yeah but she's got a lot of tattoos but that's on her. That's on her plate. It's literally on her. That's on her plate. Anyways. It's also on her skin. Oh the A's are in first place and the Giants Bay Area Classics maybe be a championship of the Giants and the A's. World Series Bay Area E40 Hosteria. Gordon's laughing. My buddy Gordon. Gordon would like to be on the show. Alright. Alright. Alright so what are we going to do today? You got a song you're going to do today? Yeah I'm just going to do one that Pete gave me for praise time. I'm doing two of them. Okay. So we get everything in the mix. Everything in the mix. Alright you can be in the background that's fine. That would be even better. You can kind of groove to it. Alright here we go. One, two, three. Hit it. It's a new horizon and I'll set you free and you meet me here today with your mercies are new because all fears and doubts that come too because they can't stay long when I'm here with you. It's a new horizon and I'm set to you and you meet me here every day with mercies that you knew fears and doubts they came to pray because they can't stay long when I believe you are the way the truth and the light like Pastor Ball says he's dynamite. The life I believe you are the way of the truth. The man on the computer 70 is Rick and he tells the truth. The life I believe you are and I stand tall. They call me Freddie Beas from the USA and that's all. How great the chast be between us. How on the mountain I could not climb. I say my old rhymes like a nursery rhyme but when I spoke the name into the night when those darkness your loving kindness tore there through the souls well sore the work is finished the end is written Jesus Christ my living hope. Jehovah Jireh Jehovah Meesee hallelujah hallelujah Jesus you are risen you're the king just ask for sin he will grant your wishes and on the microphone and I have to wash some dishes peace out one love amen that was a good track that was a good