https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ISbVo7QHTZg

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. I'm gonna close the door because it's now noisy out there. For Rich to come in if he wants to watch. No, no, no. Sure he can. No, because remember last time he tried to focus it. No, no, no. It's fine. It's fine. Rick will be fine. I got it recorded. So, a little bit chaotic on the Freddie and Paul show. We have a special guest today. I've been wanting to be on the Freddie and Paul show forever. So, what are we going to talk about today, Fred? Oh, the 49ers and the Ravens. And I hope the 49ers win against them. Although, I was watching last night the Ravens, I mean this morning, yeah, last night the replay of Super Bowl when the Ravens played the 49ers. So, it could be like that this year. Therefore, they play today and the 49ers play the Ravens. And I hope for the 49ers to win with, what's the quarterback's name again? Starts with a G. Grafalo? Grafalo, yeah. Grafalo. I want him to do good and I want the tight end to do good. Oh, he has a good tight end. And what's the other guy? You got like three or four running backs. And there's a bunch of wide receivers. Let's just make sure the 49ers get a win. Because they're a 10-1, right? 17-17. Right now they're tied? Because the Ravens beat the Pats, the Patriots, so the Ravens are good. So, Fred is hoping for a Niners win. Anyway, Paul, did you hear that the Kings beat Denver last night? No, I didn't hear that. Yeah, high teams. Oh, come on in, Mark. How are you doing? Don't worry about the football show. It's a show that's started. It's started. You can just come right through here if you need to. And what I was wondering is, do you think the 49ers have a chance to be in the Super Bowl? Oh, yeah, they've got a good chance to be in the Super Bowl. If they beat the Ravens and the Ravens beat the Pats, then... Did the Raiders beat the Chiefs, or did they play today? I don't know. I don't know. Phillip will check. Are you looking up, Phillip? Phillip's looking at the scores. Oh, never mind. Alright. Alright, so... So what should we ask John about today? It's his turn to talk. It's John's turn to talk. Yeah, baby, you want to say, John? Well, I mean, I've watched quite a few of your episodes. I'm not sure that I can upstage anybody here. I mean, this is good stuff. I'm very humble to be in your presence. And the A's are good. Do you like the A's? The A's? Well... Baseball. He's from Southern California. Oh, so he likes the Angels and the Dodgers. No, I used to live in the shadow of the A's Stadium. Really? When I lived in Hayworth, I lived in Hayworth. Oh, I'm pleased for you to be on my show. I didn't know you liked that. I lived in the shadow of the Oakland Stadium. Yeah. That's cool. Yeah, because I used to go to the games all the time. A's games. It was nice. Right now, it's mostly Dodgers and Angels for me. I like the Angels better than the Dodgers. I'm a Johnny's fan too. I can't like the Dodgers. Dodgers boo hiss! When I spell my name for people, they ask me to spell my name, I say v-a-n-d, which is Indesperately Dismal Dodgers, o-n-k. Well, and we do have somebody else on the show today who's copying checks who was in angels in the outfield. Oh, yeah, yeah, Mark. I used to watch him go play baseball all the time. He used to hook me up with the tickets and I watched him play. And I went all the way to Reno with Mark. And me and Mark have known each other for a long time. And that's all I'm gonna say. That's a shame. All right, so let's finish up the show. I'm gonna do a rap for John. A rap for John? I hear that. Here we go. Rolling deep. Everybody knows it's Sunday time, not the disco. We got the 49ers in the Ray Vans. I think the 49ers will win for Shiggy my diggity. What you got going on? I think it's a 9-1-6 for sure. And you know the River Cats are good once in a while. Really though. Don't you know without a word to say the Kings beat Denver and I gotta say hey. All right, ready? Let him do the one love too. Okay. Show me how to do it. You know how to do the one love? Look, look, look, look, John. You go one love. Amen. All right. Amen. Hallelujah. One love. I gotta make sure Robert's still out there so we can...