https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4H6JILVRm-8

 The catch phrase I say people, I say go to church. What I mean by that is in some ways, you have to engage in the human relationships around you. That's like the best way to go about that. You know, you have a relationship, you have a family, you have some kind of community around you. And so that's the best place to go because in some ways that's the place that will have this procedural aspect to it that will ground the other stuff. It's like if you have to help your kids with their homework or you have to do this kind of really grounded stuff that has very little to do with the ideology. If you get engaged in other people's lives, then it binds you in a different way. And then like my father would, he was going to church and I wasn't really living with him, but he was going to church and he would like, those are elements of this conversation. I got to go to church. Being part of a church is part of Christian discipleship. And in that word discipleship, there's this word discipline, which is it's a discipline to go to church. I was what would be so great about actually going to a church is like you start going to a church so that when you do need to be prayed for, when you have something to be prayed for about, you have a place to just say that. You're dead on right, Grizz, and that is what the church is for, to know and be known, to love and be loved, to have a place to go where people can pray for you, where they will welcome you in. And this is again, part of why I'm, you know, I want churches to have estuaries because I know that it is difficult in many churches for people to, in a sense, come in and bring their real self. And what I mean by that is have to say what's on their mind or you can't wrestle with them. It's like, you know, so Plato, you know, that John reminds us is broad. So he's a wrestler. You can't wrestle over a screen. So maybe if it's paintball for Jesus, maybe it should be wrestling with Plato because in church, in a real space, now, often it doesn't happen. I understand that. But at least there's a chance to actually have a relationship with Grizz. And that's part of why churches are local. They're relational. They're face to face. They're in real life. I said about why would young people want to go to church? And I feel like I want to have some kind of dynamic message or something that if they do find some reason to come. You know, I'm trying to fish, so I'm throwing bait and I'm trying to hook somebody. It's what Paul is going to do. It's he said about being evangelical, evangelism of some sort. Well, fishers of men is the promise, yes? Yes, correct. We did go to church today. I don't go to church to think or to rationalize God. I go to church to worship him. Right. And I'm happy with that. I'm very happy with that. And afterwards, during coffee hour, we can all argue about the God of our understanding. Right. But I think you're right. I think that the wild twin, I mean, the thing that led to my sort of dawning to consciousness of Christ, it was a 101 day vigil that I did in a forest. And I went into the forest. You don't have to go crazy. You actually have to go. You have to humble yourself and do it right here, right now. Right. Get up. I like how Father Spamman talks about it for the life of the world. He says it starts when you get up and get ready and you walk or you go to church. You start these. Those are simple. I get up. I brush my teeth. I take a shower. I put on clothes. I go. I know the things of life and we're ascending up into heaven. You're. All right. There is a little bit of branding for some of you who don't know what you just walked into. If you don't know what you just walked into, that was a little bit of virtually not alone network branding. I think that one was made by Rocco. And if you're looking for branding for your virtually not a known network, talk to Grimm Grizz and Chad and they'll be able to hook you up. And welcome to the live stream this morning. But I've got Ken in the waiting room. Jordan Hall is going to join us in a little while. But before that, I wanted to bring Bern on quickly. Bern, you've been doing a fundraiser to get your library from Alaska to Tbilisi, Georgia. And you just discovered what that you you thought you had two thousand dollars in the budget to do something and it wound up to be. Well, I've already raised twelve thousand dollars and two thousand of those dollars were going towards a barge to take my library from Haines, Alaska, thousand miles, sixteen hundred kilos down to Seattle. I don't I for some reason I didn't think about it and didn't double check my number. And it turned out it wasn't two thousand wasn't three thousand. They wanted seven thousand five hundred dollars, which is just like it was like a huge shock. But the good news is, you know, I just decided, OK, I need about six thousand more dollars. I've already I got a thousand last night from working on it. I've had a challenge grant right now. Or Richard Lund gave a he sold one of his paintings and not paintings, photographs for a thousand dollars. And he's giving me the proceeds if I can get matched that amount. And hopefully tonight. So I'll be going on in about an hour on my channel. OK, but I'm thanks for having me on just to let people know what's going on. This is just like a crazy, crazy, crazy. Yep. So all right, Bernd. So Bernd's channel, the anadromist in an hour, he's trying to get his he's trying to get his library from Haynes, Alaska to Tbilisi, Georgia, of all crazy things. And he's raised most of the money and that's coming up. So you can catch that. So thank you, Bernd. Thanks for coming out and let people know about it. All right. I'm going to bring these two guys in. This was sort of a last minute put together. But I I've been Jordan. This is you can't hear me. All right. You might want to do some work on that when you can hear me signal. Got it. OK. OK, good. So I've been you know, this is actually the first time Jordan and I, Jordan Hall and I have spoken. We've had some almosts in the past, but never been able to sort of put it together. And I was I was deeply moved and and quite struck by the podcast that you made chronicling some of your decision to be baptized and join a church. And and then that if that wasn't enough, then Ken, who just had this really amazing AI conversation on your channel with Jonathan and John and DC Schindler, you followed it up with your conversation with Jordan, which I thought was even better because what struck me was here, here we have Jordan Hall, who was known in this corner, known via rebel wisdom and the Game D movement, finding, you know, finding something in church that was enough to to have him submit to baptism, you know, he and move his family and go there. And and then you can in, I thought, just articulate, beautiful way, someone who didn't grow up, let's say, in a difficult church, you know, and you said you grew up in really a wonderful church, as did I express your difficulty. And part of what I've seen in this little corner of the Internet is that part of this for many people is sort of working their way through this question of church, because I played this little branding ahead of time because in a lot of this branding that around the Grim Grizz channel, they're sort of developing, they just brought in all of these layers to what church is and how it functions. And the more layers you have, the more stumbling blocks you have. And you two spoke about that. So I wanted to sort of have you two on and see where the conversation would go, because in many ways, many people are sort of in the position of with respect to church, can't live with it and can't live without it. And there's that dynamic. And so both of you coming at this from such interesting places and then meeting each other, if you haven't seen their conversation, by all means see it. But that serves as an introduction to this. Maybe Jordan, Ken, though, I don't know how your time is because Ken's at work. Yeah, I think right now I probably could bet on about an hour as long as nothing crazy comes in. OK, neither of you have been on the channel before. I very much want to do a conversation with Ken and his brothers at the Chino conference. I wound up being their chauffeur and I loved driving Ken and his brothers in the car because some of what Jordan talks about in terms of finding in that church, you can also find in families. And it's so beautiful watching brothers who love each other, but they're brothers. And so all of that stuff is in there. Ken, why don't you start by just giving a little bit of a way too short for a full randos conversation, but a little bit of biographical information about you, your church journey and where you're at now. Sure. Well, first of all, thank you, Paul. I'm very happy to be on your channel. It's like you said, that time in Chino was really wonderful. I really enjoyed getting to know you a little bit. And it was a lot of fun to be there with my brothers and work through all this. Yeah, I grew up sort of a fundamentalist, Anabaptist background, sort of an offshoot at the confluence of sort of like Southern Baptist and Mennonite. You know, it was very sort of separation from the world. You know, this world is going to burn and pass away. We're going, we're just pilgrims here. We're going somewhere else. Yeah, very sort of judgmental God, right? A very sort of judicial understanding of what Christianity is about. Substitutionary atonement, those sort of things. Moved from there into a sort of evangelical context. Went to Biola University. Got to, did some biblical study stuff there. And then Jordan Peterson, John Vervecky, that sort of tangent. Haven't been to church since COVID. Found evangelical Christianity, at least the brand that I was a part of, pretty, let's say shallow. And it's just sort of, didn't find it fulfilling and sort of bottomed out of it. Have been pretty ambivalent to church over the last couple of years. I've done a lot of just sort of like, I think opponent processing, with John Vervecky's language would be right. I think I've touched my toes into adversarial processing here and there. But mostly I think have been just wrestling with Christianity. And that's sort of what my channel's about in a lot of ways, is wrestling between all the usefulness, all the tools, all the really helpful framing that I've gotten from John and Jordan Peterson. And then I went pretty significantly into the East through, Ram Dass has been a really big influence on me. Alan Watts, those sorts of guys. And then reading more about Eastern stuff too. Nishitani, DT Suzuki, those guys. Got a lot of sort of Eastern practices, which have helped me a lot. And then those sort of have dumped me back in Christianity, because as I've said many times, everywhere I go, I find Jesus is right there, sort of underneath me already. And so over the past, yeah, over the past year, several months especially, I've sort of been finding a new sense of appreciation, a new sense of openness and interest in the church especially. And so yeah, Jordan's movement came at a really interesting time for me, because it sort of coincided with a lot of these movements. And I have the utmost respect for Jordan. He's been tremendously helpful for me. You know, I take the way that John talks about tracking Socrates, the beginning of after Socrates. I've done that with a lot of different people, and Jordan's one that I've done that with and found really, really helpful, just sort of the way you articulate things, Jordan, all those sorts of things. So with that being said, it was profoundly impactful for me to hear about Jordan's movement. Weirdly, sort of, I didn't expect it at all, but then as soon as I heard it, I was like, oh, that actually makes sense, based on some of the strains that I've been hearing and some of the things you've been saying. So it just so happened that we already had a conversation scheduled. So yeah, that's where I'm at, sort of tentatively open and interested in re-engaging in church. Deeply appreciative of Jordan and the conversation that we had the other day, especially I thought was really, really wonderful. So yeah. All right. I will put the link to that conversation in the notes below if someone wants to drop it in the chat, they can do that. Jordan, you and I, again, we haven't spoken before, but we've sort of been circling, I mean, John Vervecky in that sense has sort of been the connection between us. And you've been in this space a while. Again, I don't have time to really do the full treatment. I'd love to have you on sometime and just give you the time to walk through your story and ask questions, because that's usually what I do with people's stories. Why don't you give us maybe a brief version of your story? And again, for that podcast that I treated in a different video, you can, that is a beautiful podcast, really walk through it well. People were sending me that podcast like crazy. Why don't you give us a little introduction as to who you are and how on earth you found yourself in this sort of crazy space we have right now? Well, it's not perfectly accurate to say that my trajectory is the opposite of Ken's, but there's certainly something to that. So for example, my first real intellectual passion was Nietzsche. And I was becoming, it was hitting the direction of becoming a Nietzsche scholar. If I'd gone to grad school, instead of being an entrepreneur, I would have studied that in combination with the post-structuralist commentators like Foucault and Deloitte. And I spent probably 15 years, even after I left university, continuing to delve into that. And so the, not anti-Christian, but the sensibility of not struggling or wrestling with Christianity, because Christianity was already a done deal, that had been buried long ago. And the question is, what do we do in these days? And so that was the story until relatively recently. And then to kind of like teleport to the present, because I think it actually lands just right, my wife and I got married two days ago in our church. Congratulations. And it was absolutely perfect, very beautiful beyond comprehension. One of the things I've noticed as I've been spending more and more time in this context is maybe one of the advantages of the 52 years or 51 years I spent as a non-Christian, and I think this is proper, like almost as a master of the secular, I really have gone deep in four or five distinct dimensions of the secular with a real view of the furthest elements of that culture. And frankly, with an intent, with a game-beat story of how do we actually do this within this cultural worldview, within this worldview, which is now I'm in a position to be able to critique it with a very high degree of precision and intimacy. And so I looked at the category of marriage, and we were talking with some of our friends in the church, and I said, look, the one thing I can say for sure is I want not a drop of the secular to be in this, because it's not supposed to be, it never should have been. And so we had, it was effectively, it was house church on Wednesday, which happened to be on Valentine's Day, which happened to be the same day both my parents and grandparents were married, which happened to be Ash Wednesday, none of which, by the way, was malice aforethought, it just happened to land exactly that way. And I borrowed my suit, my wife borrowed her dress, it was a potluck dinner, all the songs were just a devotional song that we wanted to sing in house church anyhow. The only thing I paid for was a 70 buck cake at the time. And my daughter was just in was, and it was beautiful about it was the felt sense of consecration and encouragement, like everybody in the church was speaking forth of the wow, this was effective. One of my friends, Grant said, this put flesh and bones on what we believe. So it was an embodiment of it in a very deep way, which felt beautiful to me. So I've gone that journey. You have to sort of choose to attend some of these other podcasts, you want to figure out what happened in between, but that kind of gives you the broad strokes. Wow. Wow. I have two sons right now organizing their weddings, and they're both doing it in very different ways. But, you know, I keep going back to my own, I think my wife and I got married for $1,500, reception included in 1988. And again, it was, you know, it was at the church and my father was one of the preachers and my local preacher was another and congratulations, congratulations. Ken, talk a little bit about, I mean, one of the things that Jordan just did beautifully was give a bunch of us, some of us had a feeling of, wow, yeah, that was my wedding. That was what my church life was like. A wedding reception as church potluck, wouldn't that be great? And I know a whole bunch of other people heard wedding reception as church potluck, that is exactly what I don't want for my wedding. And we are in this really strange place right now, where on one hand, Jordan, you said it beautifully, you've been living the secular life and now, wow, I married my wife in a church and the potluck was the reception and all the church people cringed, what is going on? There's a, first of all, I love that story, Jordan. That's amazing. I'm so happy about that. I get so tired of all the shenanigans around weddings. So that's just wonderful. The thing that comes up for me here is actually my friend Matthew Whedon, who I met at the Chino Conference, said to me the other day after watching the conversation that you and I had, Jordan, he said, you know, Ken, the thing that you do that's really cool is it's not some sort of trivial authenticity. There's this sort of deep sense of honesty that you bring to conversations. And I took that as maybe the most significant compliment I've gotten. That's one of the most significant compliments I think I could get from things on my channel, because that's, that to me sort of like puts its finger on what I hear in that story from you, Jordan. That's sort of the sense that I've gotten from you throughout our relationship is this sort of deep commitment to an honesty that is, it's not, it's this entire, the entire self is called into a true accountability, a true resonance with what's going on. There's no sort, like superficiality is is totally appropriate insofar as it's actually superficial, right? But not like, like if we're stopping at superficiality or if the superficiality goes to a level that it shouldn't be at, that's not cool. We're not good with that. Like it needs to be, and so I'm, the word authentic is obviously here, but I know some people, especially in this corner, have trouble with that word, but I think it's authenticity in the really deep sense of like, you know, you know, church for me, like the reason I left the church was because of this superficiality, was because like, I felt like I wasn't, I didn't really believe it. I was pantomiming everything. I was trying to want to want it. I was trying to want to love Jesus, but like it didn't really land in the deepest sense. And I think that's sort of what we're all really looking for here. And what I really hear in that story from Jordan is like, Hey, you know, all these things land together. Let's get married. Let's do this thing. We've got, you know, we're in this place. We're with the people that were, you know, this consecrated sort of, sort of sense, but it's not about this big, you know, superficial thing. It's actually about, are we all fully participating in a deep sense of authentic honesty? Yeah, it's interesting. I was noticing in the Buddhist or New Age variant, whatever flavor that may be in America, you oftentimes run into people who have, what's it called, spiritual bypass, you guys know what that term? Spiritual bypass. It's where you superficially simulate enlightenment, but always at the service of a very particular form of narcissism. And yeah, noticing something like, it's like a term, safety bypass or something like that, where, you know, an example would be, obviously your wedding isn't about you. That's kind of the key element. It's not about you. It's also not about you being not about you. That's the Scylla and Charybdis. You have to be careful with it. But if you can actually land in the fact that your wedding is actually part of an echo of the eternal, of the reconciliation of God with his creation and Christ with his church, and you're being gifted the possibility of holding that spot for one particular moment as part of a covenant relationship, and you really hold that, like for real, it's weird. Like we live in a culture with that notion of like actually just really holding meaningful, important things as if they are meaningful and important, and with full stake, then something happens. It's just like a well-honed bell. You know, like, have you ever had a situation where like there's a bell and maybe it's got a crack or it's touching a clock and you hit it and you're like, thunk. But if you actually get that bell and it's in its tone that it's ready and you hit it and it just rings, that's it. You can get it to that place and it rings, and then that ringing feeling echoes to everybody who's listening for that. And that I think is the, that's the beauty that I've been feeling. I'm praying that I don't have to run through the whole loop of not wanting to be in church because that would be getting pretty old for that. Well, I guess I have two thoughts. One is, you know, I've been around church long enough that I do know that the honeymoon effect is real. And you can even see the honeymoon effect in the book of Acts because, of course, the book of Acts is chapter two and chapter four. There are these halcyon days of everyone shared what they had with one another. And then, of course, right after that you get Ananias and Sapphira where, you know, a couple actually get struck down by God and suddenly everyone's like, oh, and that connects with this. If I think I'm understanding your spiritual bypass term correctly, there's always a, with us in this dispensation, I don't say that to trigger dispensationalism because the word is much deeper than dispensationalism. With us in this particular frame right now between what I call creation 1.0 and creation 2.0, there is a sense that I constantly get when I read Jesus in the gospels that this particular instantiation of creation can never fully hold all the glory God intends to deliver to us and for us and through us. And so this tension of, in some ways, the simple church wedding with a potluck reception is a beautiful instantiation of, I think you said it beautifully, Jordan, that in a certain sense the wedding isn't about you because when both people stand at that altar and they make those promises, what they're basically saying is that it's kenosis. It's we will empty ourselves for this new creation, which is our marriage. I sometimes tell people that they should name their marriage and they're like, what? And, you know, I've seen a marriage named Vietnam and I don't mean the country, I mean the war. And because marriages have a spiritual body, which is the coming together of the bride and the groom and then the children and then it reaches out to all of those. And so in a sense, there's a way in which the church wedding with the potluck reception is this beautiful instantiation. Yet I think for many people struggling with church, they deal with that. It's still in a degree of simulation because there will always be elements of it that betray. We have a real sense of even the best church you've ever been to, there is a level of betrayal. It never in this world can fully embody everything that it should. And, you know, to me, that's part of what at least the reformed community talks about total depravity. It's not that everything is as bad as it could be, but in this world, sometimes even the best things, there's always, and sometimes it's limitation, sometimes it's corruption, sometimes it's betrayal. There's always a level in which we can't just get there. But then in that C.S. Lewis argument from desire, yet in our hearts, we desire its fullness, knowing that in this moment, the reality we are partaking in can't quite hold that weight of glory. Did that make any sense? Yeah, totally. Absolutely. For me, I had two things. One is, of course, and thus Christ, that one very specific aspect of creation that does hold that glory and that allows us to have a waypoint that orients us towards it. And then the second is, weirdly enough, I actually was having a conversation with a young man who just wanted to chat with you. We've talked in the past, in fact, you know, in this world, but he's on this journey, too. And this was actually very much the subject of the conversation, this notion of the, you know, it was Christ, Jesus Christ, the only one, because there was the one before, there are others. I was like, well, the only one without sin, you know, where we're all sort of participating in a journey towards something, we're in the process of justification, we're in the process of consecration, we're in the process of that process. But there's only one that is all the way, which is a different kind of thing. So yeah, I think that's a very great, like that's in a sense, that's where we are. That's the essence of the world that we live in is one that has sin is everywhere. And it's the micro and the macro. So you're in a place where it's like, oh, man, this is full of sin. Okay, fair enough. And you're in a place like, this is amazing. Okay. And also, there's cracks in the world. Yeah, there's, I want to, so there's a, I want to bring in something along with this, because I, there's this great book, John recommends it here and there called Alone with Others. It's a commentary on Buddhism. It's a, it's by a guy named Stephen Batchelor. It's really, really, really excellent book, but it's actually about the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, Stephen Batchelor. It's really, really, really excellent book, but it's actually made me more of a Christian than I've been for a while, as a Buddhist. And one of the things he talks about, Okay, you cracked up there, Ken, you're going to have to repeat that Alone with Others. It's a book about Buddhism by Stephen Batchelor. One of the things he talks about in that book is that the first step towards becoming a Buddhist is to take refuge in the Buddha, this existential taking of refuge idea. And it's something like you take all the existential questions that weigh on you. In some sense for me, this feels like that sense of always trying to prove that my life is actually worth something. Always trying to do something to actually make this whole journey, the suffering, all of it matter, the fact that I'm going to die, like just to do something to make it matter. Take the weight of all of that and displace it off your own life and place that whole weight on the life of another. In this context, he's talking about it in relation to the Buddha. I take it in relation to Jesus. If I actually can take that existential weight and say, I actually don't need to prove anything because I actually buy into this notion that this guy at this time, somehow whatever this means that he was God and man, that he actually did it. He actually did the thing in the way that everybody is trying to do the thing. And because of that, I can take all of that angst of that existential weight and I can just sort of let it go. And I think a lot of people, and for me and where these church issues get tricky, we try to do that, but we do it with the church instead of the person of Jesus. And there's a very big difference because like you said, there's always this betrayal in the church. It's made up of people. And we're trying, some people are really darn good at resonating with Jesus. We call them saints and they're really good at it. And maybe even, depending on your theology, maybe they even do break through in that sort of way. And maybe they do become sort of aligned to that, but they only become aligned insofar as you really get to that point of placing that existential faith in the person of Jesus. And to me, to me, that's, I don't know, like that's what I hear you saying there, Jordan. And I just wanted to fill that out a little bit. Boy, you just touched on the Protestant Reformation along with a whole lot of other things. Because the question is, so when I talk to some of my Jewish friends and I talk about Jesus' life, death, resurrection, ascension, the ascension is an integral part of that entire story. Some of them will say to me, well, the ascension is kind of where I have to step away. Because when you tell me, Ken, when you start using this word Jesus, and putting this on Jesus, wow, that's pretty abstract. Because you can't, you know, you're in a hospital right now, you can't just go down to another floor and touch his garment. And so then, in many ways, the conversation in the Protestant Reformation was about how actually do I gain access to this Jesus? And there's a really good argument in there, because a very traditional argument from the Orthodox, well, you gain Jesus through apostolic succession, through the hierarchy, through the church. Now Protestants say, yes, you access Jesus through the church. But Protestants, I mean, so the move you made there, Ken, there was a deeply Protestant move right there that you made. And in many ways, a lot of, if you look at the other conversations that when people listen to, they don't hear it as specifically religious, they might hear it as cultural or political or philosophical. These parts of our conversation that we have going on through Jordan Peterson and John Vervecky, we're really dealing with this question of, well, in a Christian sense, well, you say, I put this on Jesus. What on earth do you mean by that? And when you look at the history of the church, well, that's in a sense what they have all been trying to do. And so what was so fascinating, Jordan, about listening to that podcast and your story, that sense of embodiment, there was a, you know, there's an optimal fittedness. Jordan or John talks about optimal fit. I think human beings are, there's no fit. That's the eschaton. We're just always working on the fitting of the optimal grip. So, you know, what you just pointed to, Ken, wow, there's a ton there exactly with respect to this point about church. What on earth are we talking about? Yeah, well, we can, because we can notice if we zoom out one level that the body of the church is quite fractured. And so, and that's a problem. What's wrong? I'll just put it in. There's something wrong with that. There's something right with that. I think, by the way, I'm just putting myself out there. I'll just have the advantage of the honeymoon face so I can say nonsense. People would be like, yeah, he's just saying nonsense. No, but you're right on that too. Yeah. I mean, there's something there, but that optimal grip is kind of like, it's funny. It's like trying to get an optimal grip on an orange, but you don't have, you only have like one mono finger. Like, no, it needs to be a certain shape. There's a shape that's necessary to get optimal grip. And the embodiment, the body of Christ is not a single organ. It couldn't be. That's not how things work. If we're using body as the word, and that's the word we're using, it's going to have organs. And those organs are going to all be doing certain kinds of things in relationship with each other as part of a larger whole. So I feel like there's something like there's a micro-macro thing going on where each of us individually, each of us in our family relationship, in our community relationships, in our larger church relationships, the church as the church, within ultimately as the whole. All of these things are in this problem of reconciliation and coming into something. And, huh, funny. Sorry, I'm rambling, but- No, that's not rambling. You're doing good. Can I pick up on that? Because that's perfect. Because this micro-macro thing is exactly, like, there's one answer to this question that's sort of the metaphysical answer of like, you know, what does it mean for Jesus to actually tie things back together? Right? And I can talk about that. And that's interesting. It's good. Whatever. But what I'm talking about when I invoke this, taking refuge in Jesus, I'm talking about a very particular, particularly personal and relative position that is like, this is one of the ways, and again, I'm sort of outside the church. So like Jordan, I'm going to take the license to say things that may upset people. But I sort of think about traditional Christianity and Protestant Christianity as being a bifurcation and an emphasis of these two questions, right? Traditional Christianity emphasizes the absolute, the metaphysical, the- Yeah. And Protestantism emphasizes more the personal, the- how do we make this work for individual people at whatever time and place they are? And I think, you know, like, if you get those two things right, you get your personal, like, the personal shifting onto the personal shifting of the significance of my own life, off of my own life, right? On to this, in this trustful faith, struggling with words here, but manner onto the life of another of saying that somebody else actually did it and therefore, I'm going to live in the way that he did, right? I can't do that if the church isn't there. I can't do that if some sort of lineage isn't available to me to participate in. And in that sense, the traditional churches are correct, but I also can't do it simply by means of saying I'm a part of that limit, lineage. I also have to actually do it personally. Yes. And that's what I'm getting at is like, if I do that personally in the micro way, then I can actually come into this macro tradition of lineage. Did we talk about that notion of leaving your tribe? I think we talked about that in our earlier conversation because we talked about a, I'm sort of borrowing that actually from a conversation that we had almost a year ago, I think. One of these conversations I've had in the past couple of weeks, there was very specific in this notion of like an adolescent, you know, an adolescent has to be an individual. There's an adolescent phase of relationship with the church where you aren't, you're part of a tribal structure, but it's sort of, it's imposed on you. You haven't kind of metabolized, you haven't earned it. You're in relationship with it. You're just in it and you're poured into the mold and frozen. And so what ends up happening, of course, is you have to go through a process of growth. You have to individuate in some way. And this is a tragic move, right? There's a breaking, a suffering that has to happen so you can limber back up again, but then you can return back. And the returning back, the part reality, is the place where you actually are in a real relationship. You're authentically in something. You have done the work to be able to do that stuff you're talking about, to be, I am here. Like I am, I am showing up through full choice, through my own, I've owned my own sovereignty. My sovereignty is now being given back into this in a full way. I'm here. I will take on the yoke because I'm choosing to take on the yoke. It's a very different kind of thing. Something that came up for me that I thought might be useful is I had this visual image of Christ, it's like a rock dropping into a pond and it just ripples going through the world. And I can say from my own personal experience, I had to go through a meaningful amount of suffering to be available to receive. And my guess is this is true of everyone. And my guess is this is true of everyone particularly. My flavor of suffering is different than yours, Ken, because we were thrown into the world in a different way. But as that is working through the world, the way that Christ shows up and say Russia is going to be different the way that it shows up on the American frontier, because they're different than you. The suffering is in some sense the same, but there's suffering that has to be undergone because there's a lot of culture built in, all kinds of really weird particulars that are having to be unwound as this thing is kind of being metabolized in. So I'm wondering if there's a piece of that, that notion, what does it look like for us as people, as humans, to have come to our post-tragic historical arc and be able to say, yes, we now do from our own sovereignty choose to take on this yoke. I loved in your conversation between the two of you, Jordan, when you did sort of what you just did a minute ago and just brought it up a level, because we are participating in this as individuals, but then we also, all of us participate in multiple extended bodies, subtle bodies. And again, this is part of what has arisen, especially Jonathan and John have been poking at that. And these, I participate in my Jewish heritage on my father's side. I participate in the Frisian heritage on my mother's side. I participate in the genetic layer of whatever has passed through that layer. I participate in the Christian reform community that was an immigrant community. Now growing up in the East Coast, living on the West Coast, I mean, there are just so many layers involved and that period of adolescence, I think part of this also resonates with the fact that, through Jordan Peterson, Joseph Campbell, even the Hero's Journey stuff, which has taken on a lot of resonance for a lot of people. People understand, I think, also the limitations of the Hero's Journey as a framework, but there's a leaving and coming back. And these are built into how many biblical stories. With Abraham, you leave Ur, Egypt, it's back and forth. And of course, Peterson picks up all these archetypal things. So that is happening at individual levels. It's also happening at communal levels. And we are participating in many of the various ways which make all of our individual stories highly idiosyncratic, but also deeply resonant with how many other layers that are happening at the same time. Well, if we think of, Jordan and I talked a little bit about the complex versus the complicated. And if we think about humanity collectively as a complex organism that is actually meant to function as a coherent whole, that is in some sense the actual body of Christ collectively. Technically, that's the case. If Jesus actually was God and man, then technically all of humanity continues to be the body of Christ. And like you said, Jordan, we're fractured all over the place. We're fractured as Christians. We're fractured above that level too. And in all these various layers of subtle bodies, maybe we're going through the adolescent phase of humanity as such in trying to figure out what it means to actually become a complex coherent body. Well, Tom, what Tom Holland did for me, I noticed that he got a mention in your podcast too, Jordan. How Tom Holland really helped me was after all of this, Jordan Peterson, John Verveke, Jonathan Peugeot, I began to see through Tom Holland the ways that Jesus has colonized the world. And the more you understand church history, you appreciate the fact that Christianity very early on got out east. And so you almost can't find currently in this globalized world we live in a layer of at least fairly organized religion that Jesus hasn't managed one way or another to sneak some code into. And we're watching this happen right now, especially as part of what I've seen also is that secularity sort of set itself up against religion, but there was sort of a Gerardian rivalry going on there whereby secularity was the secret second church that people participated in and unknowingly imbibed a lot of Jesus' code to the point that we saw new atheists decrying religion while standing on its assumptions all the time. And so we've watched this process happen. And now we are in again a differentiation phase where we see after the fall of the Caliphate and the Ottoman Empire, sort of a resurgent Islam come up and we're seeing that continue to take form in Turkey. You're seeing it with Modi in India and then we see this strange thing happening in China which is still hard to figure out what on earth is happening in China, but Christianity is growing under the surface there. And so one of the things that Tom Holland helped me see was that, oh my goodness, Jesus has deeply colonized this world and he is still moving, but he is moving in ways that even Christians are struggling to see, but it's happening. But then again, that forces then the divisions within Christianity which in some ways are lamentable as Jesus prays against them in the Gospel of John, while at the same time do function as a sort of incarnated opponent processing within the church because I think the great human propensity is simply overreach. Once we find something that we get excited, we overreach and then we keep having to be pushed back. And I see that as happening. That's the new phase after in a sense secularization won the world. Okay, now it's losing it. What will come instead? I don't know, but Jesus is very much in the battle in ways that people only sort of see and often completely miss. And so that's where the game be. I don't know a lot about the game be conversations, but I first saw a little bit from from Brett Weinstein and then Rebel Wisdom, I began seeing it and I always thought that in some ways what you see in Christ was what I saw as a preacher because I was listening to all of this game be stuff and I still had the discipline of having to preach every week to a church that has zero understanding of any of this internet stuff because they're all older people. And well, you know, how did Jesus colonize the world? And he's still doing it. But that gets back to the point I made to you, Ken, before about, okay, well, what do you mean by Jesus and how exactly do we relate to him? Is it through an institution? Is it through an imaginative personal relationship conversation I'm having? Is it through a local group of in real life people that are meeting in his name? I mean, this to me is the cutting edge of what Christendom is wrestling with now. And we can have a long conversation about this, like this concept, like we heard the concept of meshwork. There's a book called A Thousand Years of Nonlinear History by Manuel de Landa. It's brilliant. And one of the things he points out is that consistently in history we see these two movements that include hierarchy and meshworks as two different topologies. And meshwork is governed effectively by relationships. And of course, for the most part, Christ moved through relationships. He had a certain number of apostles and the apostles went out and talked to people, largely small groups, by constraints, very limited Paul writes in epistles, and that's everything else is person to person. So there's something about proper relationship between that real hierarchy. And when hierarchy tries to take on overreach, when hierarchy tries to overreach, take on more than it is supposed to, then it becomes something wrong. There's a hardening to it. There's a cool domination, a tyrannical characteristic of synchronism. And there's something that happens at the level of the meshwork. And both of these are in a certain kind of relationship. Some of that's happened. Meshwork has been really struggling for a long time because until we had a global network that was intrinsically an open protocol, you couldn't actually do meshwork over large scales. You had to govern territory in large populations by virtue of top down hierarchies. There's no other way of doing it. But now we actually have a new way of doing it. And one of the things that we're feeling, one of the sufferings that we're undergoing, as in this case, very specifically the whole of humanity, is that we're not going to be able to do meshwork. Specifically, the whole of humanity is that confusion of, oh, wow, things have shifted deeply, deeply fundamentally. And the playing out of that implication is non-true. It's gigantic. So I don't know, Jordan, how familiar you are with estuary and this thing that I've been working on, which has basically been estuary or church adjacent small conversation groups that the particular conversation of a particular meeting is generated from the people who gather. There are lots of different layers to this. I'm now doing it every Sunday at 9 a.m. We have our full worship service at 11, but it's that way of trying to re-knit together. So in my particular group, I've got people who've been listening to my videos and have found me. Many of them are atheists. They don't go to church. They never had any involvement in church. And then I've got people who have been involved in church all their life, and now I'm putting them into groups of six to eight. And they're discovering each other. And it's just a fascinating thing to watch. And part of what I've seen happen in this little corner with respect to YouTube is that while there are certainly clearly hierarchies in play in terms of this little corner and all the conversations that we're having, it has become this meshwork network of conversations that are very ad hoc, just like this little one we're having right now, but are also available for viewing and increasingly available for participation. And that is exciting people who would normally be sort of lurkers or in church terms congregants sitting in pews to, and to me I see this as deeply Protestant because it is the increasing priesthood of all believers, that there isn't one priest and all the laity, but what you have are people being priestly at different moments in time and different places to one another being knit together. So I would like to pick up on that and talk about what you brought up, Paul, with that question of what do you mean to, what's the Jesus that you're turning to? Because I think like what we're talking about here is the increasing capacity of human beings to be interconnected in some sense, right? And it's like regardless of which vector of connectedness Jesus arrives to me in, there's some manner in which it's pointing to an underlying reality that's there. And I think, you know, so there's all sorts of things with the separation of Jesus and Christ and using the sort of universal Christ idea. I think Richard Rohr does a pretty decent job of talking about some of these things. I really like Rohr's stuff, but I think, you know, if it is really true, then there is some sense in which like you're necessarily going to be participating with Jesus. And I think that's what you're pointing towards with some of the Tom Holland stuff. It's like you're always already playing out Jesus's story. And so there's a way in which you can't get away from it. That's actually the point, right? It's like you're in it already. So the question is sort of like, you know, the question of the church is something like, well, how do we resonate with the way that Jesus is showing up? How do we report on it in such a way that we get other people on board with it? So we resonate with it and amplify it, right? And it's like the protocol for that is changing because the ways that human beings are interfacing is changing. And, you know, that's yeah, exactly. Like that's what we're doing here, right? Like how do we get more of this, of this, well, Christ into the world? Hmm. Well, one thing that would be really good, and it really helps with this spontaneous formation of hierarchy thing, is if we're very clear on the fact that it's the spirit, it's not us. If we just put that in the foreground, we just continue to kind of stay in relationship with that. The human hierarchy stuff, which is difficult not to have happen, right? Walk into a room and hierarchy is beginning to form, can maybe be backgrounded to some degree, certainly if we're not intentionally trying to pull in Andrew Tate and produce a human hierarchy on the basis of manipulation and power. That's helpful. So we say, look, this is not about me. It's about God. And I'm going to do my best and recognize that there's a suffering intrinsic in doing my best, which will continue to unfold, which is beautiful. That will help. I think also, Ken, so in the talk that I gave, I put on my channel, the sound isn't very good, at the German breakwater event. One of the interesting things when you look at the history of the church, you look at, let's say, very old history, orthodoxy, which is still present today. If you listen to people under the orthodoxy space, it's the liturgy, it's the liturgy, it's the liturgy. And the liturgy was the vehicle by which, what you just pointed to in terms of, Ken, getting Christ out into the world, the liturgy was sort of the focal point of the vehicle. You talk to Roman Catholics and you say, well, what is that the essence, the heart of the church? It's the Eucharist, the Eucharist, the Eucharist. So the Eucharist is sort of the focal point. And then when you get into Protestantism, there's on one hand, you ask a Protestant, it's a preaching of the word, the preaching of the word. It's sort of this teaching mode. Now, all of the church have always had all of the levels. At the Orthodox church, they had preaching, they had liturgy, they had Eucharist. And then the fourth thing to arrive, which I think is really where we're at now, is the fellowship. It's so interesting to me when John Vervecki sort of lands on that word, because I think, and that's where sort of this estuary thing for me has come, because I realized that I can talk to people all day long, podcast, YouTube. My education prophet, Calvin Seminary used to say, you know, mug to jug communication, from my mug to your jug. And he'd always say, it doesn't really work. He was a lifelong school teacher, teaching theology. He said, it doesn't really work. He was a funny guy. And so what I've been seeing is, in some ways, church has always had all of these levels. But at this point, part of what we need, I think now, is this re-knitting together in small conversation. I think partly because the women are no longer at the river washing the clothing together. The men are no longer in the field harvesting the grain together, where you had all of that knitting in the village together with, of course, the spires, the whole package there. And now in the increasing silos that are facilitated by these screens, now, you know, what I see necessary in estuary groups all over is, people need to learn once again how to have a conversation. And it's so, I mean, you think, no, you should have figured that out in your first 15 years of life. No, but if you don't catch it then, you got to spend 20 years learning what you would have in your first 15. And I think that's where a lot of the church is at, where, you know, and so then when I do an estuary, it's usually the church, I get more pushback from the church people, because the church people are like, you need a clear, the Protestants, you need a clear presentation of the gospel. That's not what I'm doing there. The Roman Catholics could say, you need Eucharist, and the Orthodox could say, you need liturgy. And I'll say, we've got liturgy, and Eucharist, and clear presentations, we've got that going over here. But what people really need right here is to sit down and learn how to connect with other people. That's the same reason we have a marriage crisis now. Because what it takes... I'm gonna have to go in about two minutes. All right, last words then. Yeah, well, I was just, that was the notion of relationship at the ground, that the Trinity itself is being constituted of relationship. And this, the gospel constantly being a process of relationship, relationship, relationship. And the image I had, it's funny, like you think about it in the West of these, we were TV-addled, and now we're internet-addled. None of which trains us how to be in relationship with other people. It doesn't just treat us how to be in relationship with the same persons, or in this case, Christ. And that's a very beautiful, like a simplistic, like, hey guys, we need to relearn ordinary relationality, because that actually is the ground upon which sacred relationality rests. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Excellent. Thank you. Yeah. Learn to see Christ in the face of your brother. Well, and that's, again, that question, Ken, of how you access Christ, where two or three are gathered. In my name, I am there. And so in a sense, as we go further into the story, we're coming back down to basics. Yeah. And it's not to, and it's not to say that there's anything wrong with liturgy, Eucharist, and clear teaching. We need all of those, but let's find, like, what knits them together is this relation underneath. That's right. That's right. And if you, and now you, Ken, what was interesting about yours, you can go, anytime you got to leave, Jordan, go ahead. Don't worry about it. What was interesting about your story, Ken, was I sit with many people who have had, and in almost every case, their church disaster story came down to this relational level. Usually it was the program versus the relationship. Always. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Yes. On that note, I will leave while my relationship is still healthy. All right. Thank you, Jordan. Thanks for coming in. Really appreciate it. All right. Bye bye. And so you understand that in a community, there is always, sacrifice is always required for the blessings of a community to be shared by all. You don't have a church without people sacrificing their time, talent, and attention. If people stop sacrificing their attention, meaning they don't come to church and participate, your church falls apart. People don't sacrifice their money, the church falls apart. People don't sacrifice their talents in order to bring their talents to the church and use it to serve, the church falls apart. Sacrifice is always required for community. The difficulty happens when the sacrifices are involuntary. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yeah. When you lose that depth, when you lose that depth of that sort of honesty that I talked about earlier, and you're being compelled into sacrifice, reluctantly, I mean, that's a recipe for resentment. And then, I think one of my, this lands for me in terms of my personal history. Like I can think of quite a few people who I think I had damaging interactions with as a child and adolescent in the church sort of authority space, who had been sort of, if not compelled from outside themselves, compelled by themselves, they've been forcing themselves to make these sacrifices. And then this is where it gets all tricky, right? Because oftentimes it's ourselves doing the tyranny over ourselves, right? There's all sorts of, you know, Jung would have a lot to say about this, but that they had been compelling themselves to sacrifice things for long enough that they'd become resentful enough towards others and the whole thing in general that it's, even their attempt to sacrifice out of compulsion just became destructive. Yes. Yes. And as a pastor, I'm always watching over the flock and you're looking for signs of when it's going to fail. The relationship with the flock is going to fail. And what you just said right there is exactly what I think there are often many reasons, but what I think is usually the tipping point that it's not even that the church has coerced them into this, but I remember when Jordan Peterson was talking about self-tyranny that the tyranny has gotten so far in themselves and the dissonance of, I feel the need to sacrifice and I'm resentful of it, it hits a level of dissonance and done. I'm done. And I walk away. Now, I then watch, and what's so interesting listening to you talk is I watch people walk away. And so then for the first number of years, it's, oh, I'm so glad I'm free from that. I have my Sunday mornings to do whatever I want. I don't have to give that money to the church anymore. I don't have to give them, I can do whatever I want. Years are going to pass and then stuff is going to happen. Oh, I have to arrange a funeral. I don't really dare ask those people at church. Oh, I have to move and I need a hand. Now that's where money comes in because we've developed an entire culture about how to not be indebted to anyone else. If I have enough money, I can hire it out. But still that layer, and I don't know where you're at, but still that layer of church hauntedness where, shoot, when someone comes into church, they're, and they die. There are casseroles there. There are mourners there. There are helpers there. There are ushers there. And I don't pay them a dime. The reason I don't pay them a dime is because I've been sacrificing the whole time and I'm paid up. And I'm just receiving what I've put back. And it's never fair. There are always the 20% give and the 80% receive the 20-80 rule in church, but it's always the way it is. Yeah. One thing that comes up for me there, just sort of as a, it's sort of an aside, but have you ever heard of the book Debt by David Graeber? Yes, I've read it. It's a good book. It's a great book. Yeah. So yeah. Okay. But yeah, I mean, I think you're right. I think that there's something about the coming together underneath something. There's something about, yeah, there's just, there's something about the coming together underneath something that if you do it genuinely, right, if you sacrifice genuinely, I just, I keep coming back to this, the sacrifice under compulsion versus the joyful sacrifice, the willing sacrifice, the desire to serve. The cheerful sacrifice. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Here's the thing that it reminded me of. So I'm one of nine kids, right? I have eight siblings. And I, shortly after my first daughter was born, I talked to my mom and I said, well, I'm realizing now what you, like, I mean, with one kid, I'm sort of overwhelmed. Like how did you raise nine? And thank you for your sacrifice. And she looked at me and she was sort of offended. And she said, don't thank me. Don't think it wasn't a sacrifice. And I've thought about that ever since, because what she said was, you know, there's nothing else I would have rather done with my life. And I notice now, as I try to live more in that sort of pattern, that that is always the case, it's always the case that when I let go of what I think I want to do, and I do what serves someone else or whatever it is, I'm always more grateful. I'm always more joyful. I'm always more fulfilled. And I mean, it's so like, we all know this, right? But none of us, so many of us don't do it. And so, yeah, I like, yeah. You know, T. Grogan, now, Zach, I see you in below, and I'm going to, I dropped the link and we'll bring in people. You know, T. Grogan said, religion does provide community, no doubt about it. So does Marxism, Scientology, Mormonism, et cetera. And that's true. But community is not the same under every master. And we know this because your place of employment can provide community. For many Americans, their place of employment is their primary community. But there's the quality of the boss, and there's also a spirit of the shop or the office or the vendor that governs, like school spirit. And so the point with this is that what we're really looking to do, we recognize that we need a head. You know, Dylan said, we got to serve somebody, but the quality of the person you're serving matters. And part of the Jesus revolution was every empire would ask its citizens to sacrifice themselves for the empire. In the empire of the son of man from Daniel 7, he sacrifices himself for the rest of the community. And that gets built into our culture where, you know, in America, the president is supposed to be the servant of the nation. Gosh, I wonder where they got that idea. I don't think they got it from Caesar, and they certainly didn't get it from Nero. And so churches, and this is where, so I was halfway through Jonathan Pujol and Rafe Kelly's conversation, which is just outstanding. It's on Rafe's channel. You know, so Catholics use the word subsidiarity. There's a bunch of other words that get used. But the idea is, well, part of what happened is we used to have the clan. The nuclear family was that you lived in a village with your uncles and aunts, and there was a patriarch and a matriarch, the shadow matriarchy and the patriarchy had all of that. Well, in urbanization, that all got mixed in. And so what happened, especially in America, is sociologists noted the congregationalization of almost every religion that made its way to America. And the reason was the clan structures were broken up and nobody lived by their biological families anymore. And so what they needed to form was a congregation because you needed your group of five to ten, which was maybe your nuclear family. Then you needed your group of a hundred to two hundred, which was sort of your cat-sized church. And then you needed your next size and your next size and all on up. And the story that forms the community and the actual leader who is over the community, why is it that the Roman Catholic pedophile priest scandal had such an impact? Sorry, T. Grogan gets me preaching like none other recently. Because he's right. It's right. It's like you don't get a choice of whether or not to participate in a body. You don't get a choice of to follow people. It's just you just get to choose who. Yes. And so sometimes you get to choose who. Well, yeah, yeah. Yeah, exactly. I do need to go and get back to work. Paul, this is an absolute joy. Thank you, Ken. All right. I have dropped the link. And so some others of you want to come in. Zach, welcome. Hey, great to be here. I was excited to actually catch up with you and see this whole sort of world. Like I'm a longtime listener, first time caller sort of situation. Yeah, I've recognized your name in the comments for a long time. Well, for whatever reason, I felt the call and I thought I was going to ask a question of Ken and then he just disappeared. So I guess, you know, we're here together. You, me and my buddy Ted over my shoulder here. I don't have Apple TV. I've never watched the show, but I hear that a lot of people like it. Well, you know, there are people out there who are encouraging subscriptions in order to, you know, have access to greater content. And at some point, you might feel the tug to make that lead back into Apple TV. And I think you'll love what you find with Ted. All right. Well, tell me a little bit about yourself, Zach. So I actually used to be a pastor myself. That looks like a grass cross behind you. Yeah, it's actually a plus sign. I couldn't see the bottom half. It's a type of cross, but it's actually a remnant from one of our failed coffee shops. So we have four coffee shops, my wife and I, and that was the one that failed. We called it plus. The name of our coffee shop is called Honeymoon. We have a plus sign in the middle and then we launched one called plus and it failed. But I like to speed it up. I sort of fell away. I went from sort of evangelical into a type of universalism and fell into an emotional affair, which turned into a full blown affair, which kind of wrecked my whole life. And in putting it back together, wondered how sort of God would let that sort of happen if I was earnestly seeking him. And that kind of changed a lot of my understanding of what God might be and what prayer might be and understanding the voice of God. And putting the pieces back together, decided to try on atheism, almost like figuratively, like putting a cloak on and it stuck. And that was probably about 12 years ago. And I found myself in the last handful of years, like so many people you've been talking to, sort of drawn back into this through Jordan Peterson and Rebel Wisdom and now this little corner. So where are you at now? One of the reasons I wanted to bring Ken in was part of what is so when you look at the corners of the corner, I mean, verveky tends to be religion that's not a religion, some of that type thing. Peugeot tends to be people who have gone all the way into orthodoxy. And MySpace seems to be more people, some are in church and some aren't. So where are you at in this whole thing? Yeah, definitely found myself more towards the verveky side, maybe a year ago, year and a half ago. I double clicked into his circling and dialectic into DLogos, did one of those sessions and honestly, it didn't quite resonate for me. And I'd say probably in the last six months, I find myself pulled more into into your corner. And then this Jordan Hall thing, to the extent that Jordan Hall has created his own corner, I feel absolutely pulled into that. Like, we're actually going to talk, he's been very generous with telling people, hey, if you feel you want to have a conversation with me. In fact, this, his conversation with Jim Rutt was the first time that my wife gave a shit about any of the stuff that I try and share with her. I know we've joked that one. Oh, Jim Rutt? Yeah, is it on Jim Rutt's podcast? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah, Jim Rutt's YouTube channel. And Jim just like hammers him for the last hour about the statement of beliefs from his church's website. It's like, Oh, you believe that the Bible is the inerrant word of God? Like, you really believe that? He does a T-Rogan on Jordan Hall. Oh, good. It's so good. I've heard, I heard Luke on a live stream for talking about how his wife, like, won't even meet you, which is just crazy, but totally understandable. My wife was so tuned in. So Luke, if you're still on and listening, maybe your wife would would jive with that second half of the Jim Rutt conversation as well. She gave an actual shit. I mean, it's like, we were literally, you know, it was Valentine's Day. You know what she got me for a Valentine's Day present was a single ticket to go see Jordan Peterson live in St. Louis. Not both of us. This was her Valentine's Day gift. This is her self-sacrificial love is this is something that Zach will give a shit about. Yeah, there is there is so much of that in this corner. I mean, in my first, my first Jordan Peterson meetup meeting in January of 2018, it just go around the room and, yeah, I found Jordan Peterson. I want to talk about it. I tried talking about it with my wife and she looked at me like, no, we're not doing this. That's the wild thing. And like, it's funny, but like, the fact that Jordan's story has his wife involved in it so much. Yeah, it is this whole familial intergenerational thing, I think is what makes me more drawn to whatever corner he's kind of creating and developing because it's like, oh, wow, my wife can be involved, my kids can be involved in it. That's, that's the that's sort of the project that's drawing me in. Yeah, well, and that's, you know, this, I, I still think we're going to continue to see the church, the church has always evolved with the church has always met the need, not perfectly, but has risen to the need. And because when you just say you need something that your wife and kids and the whole community can be in, well, churches sort of do that. You often wind up with men's group with the women's group and with moms, mothers of preschool kids and on and on and on. And it seems like we're always just, we're continuing to reinvent this thing. So, Michael, what do you have to say? Can you hear this good? Yeah, we hear you. Okay. Okay. So I was thinking, you know, when you're talking to T. Grogan earlier this morning and, and just the way that, you know, that all these different things are reaching different people. I don't know if you had heard it, but so the story I shared was about my dad before he got saved, grew up Catholic and he didn't have faith. He didn't have a relationship with God, but, and he was very, very depressed and he was contemplating suicide. But the Catholic church had a teaching that to commit suicide is a mortal sin. And so if you, if you do, you go to hell. It wasn't that he believed that was true, but it was like the possibility that that is true was enough to cause him to stop, to not take that, that move. And, you know, and I was just thinking about T. Grogan's problem was like, what is true? And it's like some truths, like we can't handle them, you know? And, you know, like the nihilists have a pretty good body of evidence for why their viewpoint is true. And, and, and if, if, which is always an incredibly ironic thing for a nihilist to have. Yeah. If you're going to be a nihilist, you really just kind of have to be a nihilist, but they really struggle with it. Point CS Lewis would make all throughout his books. He's like, you know, these nihilists, the problem they have is they can't stick to it. They always want a better society. And it's like, if you're a nihilist, you kind of gotta be the joker. But it's like, which, which, what certainty or what, you know, so it's that like, I exist now because of that doubt that my father had. Yeah. And, you know, and then eventually he came to Christ and then, and then his, and like the other thing I hadn't, I hadn't known previously, and I learned, and like basically his parents were like, are you going to remain Catholic? And, and he said, like, you've seen that there's been a great change, you know, in my life and how good it's been. And I don't think that he said it would be really easy for me to fall back into my old habits if I, if I remained a Catholic. And so his parents were okay with that. And he was okay with them still being Catholic. And I, I just, the video that released this morning, this morning's been so busy with Luke's live stream and now my live stream, but the video I released this morning, I treat Jordan's conversation about his wife's healing and then conversion. And the question is, well, why isn't everyone rushing to join the Catholic church? Well, first of all, compared to the Catholic church, Jordan Peterson is tiny. That's a hard thing for people in the Peterson space to recognize, but he might have 8 million subscribers, but there are how many hundreds of millions of people who are connected to the Roman Catholic church? I mean, Jordan Peterson is tiny. The second thing is if you listen to that conversation, Peterson is very interesting because he sees it not so much, even though that, that poor guy who's part of the Catholic news network is really trying to sell it. Peterson is just seeing it in a different frame. And I think part, we've been seeing this since the reformation. It was true before the reformation, but it's very much happening now where you, you institutions, you need them, but they're, they're different. And so I think Michael, the story of your father's is a great example of a story that I've seen again and again and again and again in the world that, and I see it, I see it often. It used to be in the Christian Reformed Church that if, if your kid wasn't going to a Christian Reformed Church, it was an abject failure. Now Christian Reformed people are just happy, well, at least they're going to church and might be Catholic, it might be Orthodox, it might be Baptist, but, and so there's, you know, we're continuing to work on these issues. Alan, I was, I was actually thinking of you when I was setting up this live stream, because I thought, you know, here, here is, here is poor Ken. He's coming on the internet. He's telling us about, you know, his issues with church. And I was afraid you were going to come in here with eyes blazing and say, Ken, enough! Put a B. If he's still in here, I mean, I don't know, I don't know if he'd be walking away from this interaction, but. I don't know. Ken's, Ken's a, no, I mean, he's got eight, he's got like eight brothers or something, or a good number of brothers. So, you know, in a, in a very solemnist way, you don't just walk up to Ken and think you're going to do something to him. He's got all those brothers behind him saying, yeah, we may fight amongst each other, but you don't touch one of us. Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. Before I jump in, Michael, I just want to say, I think we've been on a few chats and I really like what you say. So I just wanted to say that Zach, I've never seen you before in my life, but you seem like a great guy and I love your beard. It seems like a strong, one day I'll get there. I don't have the cheek growth, but you know. Michael's the king of the beard though. Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly. And that beard, that kind of beard, that takes discipline. Maybe I should just do a live stream. No, it doesn't. No, it doesn't. My beard grows. My beard will cover the earth. Wow. That's very eastern. This is the product of no effort. This is just what happens. So I'm happy with it, but it doesn't, it's not, it's not an effort of discipline. So that's not my strong suit. But one thing I did want to bring up, well, first of all, when you said like, oh, problems with the church. Yeah, have the problems, but have them at the church, in the church and participate. This is not like mutually exclusive whatsoever. And I've never understood, you know, guess what? Going to church, it's the best for, it's the good, really good step. You should be doing it. It's not going to solve all your problems. Like immediately, people want to jam it into like, oh, it's going to solve it. It's just, if you believe in like, like, if we, the ideas that we talk about of, dang, now I'm blanking on them, but just like the world is too big to understand by any one individual. And you understand your values and your goals by participating in a body. Like those two things, you're, we've been talking about these for what, three, four years. If you know those two things, you should be participating in a body because you're not big enough to understand the world by yourself. And, you know, so you can go to Mensa, you can participate by running for, you know, participating in clubs and whatnot. But I mean, I could go further into why church is the right move. But, you know, if you're not participating in any sort of higher spiritual body and you're in the corner, I'm like, these are the basic day one ideas that you're going to hear from Verveky, from Peugeot, you know. So, so that's, that's the other thing is like, yeah, you need a body. You need a bigger body than the body you got. Well, and I think Ken said it nicely. We all will participate in something. And the questions are, part of what we have, I was thinking, I think about this a lot. Part of what we have right now is that we have so many bodies that we can participate in. You can be a Swifty, you can be a Niners fan, you can be a Chiefs fan, you can be, you can have a club about having a really massive beard. I mean, there's right now in our culture, there's no end of bodies you can participate in. What's interesting though, again, back to T. Grogan's point, is the only, my only appearance on Justin Briarley is unbelievable. It was so funny because he, what does he pair me with when I finally get on the show? What does he pair me with? He pairs me with the guy who tried to start an atheist church. And he has a full head of hair, but he's pulling it out. Because what he discovered is, it's actually really hard to create a body. And from just looking at the media, looking at the culture, he assumed an atheist church would be the easiest thing in the world to start. It is just incredibly frustrated because they don't come. Zach, you seem to want to say something. Was that the Sunday Assembly? Yeah. Okay, okay. You just have committed the next hour and a half of my life to finding that video. It's not hard. Just go Paul VanderKlay, unbelievable, it'll probably come up. But it was an incredible conversation. I love the guy. I love talking to the guy because he was a wonderful guy to talk to, but he was just completely frustrated because all the atheists were out there saying, yeah, we don't need Jesus to have a community. And so here's one guy stepping up saying, I'm an atheist. I'd like to facilitate the community. I'll rent the hall. I'll arrange the music. I'll do everything. All you need to do is come. And the atheists are being Niner fans. And of course, the atheist response to that is, well, atheism just means we don't believe in God. Oh, so you're saying it's not a group, but yet you identify as an atheist. So are you a group or aren't you a group? And I'm not trying to dunk on anyone. I'm just saying that dissonance is a thing. And one of the astounding things about, I watch churches and T. Grogan points out the fact that Christians don't agree and they're fighting with each other. I loved what Jordan Hall said in that one podcast about that. Christians are fighting with each other, yada, yada, yada. But the crazy thing is that if you just say the word Jesus, even Christians that are fighting with each other on all sorts of levels, we'll sort of straighten up at least to one degree or another. And it's like, that's interesting. What's with that? And it was like when you had Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris debating each other, like anytime someone would score a point, you'd hear cheers in the crowd. It was like, you very much picked your side in that battle when that was going on. I call it a battle debate. Yep. Yep. So it's the funny, you know, I actually, the precursor to the corner, the precursor to Jordan Peterson for many people was Jonathan Haidt. And when he started talking about the rider and the elephant, I'd listen to that and I thought, dang it, you know, this, this, this, this thinky talky thing up here that thinks he's in charge of who I am and what I do. We've known that ain't true since Romans seven. And if you really want to actually have, if you really want to have a life that is good, you got to deal with the elephant. And the only way to deal with the elephant is not talk to it. Go ahead and talk to your dog. You know, I'm, I'm working on training this dog and this dog, when I'm done training it is going to be the kind of dog that knows 15 times more vocabulary than your dog and actually obeys. But I'll tell you the amount of vocabulary that dog will understand is like this compared to a two-year-old. And, you know, we all, part of what I think the function of sin does and our stubbornness with respect to it is begin to teach us, gosh, I am not what I think I am. And that then gets into all of these other crazy conversations that are so difficult to have and certainly can't be nailed down in all of the ways that we modernists want to nail conversations down. Shoot, I'm talking way too much. I have other videos for that. I'm going to shut up. I don't know if you saw Malcolm and Simone's video that they put out this morning. No. But it's all about Jesus and it's, it's a pretty good one. I mean, it's crazy how like, close they are to kind of like the whole picture, I think. But, you know, I don't mean it's, I don't know. I guess it's like, it's almost like, are they Christians? Like, you know, depending on how we define these things, they're extremely, they're extremely close. And I read their book, their guide to crafting your own religion. And honestly, I wish like every evangelical pastor would read that book because they're actually trying to answer the question of how do you pass on your worldview to the next generation successfully. And they've got, and they've got a whole lot of it, I think figured out really well. Yeah. So that's, it was dynamite stuff. They're really smart. They really are. I like them a lot. And then every now and then they say something, it's like, what? God, are our descendants who have figured out how to transcend time? That's really scary if we're nervous about what's so funny too about- Genesis six, the sons of God, it's Malcolm and Simone's descendants going back in time. That's my theory. Oh, that's funny. That's funny. All right. Pregnant pause. Anything you guys wanted to bring? Zach, did you have more you wanted to say? I brought these other guys in. Yeah, I just want to say I appreciate what you do to sort of bridge things, even like Malcolm and Simone, I probably would have never found them or I would have judged them so quickly that I would never let any of it come in if you didn't sort of midwife them. And I guess want to thank you and encourage you for the ways that you're looking for that and recognizing that we've outsourced some of our discernment to you in that way. And you probably feel that responsibility. And I guess I just want to affirm it and thank you for it and look forward to what's coming next. And yeah, I appreciate you letting me come in. Like I said, I felt the calling. And when you do watch Ted Lasso one day, come back to me and we'll talk about it. We'll report it for people. All right. Sounds good. Great to see your face, Zach. It's a good show. It's always wonderful to see the faces behind the accounts. And to me, I mean, you know that there are people out there and then you watch what they say. And then, you know, like Anselman and T. Grogan and if I've met a bunch of them, but then when you finally get to meet them, it's like, oh, it's so good. It's sort of like a Christmas present because on the you get a Christmas present, you kind of shake it and you kind of get the size. You figure out a little bit about it. Then when you get to open it, it's like, oh, look, there's a little bit of their story. And here's so to me, this is this is just this is just more fun than I ever thought I could have. So thank you, Zach. All right. Take care. All right. Well, maybe maybe we're done talking today. Maybe maybe we just have to end early. I did have. Go ahead, Alan. I did have one more thing. OK, just with with with Ken's story about the woman, I think he said she had nine kids and being like, oh, thank you for your service. And sort of her sort of saying, don't thank me. One thing I want to point out, and it sort of serves back to go to church is you're trapped doing whatever you're going to do either way. Like the freedom you talk about and not having kids of like sleeping in, that's chains of another sort. You know, freedom apart from Christ is, you know, this is Jesus talk about like that slavery, you know, like to be a servant of the Most High is the freedom and to be, you know, and to be, you know. So it's just that's one thing where I'm like, yeah, it's going to like, it's hard and there's elements that you won't understand, but you can sit around trying to take every data point ever that are constantly being generated infinitely more of. And you can kind of weave them together and make all the right decisions. Or you can participate in a body that has a collective way of creating values. And you're going to, like we said, you're going to do that anyway. And just the reason I bring this up is I think that that idea that like, well, it's going to come together and, you know, they're going to knock on my door and they're going to haul me away to put me on the throne. And finally, they'll know that I figured it out. It's like the bumping around in the dark and participating in collective bodies. And the fact that it's not clean cut gives you the courage to actually go to a board game night, to hang out with your friends at church, to have kids and say, well, if I have this kid, I probably can't, I won't become the famous athlete that I always knew I would, even though I'm 45 years old. It's like, yeah, buddy. Like that dream of becoming a famous athlete is a slavery that you're suffering from right now because it's preventing you from following the most high calling. So it's just, yeah, I'm just like, guys, like, I mean, I love the thinky talky. I mean, I've, you know, how many podcasts do I need to listen to before people, you know, before I can say, I love thinky talky, but ultimately, like the participation, the doing, the going, becoming a Bible study leader, you know, talking to friends, you know, we can list it out of the participatory. Like that's where it's, that's where it's at. That's where the honey, you know, that's where the good stuff is. So I just, yeah, like the thinking of like anyone, like especially having nine kids is anything like, I mean, as long, you know, certain they've chosen to do this, but it's going to be an immense blessing, you know, like it's going to be so much more valuable than like, you know, you know, sitting around and being like, well, I never had kids and I'd never had responsibility and that's my freedom as I never was responsible to anyone or anything. It's like, what could be more like nauseate, more like vertigo inducing than the idea of like perfect freedom where you have responsible to no one and nothing and no one cares about you and you care about no one else. It's like, that's, that's a toughy. That seems like a tough life. Well, part of, part of what, so, so upcycle just gifted 10 gifts. I think, I think if you click on the gifts or something, I think you can maybe, maybe get them. I don't know how, um, but, um, yeah, okay. I'll get in there. Um, get, get a gift, get in, get in and watch some of those Randall's conversations that are behind the scenes. Um, you're, you know, one of the things that I noticed watching people leave church is it's, it's just like you talked about Alan, people, people are like, well, now I'll have all of these, I'll have all of this time to do all of these great things. You know what they wind up doing? Watching more TV. You know, they, they, it's just like you say, well, now I'm going to be an athlete. Now I'm going to be, it's just like new year's resolutions. Yeah. They, they tend to settle down into their other, um, they send to settle down into their other masters and their other masters. And this happens emotionally too. If they were angry at church, now they're just angry. And, and one of the interesting things that they've seen with respect to church and politics, the most politically venomous people out there who, who sort of align with the religion no longer participate much in the religion anymore. Now they're just, you know, now they're just participating in one way or now the politics has completely consumed the religion. Whereas when they were actually in a community with other people, those other people sort of retarded the force that those other masters had on them because, and churches do that naturally. It's like, I want to, I want, I'm going to be political 24 seven. Oh, but no, you got to go to church. You got to spend time listening to Jesus. Well, there's a little politics in there. And then you got to serve in the nursery. Well, it's really hard to be political when you're running around with a lot of two year olds. You know, it's political of a different kind, but it's mostly about toy sharing. And, you know, so no, that's exactly right. And I've seen so often, you know, one of the things that I see is people leave the church because the church leadership were angry and controlling. So then they get out into the internet and you know what they are angry and controlling. And it's like, Jesus talks about that. You know, the church has made them a son of hell, you know, worse than they were. But leaving church only made it worse. Now, usually, you know, there's a whole amount of variation in there. Some people are part of really bad churches and they just got to get out. But, but usually they're sort of a period of exhaling and getting that out of their system. But at some point, and this is kind of what we're seeing in this corner, they begin to get back into it and sort of in that adolescent phase that Jordan Hall was talking about it. And then when they come back in, well, they're ready to, they're ready to be an adult in church instead of an adolescent. So we're all growing up. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. I think, you know, that, that being molded so you can participate in a body, I mean, the bodylessness is a huge part of the problem. I mean, you know, I'll just say it, but the chat has been wild this whole time. And like the chat's pretty bodyless. It's like, you know, anything can sort of, anyone can come in, say what they want and leave. I mean, the chat of the stream. And like, you can go to any topic, but you know, so it leads to the lowest common denominator. But when you have structure and you, okay, well, you have to make the coffee. Okay. I was going to be political 24 seven, but now I'll do 23 seven and one hour to make the coffee. And then, you know, oh, well, now I'll, like you said, you know, so, you know, it, it prevents the lowest lowest common denominator ism by having walls and gates and structure. Yeah. Yeah, it does. It does. And I mean, families do that. You look at, you look at men who aren't connected with families. They drink more, they do more porn. They see more prostitutes. They work on their workaholics. They only have sports. Men, men don't do well unattached. Now they might say, well, I'm free. I'm free to drink and screw and whatever. Yeah. But you just proved the point that when you take away one master, the other masters step up. And is that I have, I have worked with so many men in their seventies who they got to a point, maybe they became a widow, maybe, maybe they're divorced two or three times and they get into their seventies. I see this with women, but it's different with women. They get into their seventies and they realize they've screwed everything. They've smoked everything. They've drank everything. They've done all this stuff and they've just basically found the world is shallow and then they start sitting in church and they start thinking about their relationships with the kids of their exes and the difficulty, the difficulty of ministering to this group. I watched my father do it too, is they tend to die on you. They come in, they realize the way they've spent their life. And then in church, they begin to find new life and they begin to really enjoy participating in the life of the church. They give their time, they give their money, they give their talent, they find a new sense of joy. And then they're already in their seventies and eighties and cancer or a stroke gets them and out they go. I watched this all the time in my father's church in the black community because, I mean, with the family structure having been so disrupted in the black community, you tended to have a lot of black men that weren't able to enjoy years of marital stability because that itself is not just an individual accomplishment, it's a societal accomplishment. And part of the, it sounds so cliche in America to decry the breakdown of the family, but it's sort of like when Jordan Peterson in his thing says, when you lose your wife, you don't just lose your wife. You know what? When you lose the family, you don't just lose a family, you lose the stabilizing structure that forces highly powerful people like men to, well, guess what? You're going to go visit your mom and you're going to go be faithful to your kids and you're going to be faithful to your wife. And just like you said, Michael, well, it sorts of gets instantiated in the Roman Catholic church. It says, you better not kill yourself. All right. I won't kill myself. And guess what that means? It means that Michael's father gets to have Michael and maybe see grandkids and then get involved in a church where he has a personal relationship with Jesus. And suddenly, instead of there being an incredibly sad story of a suicide, now you have flourishing. Gosh. And for me as a minister, that's why I do it. When I see that, I say, now I can go and rest in peace because this person found eternal life. Well, what do you mean by eternal life? Ah, I mean a lot of things by eternal life. I don't just mean hell avoidance or going to a good place instead of a bad place when you die. I mean, Michael, your story nails it exactly. What life did your father find? He found love of children, love of grandchildren, love of a church, love of a community. That's eternal life. And it's because eternal isn't just a function of time. It's a function of quality. It's actually, I get frustrated with the English translation in the New Testament. In Greek, it's life of the age, which means life of the age to come. It's that quality of life. It starts now and it doesn't end. So let's get you guys keep getting me preaching. If you guys don't step up and say something, I'm going to talk this whole darn time. That's impossible with how much you're talking, Paul. You just can't even get a word in edgewise. And by the way, I'm just here to represent the clean shaven men. And what you were talking about, Jordan Peterson, where you're saying when your wife dies, it cuts off your whole future life. I'm a little bit unique. I never was married until I was 49. So I took the single and first never had kids until I was 51. So I'm now 63 have a 12, 10 and an eight year old. So it's a little bit backwards way of doing life. And then just two and a half years ago, my wife starts going off the deep end. Literally, I sit at the table at the dinner table. And because of you, it's like, yeah, I grew up CRC. I've never lost faith or anything. But I sort of drifted away from the church, even though I was sending my kids to a private Lutheran school. So I'm sitting at the table, dinner table, and I say, you know, I'm going to start going back to church. And we've been doing breakfast every morning on Sundays. I said, anybody that goes with me will go for breakfast afterwards. My wife right at the dinner table says, you do this, we're getting a divorce. That was two and a half years ago. custody battle later, I finally have primary custody of the kids again. So I'm like, you know, full time father, life is way better than it was two and a half years ago. Oh, by the way, heart surgery, or the ornithogastric aneurysm during this time, my mother dies. It's been exciting two and a half years. Well, anyway, back to the Jordan thing, when he said, you know, divorce, you know, I've talked a lot of people say divorce of this type, like I went through is like a lot like, is worse than your wife dying. Because you got to put up with that in but also at the same time, your whole future life has just been rearranged and ripped up. So yep, yep, yep, yep. Divorce, divorce is worse than death. And but but it's it's like Ken said, I mean, someone might look at your situation and say, isn't this horrible? The 63 year old man has to chase around adolescents. Oh, no, that's not what you say. No, that ain't horrible at all. It's life. It's life. Oh, it's great fun. Like my middle daughter, I do stained glass as a hobby. And for raising money at the school, we have a school auction every spring. And I've been duplicating the church stained glass up there. I do one of the church emblems. Well, she's into it now. So she's, you know, 10 years old and just starting to get into stained glass. It's great. Life. You found life. Oh, it's good. Thank you. Thank you, Dale. Thank you for your story. This is so much of what we need are stories. So Michael shared his father's story. Dale shared your story. Alan, I mean, that's really, if it's a we'll see what Elizabeth Oldfield does with my challenge to her to not just talk to high status people on the internet, but to talk to randos. There's no clicks in it. I'll tell you that right now. There's no clicks into talking to randos. But it's something it's something really good. So well, I sort of experienced the other side of what you got going is, you know, I told you I was in gaming type stuff where I used to have 10,000 paying subscribers who I would go online and do live conferences, that type of stuff. You know, in that little world, you're sort of famous, but outside of that world, you're just a normal person. Yeah, I'm sure you must have the exact same thing. It's like, yeah, in this little corner, you're a famous person. But outside of that, if you ever bumped into anybody that heard of you in real life, be like, wow, you're the first. Yeah, yeah. No, every now and then I bumped into a guy at Costco. The other day, I was going through Costco and this guy stops and looks at me. I thought, Oh, here we go. He says, you're Paul VanderKlay. Yes, I am. How do you know? Oh, my pastor told me to watch your YouTube channel. And actually, good thing that you mentioned this, because coming up on the 20, let me pull up a calendar here, coming up on the 24th of the 24th of February, I am going to be in Battleground, Oregon. I have a church meeting the next day and I have to fly up the day before. So I'm going to do an estuary meeting in the, let me pull up the name of the church. I'm going to just do a little video announcement of this. Anyway, I'm going to do an estuary meeting in Cross, where is it? In a church in Battleground. I'll put another video in. But if you live within driving distance of Battleground, Oregon, and are available Friday night from seven to nine, and come on down and we'll do an estuary meeting in this church. I always leverage that the church is getting, the classes is getting me up there to do synodical deputy work. So it's like, I got to fly in the day before. So, hey, I'm going to do an estuary meeting and we'll see how many people come up. It'll probably be six to eight, something like that. But I'm just famous. I like my level of fame. I'm just famous enough that if I go to a random town, I can draw a handful of people and for two hours we can have an interesting conversation. What is an estuary meeting? If only we had an answer for that question. Estuary hub.org or find a man named John Van Donk. He will love to tell you about estuary. Just Google Paul VanderKlay estuary and you can find what an estuary. This is a dynamic that I try to remind people about. That it doesn't matter how often you talk about estuary on your channel, there's always someone who hasn't heard about it. So, you know, it would be really great if we could, it doesn't have to be you, somebody who does videos. If we can get like a 15 minute video to share with, like, like, I'm thinking like our new pastor at our church, like he would be on board. I think he, because he's, he's actually, it's actually interesting because he's, he's revamped a lot of churches before, but he's mostly worked in more urban environments and now he's in the suburb of San Antonio here where it's all thinky talky people mostly and he's trying to figure out how to get them to come. And so I think, I think he would probably be pretty excited about something like that, but it's just, I can't give him a five hour playlist. No, Justin Wells is, John Van Donk is leaning on Justin Wells who teaches documentary filmmaking to do a 10 minute estuary introductory video. Oh, excellent. But, but of course, just like everything else in church and in this little corner, we sort of have to rely upon the goodwill and of people and Justin will do an excellent job. He's also working on a bigger TLC documentary. Charlie Brown, did you see his documentary? I'm sure you did, Michael. This little TLC documentary was awesome. So yeah, estuary hub.com or dot org. I don't remember what it is. But yeah, no, it's, and, and even if you, and even if you, that's the thing that you learn as a pastor about colonizing people. It's remarkably different and it's a really good thing it's different, but it's, it's difficult. It's remarkably difficult, but it's, and that in a sense, that's why it's sort of hard to get an estuary up and going. But once you get it going, like Van Donk has worked on it for a long time and his is a beautiful one, but it does take some time. And especially if you're sort of beholden to a pastor and it's really tough because pastors, pastors have a lot of people constantly trying to colonize them. Yeah. One thing with the, because my estuary is more dominated by non-corner people. It makes me crack up laughing because anytime we try and describe the structure of it, they all look like, what are you talking like? We're having a group conversation with crackers, like, excuse me. And it's like a perfect like, like a wedge issue of, oh, well we're initiating a spirit to come down upon us. And there's liturgy and ritual. And they're like, I'm drinking a diet Coke and talking about my cat. I don't know if I'm initiating a spirit to come down from the heavenly places and be instantiated on earth. I think I'm more eating, you know, a cracker and cheese. And so, I don't know, it's just so, you know, you could call, I mean, this is why all these terms are impossible to like actually define because they're both sides of simple and extremely complicated, which is all things, which is why you should go to church because it's too complicated to describe easily. So see, I can wrap all of my points into going to church. Which was the branding that I opened this thing with. Yeah, exactly. I'm going to close it with branding too. I, you know, I opened it with the, I opened it with the, the go to church branding. And of course this branding is, you know, Racco did that. Racco's, I'm, Racco, you're in the comments section. I, you are colonizing me with your branding and I am going to copy the heck out of what you're doing with your YouTube channel. So be prepared. So yeah, yeah. And I just don't want to highlight, I've wanted for a long time to do a randos conversation with Nate Vendennand and that, that's going to have to come, Nate. So Nate's in the live stream. Nate is another Christian Reformed minister up in Canada. His grandfather was good friends and co-laborers with my parents in Patterson, New Jersey. Did really beautiful work. Really along the lines, Michael, of what you look at in terms of Herb Vendennand had some industry in Patterson. He taught so many people trade skills and work skills and gave them, you know, these kids growing up in Patterson that might not, you know, have much of a chance, gave them a future. Herb Vendennand did that beautifully. And that's, that's Nate Vendennand's grandfather. And Nate is just a, he's a, he's a, he's a fine testimony to his family heritage because he's another one of the moderators on CRC Voices, which I have been extremely negligent about. But Nate, Nate is, is just a terrific guy. And he's, he's been doing Exodus 90. So I'm really surprised he's been in this. So anyway, yeah, last five minutes. I should probably end on time. I got to do other things today, but last points anyone wants to make. I have a question, a simple question before it popped into my head. Yeah. I assume you, you keep conversations fairly private with your, you know, or is it that people from your congregation? Yes. How do you not vent sometimes to your wife? Well, I do vent sometimes to my wife. They're one flesh, but she, but she, she vents to me 10 times more than I vent to her because she's a public school teacher. Okay. So in terms of the label, the level of ventings, I have so much, I, the amount of venting that I have absorbed, you know, I could vent for years and not catch up to her because I love my job. She often comes home and she looks at me like it's so unfair, how much you love your job. And I'm just sorry, honey. I, I just, I just love it. What does she teach? She teaches at a Waldorf school. So they loop up with their kids. So she's in the same class with her kids for, from first grade to eighth grade. And so it's, and so in a Waldorf school, there's no set curriculum. There's sort of a Waldorf tradition. So she always has to make her own lessons and she has all the other things you have to deal with in terms of parents and administration and all of this stuff. So, but it's so funny. She vents, but she loves it and she loves the kids. I mean, she wouldn't, she wouldn't do it if she didn't love them. She's always fantasizing that, well, maybe we'll win the lottery and I won't have to work. And I keep saying, if we want, first of all, you have to play. Second of all, if we actually won the lottery, you'd probably keep working. Yes. Wendy from Framingham, the, the budding New England estuary. They're, they're, they're, that's where both of my, both my parents are from Framingham. Logan Express. That's how I always get in and out of Logan through Framingham. So, so they serve salad lunch at Waldorf. All right. Any last questions? Otherwise I'm going to hit the branding and out we're going to go. Yeah. Burns, Burns live. So everybody should go over there after this and get his numbers up and support. All right. So if you want to, and the key to Burns library is Burn, Burn basically just wants to get on steroids in terms of his channel, because he's got all of this stuff in his library in a storage unit in Haynes, Alaska. And he's now figured he will live, probably live the rest of his days in Tbilisi, Georgia. So he wants to get reunited with his library. So if you've got some donations to give, go to the anadromist channel, that's the name of his channel and, you know, give him a little donation, help them get his library over. So anything else? Yeah, I had one. This is just something that I've been thinking about processing. It's good to say it out loud is like how to basically, I guess this is, I believe something and then how to do it, but how to rehabilitate the word submission, because I feel like that word is so once I started to understand it, and it was so helpful, it is so helpful. You got to serve someone, you got to serve something, you're under that thing, you're sub sub, you're under that mission, like, it's so helpful. And when I you use that word, and immediately, it's just attacked on so many different levels. And I just laughed to myself, because I'm like, you're every everyone all the time is submitted. So yeah, you know, John, he can invent a new version of that word. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. Well, we'll need it. But it's just so makes me sad when people don't see that, like, you know, that's such a key ideal, or not ideal, but idea. Yep. Bob Dylan, you got to serve somebody. It's just true. So I dropped Burns, I dropped the chat, dropped the link to Burns, Burns channel there in the show links. That's where and right now, Burn, it's so funny, because Burn, Burn used to spend time doing PBS telethon fundraiser. So when Burn does this fundraiser, it's just like a PBS telethon, except instead of like the kind of things that PBS does, like the music, Burn gets this music from Tbilisi, Georgia, and plays it on his channel. So it's really hilarious to watch. So there's the link. I just put it in the comments. And all right, so I am going to figure out, you know, I'm just trying to learn how to do these things. So here comes the, I sent this to Freddie, and he hit the moon. So here it comes. Now, if that doesn't put a smile on your face, I don't know what will. So, we're agreement there. So thank you all for watching and have a good day. Bye.