https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=JtU1TOnKKBo

 I saw it in your pocket. Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. I think this is episode 48. Hey, how you doing? We're just talking about hair and Fred was worried his hair didn't look good. I said at least he has hair. Okay, thank you, Paul. That's a good compliment. And I said I... No, you have plenty of hair. You got hair on the side and you rolling in a ride. Anyway. Alright, Fred, what are we going to talk about today? John Dirks, right? John Van Dunk. John Van Dunk got a Jesus sign from my... in Jesus name, Father. And now what I'm saying is he's a good man. He hands out Jesus signs and I think this is a good ministry for him because he can bring people that don't know Christ closer to the Lord. That's true. That's true. And... You put it there. Okay. Anyways, and what I'm saying is... It's been on the show before too. I know. And he's a really good aspect because he does a lot of good things. And... You're on the next one, man. Anyways, and basically what I'm saying is I like what he does. It's like awesome that he makes those signs and he knows how to make them. And he puts the passage on them and it's awesome. John... Van Dunk. Van Dunk. He's Dutch. Enjoy your Jesus sign, John Van Dunk. Okay. I'm sure you'll watch this episode. Hi, Phillip. Anyways, let's talk about the Kings. Ooh! They won two in a row. Woo! Guess who they played tonight? Who? San Antonio Spurs. They could lose. They could, but the Spurs lost two games in a row. Oh, okay. Well, maybe they got a chance. But the Warriors are doing good. The Warriors are doing good. The Warriors are a great team. Who is the guy? Who? Clay Thompson. Uh-huh. Seth Curry. Uh-huh. Draymond Green. Yeah. And... Iguodaga. Yeah. And who else? I can't think of his name. Oh, I got it. Kevin Durant. Yeah. Yeah, boy! I knew it. Anyways. So, Paul, you had a good service, man. I really enjoyed it. Well, good. Well, I'm glad. You said people on earth look up to people in heaven because they want to make it to heaven. And then people in heaven are looking down to earth. So that way, God wants to see you walk the Christian life to be pure, grateful, loyal, and just, and cheerful to the Cadet Code. Because I think if you do the Cadet Code, you're reaching closer to God. It's always good to find out what... It's always good to get feedback on the sermon to find out what gets heard. Yeah, I really understood what you were saying. Well, good. You talked about the Kings, and you said, well, if you know somebody to play for the Kings, you'll get free tickets. But, you know, you should just be thankful if you know somebody for the Kings that you're getting tickets to be blessed to do what you gotta do. And I am blessed to say I had an awesome birthday. My mom and Philip bought me pizza, soda, and a birthday cake. I was blessed. And the awesome was awesome. Anyway, so now I'm a year older, and now I will grow in the church. And I think my voice is doing pretty good in the church. I'm harmonizing because I've been practicing at home. Good. My lyrics, you know, I keep them and I practice them and I go through them. Good. So what's going on with you, Paul? What's new with you, brother? Just, I'm doing what I'm doing, my ministry. Right on. I understand. The YouTube thing now, got some more about that. I'm gonna check that out some more, too. Okay, okay. And I'll write some notes. And then we can go from there and then we can talk more about this. Okay. But I think this has been a good show. And I guess I could do this, but I want to do it with my mom. Yeah, okay. So we're getting about four minutes. So let's bring the show to an end and we can do it. You go ahead and talk and then. We can bring the show to an end and then we can do another show with Nancy in, okay? Yes, and Phillip. I want Phillip in, too. You want Phillip in, too? Yeah, I do. Okay, we'll see. We'll see what you want to be. All right. God bless you. Ready? Yep. One love. Amen. Jesus Christ number one.