https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=KYco5kBXiXc

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show this is episode 68 I think So one of the things that we're talking about is Freddie likes to do a lot more music than I like to do Yeah, so we're gonna have my own program Freddie's gonna have his own channel. I don't have the name of it yet What do you want to do one last week and that one will be on it? What do you want your channel name to be like Freddie D or Freddie B? You got B and D now I don't know which one you're doing. This is called for the Freddie show. Yeah Okay. Well, so I'm gonna try I'm gonna get a YouTube channel for Freddie call it the Freddie show. It'll be all Freddie's material Freddie and friends can rap Charles J can be there Even if Gordon wants to come in even Gordon Gordon can do Media yes Could I be a special guest? Oh, yeah We're still gonna have the Freddie and Paul show we'll still have the Freddie and Paul You have to show that mean you and then one by yourself and I do that on Friday You could do it anytime you want. Yes, sir You know if we figure out if we figure out a way that you can do it by yourself Yeah, then you could you could even do it by yourself. You don't any room on your cell phone though That's the problem otherwise because all I'm using is a cell phone and that's all we have to do Okay. So what should we talk about today? What do you think of the sermon? It was nicer. Yeah, you liked it Yeah, I just found out that God is our maker and we should follow God because if we follow God, he will bless us Okay, and if we ask for his Mercy and grace he'll come to you like the song seek you first the kingdom of God All they do all they do ask the door shall be open unto you I know you know I should be a kind of kitchen Anyways, but yeah, let me just do a rap real quick. Okay, real quick. I'm not Christian. Okay. Here we go Here we go. Rolling deep in my partner six fall Jesus Christ Really though good to go without a word to say Rocking on the mic like kid and play one two three, you know, it's me the boy they call Freddie D coming up like this coming up like that Enough kid a chat. My stuff is fat. I bust platinum tracks out to speak Now must later Paul now three is the preacher one two three. Yeah, you know, it's me Freddie D Thanks for tuning in to the Freddie and Paul show tune into my show Really though cuz I'll have my own Good to go. I'm on the mic and I'm gonna have my own show Whoa All right ready one one love we did it right one love see that was quick. That's great