https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=kW0B2PJYUFY

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. This is episode 42 here on Christmas Eve 2017. Can you believe it Paul? I mean our show is really coming along. It's very awesome. The abundance is great. The loyalty, the fans. I mean I feel like we're celebrities or something. Are we? Are we somewhat celebrities? I don't know what kinds of celebrities you are Fred, but we won't worry about that. It's Christmas Eve. So what are your hopes for this Christmas? I hope the Kings have a good year. And I hope, well I hope the Raiders are going to make the playoffs. But it doesn't look too good. No, they've got a pretty good team this year. They're doing better. Merry Christmas Carmen. Alright, thank you. See you next week. We're still waiting on Phillip. Alright, so anyway. Phillip's coming in. Okay, go ahead. Okay, so the Warriors are doing really good. The Warriors have been really good. You know the Kings won three in a row. Did they really? No joke. That's amazing. I know. So now there's a possibility they can make the playoffs. If they have a better, no I'm serious. The Kings? I'm not playing with you this time. I'm being for real. I know I said it last year, but I was just joking around. That's because you're a fan. You're a die hard fan. But I like the Warriors team. I like the Warriors. I like West Coast. Yeah, I know. I know. So the Warriors have a great team. The Kings struggled. I just want to say hi CJ. Happy Holidays to all your family. Hi Dion. Hi mom. Hi Phillip. Hi Justin. And all my friends. Gordon. Hi Gordon and your family Mrs. Smith. I met Gordon's mom the other day. She's a very nice lady. Oh you did? I did. Oh because when he forgot his thing. That's right. That was cool. So anyway, football today. The Raiders play the Eagles. That will be interesting. I know but they don't have their starting quarterback. And the 49ers play somebody. Remember who? No. Phillip who did the 49ers play today? I'm not paying attention to football because I'm in the toilet bowl. And I'm afraid I'm going to lose. Okay well let's talk basketball then. Anyways like I said the Kings are doing good. They won three in a row. The Warriors won the other night against the Lakers. With the longsaw ball they beat them. That guy's good. And Kazan or something like that. That guy, he did alright too. Oh hi Visalia too if you guys are watching. The whole town of Visalia. I live down there so I have to say hi to them. Because they're loyal. And they're going to be good. And they're going to be good. Because they're loyal. And they're good. Anyways do you want to sing? Okay go for it. On four. One, two, three, four. We three Kings of Orient are Traveling as we travel afar Fields and fountains, Lord and mountains, Following yonder star. Oh star of wonder, Star of light, Star was routine, Royal right, Westward leading, Still proceeding, Guide us to Our perfect Light. Amen hallelujah. That was nice. That's my We Three Kings favorite. One of my favorite hymns. All right shall we wrap it up? Yep that was good. On three. One, two, three, one. Love. Amen. Merry Christmas.