https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=SloRs2yzmvo

 Hi, this is Paul and I have a conversation today that I've very much been looking forward to. I'm talking to Brett Sockold who has written this terrific book that by virtue of the title and the subject, many of you might not be tempted to read but should. And I will say it that way because I think this book is incredibly valuable for a lot of the work that I'm doing. So Brett, I thank you so much for being willing to talk and for sending me this book and for I mean you initiated this and I am so glad you did. Why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? Tell us who you are and then I'll just keep asking you questions. Sure, yeah, that sounds great and thanks so much for having me. It's exciting to be on here and to find people who want to talk about my book so I'm delighted. So my name is Brett Sockold. I work for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese in Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada. I'm the archdiocesan theologian here which means you wear a bunch of hats with that. My main task is I'm in charge of our diaconate formation program and I do other teaching and writing. Because it's not a university context, I kind of teach intro everything. So when you're doing with sort of adult ed kind of stuff with deacon candidates or lay formation people, yeah, it's intro theology, intro Christology, intro scripture, intro ethics, intro everything. And actually there's an interesting story with the book. I was doing my doctorate and I was looking for a topic. I was working with my mentor to whom the book is dedicated, Margaret O'Gara. And we were looking for a topic that would give me sort of a wide scope to think about theology in general and give me tools to be a good theological teacher. When we stumbled across transubstantiation, somehow we both knew that that would work. Now that will seem crazy on the surface, but maybe some of the conversation today will show how some of the basic problems that underlay Catholic Protestant disagreement about transubstantiation go to deeper questions about worldview that have application across the whole range of theological questions. And so it's actually been very helpful for thinking about even surprisingly enough intro scripture, but certainly intro theology, the relationship between faith and reason, all those kinds of things. So, yes, that's a little bit about me. I'm a family man. We just had little Martha is six weeks old and so she's number seven. Oh, wow. We're busy. You've outdone me. I only had five. Okay, only five. We never had five. We went from four direct to six. No, it's it's it's we're still recovering from that. So imagine. Yeah, what's the age span with your children? My oldest just turned 13. Okay, so we don't have one with a license yet, but I'm told that that's a game changer when the oldest gets their license because right now we're in the game of like how many activities can you get to on a Saturday? What kind are you homeschooling Catholic school? What are you doing for education? Yeah, right now we're homeschooling and that's going very well. My my wife manages that her name is Flannery. So some people might recognize that name. She's named for Flannery O'Connor. I didn't name her but her parents were reading Flannery O'Connor. And in Saskatchewan actually, we have a great arrangement. At least works well for us. Our homeschoolers register through our local public school system, which means that our kids can play on the sports team. They can be in the band program. Once they get to high school, they can take one course per semester at the local high school. So if you don't want to set up a chem lab in your kitchen, your kid can go take chemistry at the local high school and our local Catholic school that we have publicly funded Catholic school here in Saskatchewan. So we register through Regina Catholic and they're they've been really excellent with the homeschool community. So that's that's been a great blessing because you some of the things you miss out on with schools, you know, band or soccer team or whatever, we don't. And we can even take advantage of something like a chem lab in high school. So it's it's been really great for us and the kids are really thriving. And yeah, that sounds ideal. That really sounds tremendous. It's a nice gig. Yeah. Well, well, let for a lot of the Protestants out there, when you talk about deaconate formation a lot of Protestants hear that. Let's say someone from the Christian Reformed Church like myself. And wow, that's a lot for deacons. But the Roman Catholic Church, a deacon is a very different thing than a deacon is in the Christian Reformed Church. OK, why don't you flesh that out a little bit? Yeah, so so our deacons are our clerics. We would say they're they're members of the clergy. They're ordained. All of our priests and bishops are ordained deacons. Right. They'll typically spend a year as a deacon before they're ordained as a priest. Oh, so it's part of a sort of the threefold ministry of orders that we see in the later books of the New Testament of deaconate presbyterate episcopate. Yeah, we we sort of follow that. Now, that's been sort of recovered since Vatican II. In the early church, there were deacons and presbyters or what we call priests and bishops, episcopate, but deacons sort of slowly died out and were sort of absorbed into the priesthood because originally you weren't ordained a deacon and then a priest. It was quite separate things. And then the deaconate got subsumed into priesthood. And with Vatican II, we looked back at the early church and said, well, no, deaconate deserves its own thing. So now we have this technical distinction between a permanent deacon, who is someone who is often married and not on the track to priesthood, and a transitional deacon, who is someone who's spending that sort of generally one year period in their formation on their way to priesthood. But yeah, they have a very specific liturgical role. They can preach and then they a big part of their role is to sort of sacramentally represent to the Christian community the relationship between worship and service. So they have a role in the liturgy and then they have a role generally outside the walls of the church where it's maybe in the rough part of town, maybe in the prisons, maybe in the hospitals, sometimes in quite creative ways. I know a couple of guys who do ministry on ships, so sailors who are coming into port, who haven't seen their families or a church for months maybe. But outside the walls of the church and then their ministry demonstrates for all of us that our worship should lead to service and our experience of service in the world drives us back to praise God and to find our strength in God because sometimes ministry in the world wears you out. So there's that kind of dynamic between worship and service that the deacon is kind of the sacramental representation of that for us. Okay, well that's wonderful. I love how you set that whole thing up. So you're doing essentially theological formation and preparation for deacons. What sort of course do they undergo in this process? We do a four-year program which is fairly typical and these guys are people with day jobs and families so it's an evenings and weekends kind of thing. And so we run a weekend formation program and on a given weekend we'll have myself or other presenters trying to cover a whole sort of curriculum of formation that would be similar to what lots of people in pastoral ministry would go through in Protestant or Catholic context. So you'll have scripture, you'll have some intro philosophy, you'll get into theology but then you'll also get into the pastoral care elements, so pastoral counseling or things like different kinds of ministry to the poor or in healthcare context or whatever. We'll have people who do chaplaincy and those contexts come in and share their expertise and then we have sort of a practicum where essentially the practicum is like you learn how to listen. Like in any pastoral ministry you do, I don't care where it is, listening is like a really key skill. We do that. What else? I mean we have to know some canon law in a Catholic context. So a wide range of those kinds of things but they're not typically university courses though in our context some of our guys are doing some distance ed on the side. Like we're a long way from the nearest seminary or theological faculty which is why it makes sense to have me on staff at the diocese. If you live in Edmonton or Toronto you just ask the seminary to do this work for you but if you live in Regina you don't have that option. But we do some distance learning through theological college in Edmonton and it's a little flexible. More academically inclined people can do more of that but at the local level I'll make sure everyone's got at least the basics kind of thing. What are the numbers like in terms of ratios in North America between deacons and priests? Do you have any idea what that is? I couldn't tell you exact numbers but I can tell you that dioceses that have had diaconate for a long time will sometimes, you'll go to a big city parish in I don't know Atlanta or Houston or something and a priest will be celebrating Mass and he'll have two or three or four deacons with him. I don't know that that means the deacons outnumber the priests in a given diocese though they may at some of these larger parishes. But many dioceses, Western Canada in particular, were not quick to take up the deaconate and so we're only in our second cohort. So we've got 12 working deacons in our diocese and that would be oh maybe a fifth or a sixth, the number of working priests that we have. But we're sort of playing catch up right now. So we've got three more in formation this time. But yeah typically in Canada the priests will outnumber the deacons significantly. If there's a diocese in the States where deacons outnumber the priests I don't know about it but it would be somewhere where there has been a long history of diaconate that started right after Vatican II just over 50 years ago. So yeah in general priests outnumber deacons by a significant margin. Do deacons generally serve for life or do they serve for terms? So like our priesthood if you're ordained that's a lifelong thing. But you might retire. You're still a deacon. And often deacons and priests in our context you might retire from full-time ministry but until you're totally incapacitated we're going to keep asking you for help. That's ministry. That's ministry. So you know like our retired priests will step in and say mass when a priest is on holiday or when there's a scheduling conflict or you know these kinds of things. And same with deacons. I mean you retire slowly right. You might step back from your main tasks. In fact one of the interesting things with deaconate is a lot of guys who are retiring from their secular work will then put more time into deaconate. Because they're doing deaconate kind of part-time while they're working and then they retire and they you know if they're healthy and whatever they'll put more they'll be at the parish and in their ministry you know beyond the parish all the time. So it can take that form too. Yeah wonderful wonderful. Well let's start talking about your book. Is this your first book? It's not. I wrote a little book on purgatory for Catholics and evangelicals. That sounds interesting. Yeah so that could be another episode. That was my master's thesis and I co-authored a little book on dating and sexuality. So both of those came out about 10 years ago and then this just came out in 2019. So this is new and this was basically my doctoral dissertation. And one of the reasons it reads as a book is because I had published books before I wrote my doctoral dissertation. So I wrote the doctoral dissertation thinking of it more as a book than as a dissertation. So when it came time to publish there wasn't need to do a lot of a lot of the times you write a dissertation you got to do a lot of work to sort of switch genre. Yeah. A dissertation to a book and I had kind of written it as a book to start with which saved a lot a lot of work. Well I I was struck now. So let's you know a minister in the Christian Reformed Church has had a seminary education. Most of them have had some kinds of you know an undergraduate degree and I'm in my 50s. So I've been reading a variety of kinds of books. I thought your book was very clear. I found your book. I think you're especially in the in the first you know the the introduction. I found your your you deal with a lot of really you deal with a lot of philosophy. Right. Even before the theology. And I thought you laid it out well. Now I've been playing around in this stuff for a little while because of where the YouTube stuff has taken me. OK. The I don't know if you're familiar with John Verbecky and the video series that he's doing. No I've seen his name but I don't know much about him at all. OK. John Verbecky is a is a professor of psychology at University of Toronto. OK. And he he's he grew up in a Christian household gave that up and has been has been fairly I would I might categorize him as post Christian. He developed somewhat of a following at his university with a course that he entitled Buddhism and cognitive science. He just finished a 50 part video series called Awakening from the Meaning Crisis where he tries to lay out. The history of. Let's see what there's so many ways to get into this. Let's call it the history of disenchantment. OK. OK. The history of the of secular risk caused nihilism in in the Western world. So in some ways tracking with with some with some Charles Taylor. But but his his goal is is to develop communities and practices for really for post Christian individuals who are feeling I would say dislocated by by Western nihilism to try to address that in his own way pastorally. His you know probably one of his. So he walks he sort of walks through the history of religion and theology sort of winds up with individuals like Paul Tillich Owen Barfield you know working trying to work through a bunch of these things. But but he forced me to you know shake off cobwebs and go back to questions of realists and nominalists and a bunch of the stuff that that you'd been developing. I got into YouTube when I made a couple of little commentary videos on the work of Jordan Peterson especially on what I saw happening in the wake of Jordan Peterson's work which were a whole bunch of men usually between the ages of 25 and 45 who were who had been professed atheists fans of new atheists such as Sam Harris. And now we're becoming very interested in Christianity some of whom were returning let's say to Roman Catholic roots that they had had many who had had roots in evangelical traditions becoming very interested in Anglican or even Orthodox. Right. Churches had a conversation with a pastor a priest an Orthodox priest in Dallas Texas who had spent some time actually in the Presbyterian Church and then the Christian Forum Church in South Bend Illinois had been a worship there when a friend of mine Len Vanderzee had been ministering there. And so I'm watching all of this thinking well this is really interesting. What's going on. And as I'm sort of following the bread trails I start piecing together a language of sort of neo sacramentalism because before the Jordan Peterson stuff I had been so I grew up in a my father pastored what I would call first a Dutch Christian reform Dutch reformed mission to poor black folks in Patterson New Jersey. He pastored there from the 60s to the 90s and so very much in the 60s and 70s became kind of a racial reconciliation church where you had African-American folks and some CRC folks who were interested in that type of ministry. That was the context in which I grew up. I went to Calvin College and eventually Calvin Seminary. I spent seven years overseas in the Dominican Republic working mostly with poor Haitians came back to ministry in North America in Sacramento California sort of at the end of the wave of the seeker movement you know the Bill Hybels Rick Warren. And so watch that recede watch the emergent rise which is sort of split between I would say the what became the progressive evangelicals and then the young restless and reformed tribe. You know it's out of this that we find Jamie Smith James K Smith rise with this critique of of of Charles Taylor and his kind of appropriation of Charles Taylor. And I think in terms of my circles Jamie Smith was was my introduction to what was becoming sort of a young Catholic and reformed movement that I saw happening in the Christian Reformed Church. People who went through seminary during in the 80s when I was there got very excited about seeker movement Bill Hybels a safe place to hear a dangerous message but it basically unreconstructed evangelicalism. And then so we I was taking part in a church planting movement here in Sacramento. The first church out of the gate was sort of a seeker methodology. The second church was sort of a cell church methodology. By the time we hit the 2000s all of these church were migrating towards weekly communion remembering their baptism far more self conscious and obvious liturgy greater appreciation for church fathers. And so I'm watching this movement thinking now this is interesting. Right. And as a Catholic. So growing up in the 90s we thought the evangelicals were just going to steal all the people because they had the hip music and the preaching and whatever. And this old liturgy stuff was like we needed to get hip you know because liturgy is so you know that was that was 20 to 30 years ago. And and now we've grown up to see like the evangelicals my age some 40 grew up in that and lots of them are looking for liturgy. I talked to a pastor the other day who's you know he and his wife had gone to a wedding in an Orthodox church and they said it was like the most beautiful thing they'd ever seen. And 30 years ago most of the people in their community would said that was full of you know sort of traditional nonsense and manmade ritual and all that kind of language. And now it's it's sort of this it's beautiful it's part of our heritage that we've lost. So there's there's a there's a there's a longing there's a kind of emptiness. You know when I go into a an evangelical church but maybe even a Catholic parish that looks a lot like a mall or a coffee shop there there's something you know there's a transcendence that I want that's missing. You know even something as simple as a stained glass window is something you know that that that now people are striving for whereas you know 30 years ago it was seen as sort of old fashioned and a little you know maybe even what's the word I want. Oh shoot superstitious you know. So anyway yeah I've noticed this this basic dynamic and and and one of the things that has made transubstantiation even you know I mean it sounds shocking but one of the things that has made transubstantiation more available to non-Catholic Christians is that it's a kind of it's kind of a bulwark against a totally secularized space. And it's a way of saying that God is present in our life in our ritual in our gathering as church. It's a sort of a very strong affirmation of things that Catholics and Protestants want to be able to say together. And so I mean there's there's all kinds of details that that that I go through in the book in terms of Christian history and how it was rejected here and there and and when that rejection was just and when maybe it was unjust and all that kind of stuff. But when it comes down to brass tacks in terms of this dynamic you're describing sort of the recent history of you know Christianity in North America. It's liturgy in general and then transubstantiation maybe more specifically has become something that evangelicals are like wait a minute tell me more you know. Yep yep yep. So. So you know all of that you know I'm watching this as a pastor and then Jordan Peterson pops up. And. I had that I had been when Jordan Peterson popped up I had been playing around with YouTube because I realized people don't read a lot of books you know people in the pews. And so I'd been playing around with YouTube because I'd been thinking about doing some writing but I thought well why am I going to I see pastors write books that nobody reads. Okay yeah. Okay yeah. And so I thought. And Jordan Peterson pops up and I'd also been wrestling I've been working through CS Lewis's book miracles because that book had fascinated me for a number of years. Okay yeah. And because I've been I've been working through the question of what really is happening with our divided world because on one hand we go to church and Protestants over the last Protestants over the last hundred years have had this major war over what on earth to do with let's say Genesis one in the cosmology there. Right. You know when you go to seminary you start learning Hebrew and and you get to play around with Genesis one and realize well what's a firmament. You know you get this image out of Genesis one of this earth with a bowl waters above waters below you recognize that contemporary some contemporary Bible translations are sort of fudging these terms and a lot of ways to to sort of to sort of fudge the distance between the picture you might see in Genesis one and the picture we're all living with of being on this globe you know going around the sun and you know all this stuff going on. And I was I was really thinking about you know just the basic preacher task of trying to bridge these two worlds. Well how does it how do we really how do we really think about all of these facts. OK so you get Jesus ascension. He goes up. What's that about. And so you start working through all of these things. And Jordan Peterson comes on the scene and there's this whoosh and I want to know what the whoosh is about. And and part of it I could tell was this distance between these two worlds these two images of of our contemporary image of of living on a globe being hurled through space this ancient image of you know the firmament and the waters above and you know the throne room of God and all of this all of this all of this geometry. And so you know what's this about and why would whatever Jordan Jordan Peterson telling people to clean their room. Why would that send people back to church. That's strange. And so you know he did a biblical series so I start playing around with all this stuff. And you know I begin to I begin to recognize that you know this the division the division of the worlds is a is a thing that might not be conscious to us but is deeply beneath the surface. Right. And the more I began to wrestle with this the more I began to see. So then I was watching this this debate between Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson was sort of describing the God that he acts as if he exists. And Sam Harris complaining about all this stuff Sam Harris always complains about. And I realized these two people are talking about two very different things. OK. And I called them God number one and God number two. And I had to figuring out Sam Harris's God number two was not hard. Right. Figuring out what Jordan Peterson was talking about has been significantly more work. But that very quickly put me on the hunt of exactly what you're writing about in this book because just today in fact there are a couple of YouTube celebrities who grew up evangelical in North Carolina and hit it big and now live in L.A. as you know not just YouTube celebrities but comedians on a bigger stage. And just over the last few weeks they have put out some videos and podcasts basically about their deconstruction of their evangelical faith. And for anybody who's been around in church who has watched this happen through countless numbers of people you know it's it's a it's a fairly standard routine that they've gone through. But one of the things that through these last two years of working on this stuff of paying very close attention listening to people who grew up in the church. Left the church somehow got Jordan Peterson did something to them that nobody seems to know what happened and we're all sort of guessing at. And of course it's individual and it's different. I came to the real conclusion that God what we think of as God deep in our guts has been slowly changing dramatically for a very long time. Right. And for many people reaches sort of a crisis point and their rejection of a world view necessitates you know huge changes and all sorts of things of their life. And and that very deeply gets into the fact that the ancients when Christianity. So I've been reading a lot of work by Tom a lot of history by Tom Holland because I'm going to talk to him in a few weeks. What's you know what's what what everyone understood as God has deeply changed and we don't quite know how what we mean by the words that we're using anymore. Right. And and your book. And so this idea of sacramentality of your book all of this is a very very very very very is to me right on the money. OK well OK. So so let me take a take a shot at at connecting some of the dots from from the narrative you just shared to the book. So because people are like OK doctrine of God isn't this about you know the Eucharist and some crazy medieval you know Aristotelian logic scheme to make sense of the Eucharist. And and some of the early work I have to do is to investigate how our God language shifted. And there's two shifts. There's there's a shift after Thomas. So Thomas is kind of the center Thomas Aquinas his articulation of transubstantiation is kind of the center of the book. But there's two there's two shifts. There's a shift after Thomas which between Thomas and the Reformation which made Thomas's categories very difficult for the reformers to read and understand. But but transubstantiation was necessary in the first place because of a shift that happened before Thomas. So in the early church there seems to be no real debate at all about Christ's presence in the Eucharist. It's it's you know John chapter six. Jesus is really sort of graphic language there. Just see we you know living after the Reformation we think well how did they not debate about this. Why doesn't this show up in like the Council of Ephesus right. Why when they were doing the early arguments about the nature of Christ how come we weren't fighting about the Eucharist. And part of the reason is because everyone sort of culturally was a Platonist. And if you're a Platonist and you say you know this is a symbol and God is really present in acting here the Platonist says yeah that's how symbols work. And when that breaks down you start getting questions in Western Europe which never really happens by the way in Eastern Orthodoxy. It happens in the West. Yeah. Where people start asking well this Eucharist thing is this a symbol or is this real. And the Platonist would say yes. And the truth. Oh. Zoom here. When you know the Platonist would say yes but the church and right there you pause so I don't know if you can go back there. Yeah the church in in in the you know 9th through 11th centuries is trying to figure out how to say what something that was easy for a Platonist to say. But it's hard it's hard to say in Western Europe in the 9th to 11th century which is yes there's a symbolic element. I mean any anthropologist looking at Christians celebrating the Eucharist are going to say that the bread represents something in the wine represents something in the eating represents something in the like it's obviously a symbolic nexus. But that doesn't mean it's not God's real presence. And so we need new language to do this in this new cultural context and transubstantiation emerges to be able to say just that. And if to go into a little detail the word substance actually becomes sort of the prime category for talking about something which is really really really real maybe more real than the physical. But that is not easily identified with just the physical reality. So today we we still live in in a similar world where when we say real we hear physical. And the church wanted to say the physical elements don't change. You can you can look at them under a microscope you can put them in a mass spectrometer you can do all kinds of things and you will find the chemical reality of bread and wine. And still we are saying that that this is the body and blood of Christ. And so what how can you say that. Well one way you can say that is to is to say we actually all recognize in our everyday speech whether we whether we notice we're doing it or not that we realize that there's a deeper reality than the physical. So when I recognize that you are Paul seven years ago you were talking about the physical seven years ago you know biologists tell us not one of the cells that is in your body today was in you say we recycle ourselves about every seven years. Certainly the first cell that you were in your mother's womb is long gone. That one probably you you probably weren't even born with that one. That was you know but but I identify something in you that is a principle of continuity and identity that is deeper than the physical reality even though it's manifest through the physical reality. When I encounter the physical reality I encounter things like color and texture and taste and smell and all that kind of stuff. But it's only my intellect that synthesizes all of those data pieces and identifies the deeper reality which then I can recognize as persisting even though some of those things change right. I can paint a door a different color and I don't get confused and think it's a different door. I can actually recognize a persisting reality despite a physical change. Now if we want to go into a little some changes change the reality if I burn the door then I don't have a door anymore I have something else. So some physical changes can manifest a new reality just like you dying. Now I don't say that Paul I say that Paul's corpse and that's a different kind of thing. But anyways the point is that in our basic experience of reality we recognize something deeper than the physical that we intuitively know is more real than the physical and substance is the language that Thomas Aquinas finds in Aristotle that helps him to communicate this and well actually Thomas isn't the first one who finds it. The language of substance emerges a generation before Thomas that kind of solves a controversy at the time and enters official church teaching. And then Thomas is the one who really articulates it with such clarity that it becomes the sort of standard Catholic reference point for thinking about this. So that's substance and then from it transubstantiation emerges as a response to this shift in our attitude philosophically. But then after Thomas substance itself undergoes a shift and substance becomes what it is for you and me today. It becomes the physical stuff. The exact thing that Thomas was using it to not be. Yes yes yes yes. And when you get to the reformers 300 years later transubstantiation starts to look like the opposite of what Thomas meant for it. It becomes a kind of physical or clandestinely physical like you can't really see it but if you but that's because there's some kind of veil that hides it from us. Right. Thomas insists that is not like the Eucharist is not a deception but in later medieval theologians it becomes a kind of veil that God is putting over the flesh to keep us from being disgusted by it all that kind of stuff which which Protestants reject and I have to say as a Thomas Protestants were right to reject that. But what they were rejecting was something which had already transformed and didn't mean what it meant for Thomas. And and if we want to now zoom out and go to this question of God and I'm going to try this is this complex I do this a lot in the book but let's try to adhere. One of the things that happens just before Thomas is the fourth ladder in council says something like we can speak about God using analogy. We can't speak about God directly our language is unequal to the task of God talk but we don't despair of of knowing true things about God and the mysteries of God. We can actually know true things about God and when we speak in that way we we can only do it by analogy to things we know in creation. And then here's the key point that later in force says but you must recognize whenever you you're doing God talk and you're using analogy that the difference between your articulation and the reality of God is greater than the similarity. So you can actually say true things about God but you need to recognize the grave limits on what you're doing and that when you say God is good and you say a watermelon is good because you have an experience of the goodness of a watermelon. You need to recognize that there's a there's an infinite distance between God's goodness and the watermelon's goodness even though it is still true in a way to say that God is good. Now this starts to break down after Thomas with with the nominalist school where they they want to grab they they they reject analogy or or to some degree reject it and say no we can say more or less direct things about God because there's a category beyond God against which we can measure both watermelons and God and we'll call that category being. And once you do that God is in the system and this is Sam Harris's God. So the God that's in the system and which can be measured against other things in the system like watermelon is now a God that is in competition with the system. So all kinds of problems that separate Catholics and Protestants that emerge at the Reformation things like providence and free will yes right yeah providence and free will becomes a problem when God is in the system and and one actor's will is measured against the other actor's will in a zero sum game. So if God's will is done then mine is not or vice versa. Thomas Aquinas lives in a totally different world where he he asked the question you know does human does the reality of human freedom impede you know God's will being done and he just says so casually he says well no because God can choose to do his will through human freedom and and he says it as if it's almost self-explanatory and we look at it like well that's crazy that doesn't make any sense you know because we live in this world where God is in in the system and in competition with this with the other parts of the system rather than the God that transcends the system and therefore is not in competition with it. So so to use a an analogy from our own experience and again I'm using analogy so it says something true about God but its its limit is greater than it's true. When I'm a parent and I engage my children at the level of their will and I and I get and I butt heads right and I say like my will versus your will I'm gonna try push uh and and I'm gonna trump and I eventually I'm the stronger one so I I'm the one who can lock you in your room and whatever you know this is not satisfying even if I get my way um I do not feel actually free I don't feel like my freedom has been vindicated because I crushed the weaker party in this conflict but when as a parent I can engage a child in their freedom by reframing the question or doing a kind of a distract and an end run around whatever and then both of us feel like we were engaged in our freedom and both of our needs can be met. I as when I'm more free I can free the weaker party and when I am less free I butt heads with the weaker party and then I resort to violence. Now it may not I mean I'm not beating my children but some some kind of coercion right right right in in Thomas Aquinas's world God is so free that God can engage us at our level of freedom and never have to coerce us and so providence and free will don't aren't don't butt heads and God now here's what God can do much better than I can do when the weaker party screws up God can even work through that now maybe I can do that sometimes I don't know but that's the experience I have is when it all goes well and so maybe the analogy part of where it starts to break down is God is so much freer than I am that even I don't know the murder of an innocent man by mob justice under a sort of calculating Roman procurator even that disaster is something that God's freedom can engage to achieve God's purposes right and so anyway I mean that's that's the God that transubstantiation is trying to witness to because one of the questions in sacramental theology is how do we how do we measure the human reality of what we're doing over against the divine reality so some of the reformers say well this is just a community act we in our minds do what Jesus told us to do and we remember we do the work of remembering it's a great irony that the reformation which is you know God's grace God's grace God's grace ends up with a sacramental theology in at least some cases not not Luther by the way and and Calvin is more complicated but but the the what we might call the left wing for lack of a better term I don't know right the Swiss reformers right end up with a Eucharist where it depends on the humans doing the work which was very strange yes yes yes but it only happens because God's work and human work are now butting heads and it's they're in a zero-sum game and transubstantiation is trying to witness to a world where it says God works through the human ritual the human we have this beautiful line in our liturgy fruit of the vine and work of human hands these are the gifts that we present they're both gifts of God the grain and the and the grapes but they're also human work they're a product of human culture and and both the natural gift and the the added value of that human culture does in making those into bread and wine are transcended and become God's gift of himself back to us right and so we don't have to negate the human to to affirm the divine in the sacraments we can say God is really the real fundamental actor here but that is in a way that engages the human and the natural and the cultural rather than as something that destroys or obviates or whatever the human and the natural and the cultural well that that was I'm going to use that in a video that was tremendous that was tremendous well I tried there I tried to do the the hard work of the first chapter and I don't know how it was tremendous you did it very well a couple of things stand out right away in two things I'll say the first one then I'll land on the second one the first one in watching people in watching people walk away from Christianity in the west watching the post-Christian journey which again which which I I see often often close up it's it's interesting that they go back to a sort of they go back to a sort of pantheism which is what CS Lewis calls you know basic human religion that's that's sort of the default that's sort of the default location of our imagination now it's it's interesting that they many of them don't sort of try to maintain what I think is a is a very difficult position to maintain which is that of a you know it's an atheist like Sam Harris I think that's actually a very difficult place to stay that we we people tend to default back to a sort of paganism where they do so to to naturally re-enchant the world when their car breaks down they talk to it when circumstances in their life are frustrating they appeal to the universe they don't want to say god because that's too churchy they appeal to the universe but it's interesting that they they once again default to a a situation where universe is is acting through the through to the vine and acting through the hands of their enemies or friends right and and and so that's that's the first point but it gets to the second point which is the which is the human nature dichotomy and I love you know where how you use that phrase out of the liturgy because what someone would say would be there's a fundamental difference between the fruit of the vine because that happens for lack of a better word automatically without any will involved and the work of human hands which we you know all of our language separates this out we would say the fruit of the vine is a natural process and in terms of all of our language even our language about climate change we would say you know there's there's natural climate change and mentally we take human beings out of the picture right and then we say there's you know man-made we're allowed to use man in a term like that man because we can blame men for this there's man-made climate change right and and so right and of course we're looking at this this dichotomy that arises and becomes very instrumental in in the scientific revolution especially in deism I mean I think deism has many ways this stuff baked in right right yeah and I well I yeah so a couple things I mean one is you know as much as we worry about the new atheists when you go you know for Thanksgiving dinner with your family you're gonna have a lot more people who think they talk to their cat then you're gonna have a rigorous new atheist you know who think their tech cat talks back to them yeah sorry that's yeah that's right right um so so yeah I think there's right humans even even if you want to be a really rigorous atheist you're gonna find transcendence in something like that we I don't care what what whether it's talking cats or violent political ideologies I mean I think one of the things really driving our increasingly polarized political rhetoric is that people are finding their transcendence in political movements yes and and so um you you might say you're an atheist but you are going to have some value that you consider um worthy of great sacrifice and I mean I don't think we have a very functional operative definition of religion you know we we have this world religions definition that means if you can check one of these boxes Buddhism Hinduism Judaism Islam Christianity then you're religious and then we say well there's people who don't check any of those but they still like spiritual things so they're spiritual but not religious this is all very vague I think if you want to get down to brass tacks your religion is what you will sacrifice anything else for and and so you will find transcendence in you might find it in the Super Bowl you might find it in a Trump rally you might find it in a in a women's march you'll you'll find it uh you know gay pride parade is drenched with transcendent claims um these this is what humans do we are believing and worshiping creatures right and so um yeah what do you know the novelist David Foster Wallace yeah um he's got this great quote from this address he gave to Kenyon College where he says everybody worships and then he says most of the things you worship will eat you alive yeah if you don't have a sense of an actual transcendent god and and so here's where we get back to the non-competitive god that is not in the system anything in the system will demand destructive sacrifices because it's in competition with everything else but then but an actually transcendent god can ask for um sacrifices that put you in harmony with the rest of the system right and so um when we see that when we see the development of sacrificial language in the Old Testament right if you think of Abraham and Isaac and the and the and the story there of the move from human sacrifice to animal sacrifice um what you're seeing is um a less violent less uh sort of zero-sum game because this this impulse is now being passed off but then even then you always start saying even this animal sacrifice is open to wild misinterpretation and if you think you can use this to manipulate me the real actual and transcendent god maker of all things you've got it upside down and so sacrifice then then migrates to becoming a more ethical thing what do i demand from you but but you know the circumcised heart all this kind of stuff and then in the cross it becomes uh self-sacrifice even for the sake of your enemy and when when that is the sort of end game of the human desire for transcendence which will which will demand some sacrifice it is only the transcendent god that is not in competition that doesn't need you in your sacrifices that can actually ask for a sacrifice that makes puts you in a peaceful order with creation and not in the power game of of um subverting this or that group but when we get to the other forms of transcendence like the our current political climate i think we have we have reverted we might say that this is all very secular i think we've reverted to um sacrificial power games which is the whole old testament is a polemic against this move um and so i so this goes to an element of the eucharist as sacrifice which isn't what the book is about um but the eucharist is the peaceful sacrifice right it is the joint but but it's a recognition that we can never make that peaceful sacrifice because of our sinfulness all of our sacrifices however well intentioned and the the reformers had this dead right i mean luther was completely clear-sighted on the ambiguity of his own motivations when approaching god when we approach the eucharist um our motives will always be mixed when we and so calling it a sacrifice says despite your imperfection um you can participate in this peaceful sacrifice which was made for you because you can't do it right uh right so um yeah well that then becomes the i mean in my tradition you know in the reform tradition that then becomes sort of the centerpiece uh but i love how you laid out because once you know when i started making youtube videos and i mentioned well i'm a minister in a calvinist denomination it's like whoosh so calvinists and and i think i think you languished this i don't think you languished this very very well now i i love how you laid out because because this you know god god is not in the system and this gets this gets laid out around this this word being um okay and another thing that's been interesting to me is the rise of the rise of simulation theories in out in the world and i think this also is a manifestation of you know people know things in their guts that don't necessarily travel up to their out of their mouths through their brains and they act them out in their lives but the you know the the question of you know how how to talk about god in terms of being a being god no god god is not a being and and i think again in your book you laid that out and that then gets into this question of um i just you know i just i have to i just you know finding things there's so much good stuff in your book um but laying out where you talked about well here it is this um you know the omnipresence and this this a quote from you know i i got my i i said something let me back up a little bit in kind of typical formation as a youth in the dutch reform tradition there's a lot of anti-catholicism that held sway really until sort of the 80s okay and so transubstantiation was taught to me as this you know i i so i read it in your book and it's like oh yeah i totally got i totally got propagandized against the roman catholics in terms of what transubstantiation was and i made an ungenerous comment in one of my videos and a bunch of my catholic listeners were all over me and said you know watch this watch this video by bishop barons about the eucharist and i watched that video and i listened to that video and i thought this doesn't sound a lot different from what you know we might use some different words but this doesn't sound a lot different from what i believe the lord's supper is and that of course really set me up for your book but right point from this quote from aquinas god is no such extended long broad thick high deep being he is a supernatural inscrutable being but i don't think supernatural means today what it meant for him either he's trying to tell you what supernatural means right right yeah um he is a supernatural inscrutable being who exists at the same time in every little seed whole and entire and yet also in all and above all and outside all created things nothing is so small but god is still smaller nothing is so large but god is still larger nothing is so short but god is still shorter nothing is so long but god is still longer nothing is so narrow but god is still narrower and so on he is can you tell me what page you're on page 169 so so i'm thinking this is this is um this is not thomas this is luther really yeah this is so this is luther and so okay if you look so right above um oh yeah i have a short quote from thomas that says god is in all things and innermostly and then i say compare this with luther who wrote and then it's the thing that you just said luther is trying in a new idiom to say things that thomas would say in a much more philosophical register that luther's um heritage has lost for him but luther intuits it and luther says it in very concrete earthy kinds of ways which is how luther talks um and and a lot of the work i do in the book is to say look this stuff that thomas is saying in a philosophical register um once luther's tradition has dispensed with that register he still wants to say the kinds of things thomas was trying to say but he has to say them in a different way so a lot of the book is a translation you know it's like compare what luther says and what thomas says and taking into account their own philosophical traditions and and in in the case of luther some of what i consider to be the um gaps in the in the nominalist philosophical tradition or the errors can we see in them a common intention to say something uh in this case about god but then once once we've said what god is um about how god acts in the world and particularly in the sacraments and so i try i try to show uh first with luther so for those who yeah so if you look at the table of contents this might be helpful for the listener after the introductory chapter there's a chapter on thomas then there's a chapter on luther then there's a chapter on kelvin yeah and after i lay out why the medieval tradition found transubstantiation helpful and uh how thomas articulated it i go to the reformation and i say transubstantiation is no longer available as the category it was for thomas because of the changes in the philosophical environment luther and kelvin both want to say that christ is really present in the eucharist but they need new tools for doing it and on the surface level they look like they're contradicting the catholic tradition on transubstantiation but if you dig uh and if you i mean and one of the key features which you're highlighting here is first let's think about who god is and god's relationship with creation which we're going to say in different ways because of our different philosophical traditions we're going to end up saying remarkably similar things and one of the things that really struck me so i'll tell the reverse story of you as a calvinist hearing about catholics um if a catholic says something that sounds a little too symbolical about the eucharist the first accusation is that's calvinism um and so so and i thought yeah that's terrible i don't want to be a calvinist and when you start reading the the literature around this there's this pattern which i note at the very beginning of the chapter on kelvin which is like i i pull out like a dozen examples of scholars catholic reformed and lutheran scholars and i think there's a baptist scholar in there and an anglican like scholars from across the spectrum who when they read thomas and kelvin on the eucharist say this looks remarkably similar um and so uh i now there's there's trouble with calvin because calvin's writing in a polemical context where sometimes he's writing against a certain set of lutherans who have a very literalistic reading and sometimes he's writing against the swiss which have this much more symbolic read so it's easy to find quotes from calvin to prove anything you want because of the different sort of fronts he's fighting on but i think a holistic read of calvin ends up landing him remarkably close to thomas and this is shocking to people but i think once you read the stuff it's basically undeniable and i wonder like as a christian reformed pastor like yeah you watch bishop baron you said well that doesn't sound so bad no i'm thinking well i wow i this this is not what i expected and but but you know even this you know the my misreading of your quote here i mean because if you read what luther has to say about equinas i mean luther i mean thomas equinas was fighting words to luther and essentially what you're saying is well that's because luther by virtue of the history that happened between equinas and luther and where luther is situated that's because luther wasn't really understanding equinas right right he wasn't able to read him on his own terms yeah the categories had shifted to such a degree and luther comes out of out of a tradition that has explicitly rejected thomas on several points yes uh and luther quotes uh the learned cardinal of cambray pierre dailly who was a student of occam uh on uh saying consubstantiation would be more um philosophically coherent than transubstantiation and in the book i go through a careful analysis of why in the in the 12th century consubstantiation was seen to be philosophically untenable and by the 16th century it looked more tenable than transubstantiation and it's because the categories had shifted um and i don't know i don't have it all right at the front of my mind right now so you might have to read the book to see that but but basically um it i try to show that they're trying to say the same thing but within their different philosophical categories their answers look like opposites but they're not and even joseph ratzinger so pope benedict the 16th writes an article that i quote extensively in the book in like 1968 or something where he says that if you understand what luther's trying to say with consubstantiation it's not actually an opposite of transubstantiation it's trying to say the same thing and give in it with a different set of categories um and well here's here's even though i don't have it all at the front of my head here's the basics luther wants to affirm um the persistence of the bread and wine in some real way that they're not just a veil or a disguise well thomas insists that the bread and wine are not a veil or a disguise he says the accidents of the bread and wine remain and we tend to think well that doesn't mean very much but the accidents are actually what is required for them to properly signify what they're supposed to signify accidents aren't some metaphysical nothing accidents are and and when when thomas has asked you know are is there a deception here if we don't see the substance he says no you see the accidents and they're really there so you're not deceived um and so if you understand substance and accidents the way thomas understands them he's not saying the bread and the wine have like evaporated or been annihilated he explicitly rejects annihilation um which is one of the possible theories that's floated at the time the accidents are really there and they have an essential role in the sacrament which is a lot of what luther is trying to say when he prefers something that looks like consubstantiation is that the physical reality of the thing is not obliterated annihilated etc but by the time you get to luther the annihilation theory has become part and parcel with transubstantiation and so it's not what thomas meant by transubstantiation so hopefully i got close to that i didn't have it right at the front of my head but it seemed to come to me as i yeah yeah yeah the basic point is luther and calvin are all trying to say that christ is really present in the eucharist and thomas is trying to say christ is really present in the eucharist and they're using different conceptual categories to do it but if their intention is basically the same we shouldn't be surprised if we go digging and by the way they're their their deepest roots even if their philosophical recent roots are are off their deepest roots are scripture and augustin yeah we shouldn't be surprised that they actually end up saying things that are remarkably the same and so i was even shocked as i did the research and the writing at how strong i could make my conclusion like at first i thought oh i'd make some careful distinctions that would show it wasn't as bad as we all thought and by the by the end of the book i make some pretty bold claims that i didn't expect to make when i started writing it but i i felt perfectly justified and the put i haven't got pushback on them yet all the you know from catholics and protestants reading it in the back of the book i've got two protestant and two catholic endorsements yeah nobody has said oh that's not fair you're papering over this or you're ignoring that a christian reform pastor reads it and says hey this sounds right i'm not the only one i i've been shopping your book around and i'm gonna do more obviously with this video um okay but but no i i again i i found your book tremendously compelling tremendously helpful and you know i think some of the people listening to this video will imagine that we're talking something small and narrow like theological distinctions behind practices of uh separated you know ecclesiastical concerns but i think actually your book points to some tremendously helpful ideas that are vital for vital for doing missionary work in the west today because and this again is where i mean because i i got into this via you know this crazy this crazy canadian psychologist who so i have my brother-in-law is from um manitoba and when i listened to jordan peterson talkies from you know northern northern alberta right and i listened to him talk i thought it sounds like my brother-in-law you know right you northern canadians you don't like getting pushed you know when you push when you put get pushed you push back and you know jordan peterson's there well you know i'm not gonna say it and and if they if they arrest me i'm not gonna eat and that's i'm thinking it's kind of like my brother-in-law but there's you know so this guy complaining over pronouns you know suddenly gets visibility that he had had some visibility before but suddenly a lot of visibility and the whole political thing to me was kind of okay that's going on that sort of gave him his lift but the issues that he's beginning to manifest and point out these are these are vitally important for why people are rejecting and i think i love the way you put it rejecting a god that's in the system because a lot of the you know what one question one question that has been that has interested me for a while that has interested a lot of protestants is the genesis of the problem of evil okay i would i would you know in terms of how you lay things out here it's whereas you can certainly seek certain forms of what we look at as the problem of evil in the book of jove so a lot of these questions are very ancient but many many people have noted tim keller for example in his book on suffering and evil many people have noted that the problem of evil in with its contemporary power really take shape in the early modern period for example like with the with the earthquake and fire and flood of lisbon okay that's that's something that comes up and because very quickly well you know again for for for thousands of years people would be asking how can god allow this you know the rise of islam let's say in the east and how it you know destroys the eastern church in many ways and destroys the eastern empire and threatens you know the west well i've been reading tom's tom holland's book about the rise of islam and very clearly the success on the battlefield is the witness of the will of god for the world and that's that's simply how everyone in that world would understand it because god has made manifest through the events of history now obviously there's there are plenty of theological conversations about that because you know everybody has to deal with these with these issues but the questions of okay what what exactly is what exactly are we talking about when we use this word god and how does that relate to history so can i take a crack at something here please go right ahead yeah i i talk a lot so i want to interview you so i haven't thought about the problem of evil with respect to this question of god outside the system so this i'm riffing but something strikes me is really interesting uh if we read the old testament we can see that in the early layers layers uh the hebraeus have a have a have a theology that is quite common in the ancient world which is if if my god beats your god my god is stronger than your god right and it's the Babylonian captivity that makes that heuristic for thinking about god impossible right and it's also most biblical scholars would say this is when biblical monotheism is most carefully articulated this is when the final versions of the genesis first you know one and two genesis especially genesis one are put down and we get a picture of one god and now the other gods they're they're either not real at all or they're demons but they're not they're not gods in competition with god and this is this is the way the jews are not destroyed by the Babylonian captivity because the the obvious theological answer in the ancient near east is marduk is stronger than yawi uh and therefore uh your god your temple is destroyed your god can't defend you you know worship marduk that would be the logical thing to do and the jews say actually marduk is not real yawi is in fact um uh punishing us he he didn't lose this fight uh and he's still in control and he's actually still with us um you you have here historically a unique chosen people finding their way into getting god out of the system and so then um historical events for good or ill are the manifestation of that god's um right will now that doesn't mean that evil isn't evil uh but but it introduces a philosophical problem right you have this good god who wants your good i mean this is the jewish god god is doing this for your good even the ill that befalls you is in some way for your good um and and we see in the book of job it's not always easy to tell how that ill is for your good there are times right i can go to the gym and not like exerting myself and i can see how that is for my good but if my kid dies of leukemia that's a lot trickier right and so one of the answers in job is um you you do not have the perspective from which to see whether or not this is for your good right and so if you live if you if you if you live in that world you can still say something like the rise of islam which looks catastrophic for the eastern church um god can still work through that and the crucifixion is again the paradigmatic example of this great evil which befalls not you but me actually which i take on your behalf um somehow can can your good can be worked through it and that that can happen if god is outside the system and not sort of totally compromised by the engagement and the the loss uh found in the system if you have then a god that's back and i'm just guessing uh god that gets starts getting back into the system by the early modern period and god is one being among many and god's um intentions are in competition with these other intentions etc etc intentions etc etc if god does not work through good and ill but god is confronted with ill as an enemy that that um that is in some ways on equal footing and god doesn't defeat it then what kind of god have you got right right um so so i i can see why the problem of evil becomes a specific kind of thing it it's not that it was never a problem right or you wouldn't write the book of joe right but it's a new kind of problem if god is back in the system right because then god is in a zero-sum game with the evil in the world instead of transcending it and being able to do good even through the evil right and then he needs our help maybe you know if you if you watch a movie like avatar which fascinates me so avatar is your classic post-christian neo pantheist movie where you know these these colonial unobtain colonialists who are trying to mine unobtainium from you know this this wonderful idyllic plan planet where you know it's it's a pantheistic world and then you have your great battle scene and then the god starts fighting for us and it's like uh you know you just gave away the you just gave away your pantheism because you you you know you can't have these distinctions hang on a second there are two books i carry around with me right now i don't like carrying around books because i'm always reading way too many at once and they're heavy and they fill my bag yours has been in my bag i've been carrying your book around which says how much i really value you book and let me show you the other book okay now yeah this is curious who will buy who will i be associated with on the internet uh for i don't know well maybe in the future do you recognize this book no i don't but but but it strikes me as something that's probably in the background of every intro old testament whatever stuff i've been doing like it even the title looks like this is a book by ezekiel kaufman um translated and abridged by moshe greenberg i first got acquainted with ezekiel kaufman and this idea from christine haze who in her introduction to old testament course on youtube i'll put the link in the notes here so you can find it i've talked about it a lot in my videos talks about ezekiel kaufman who basically said you know this whole kind of evolutionary approach to this whole evolutionary approach to monotheism you don't find the roots of that in the old testament the old testament he's a he's a jewish scholar so he's not a christian the old testament if if that evolutionary approach to monotheism were true the old testament would look very different okay and you can find you can find traces of henotheism and and mona you know basically worship of one god as opposed to other gods i mean the old testament is is a complex document but he basically says you know there are fundamentally two perspectives on the world one perspective is what he calls the meta divine realm where you have an impersonal universe and out of this universe emerges the gods you know let's say greek you know have yeah out of this universe emerges the gods who become actors and the gods then make people down you have this huge chain of being and and um and history is basically the struggle of these beings within this impersonal meta divine realm that gives rules and context to everything that's going on okay once you begin to understand that you can look at modern materialism you can look at ancient paganism they all have a degree of commonality in that that the universe is fundamentally impersonal and you know there's all these there's there's all these willful agents vying for power and to get what they want right on the other hand you have god and when i so i've been poking around in this stuff at the same time i start reading your book and it's like oh wow that and and and the conception of god but you know the the other thing i underlined on this same page on page 169 way down at the bottom in this affirmation it is not as different as you might at first glance appear from luther's view as described for instance by david steinmetz god is near that is his eminence god's presence is inaccessible apart from his word and sacrament that is his transcendence now once once once kaufman's perspective on human thought and history has sufficiently colonized to the degree that suddenly when i'm looking around i'm seeing this distinction between a medidivine realm out of which emerges all sorts of things and and you know it let's use the let's use the term naturally there's no intention in it it's very darwinian i mean that's right that's essentially the move that darwin makes uh jordan peterson promoted a book called the metaphysical club and which is basically the history of the rise of pragmatism in in american philosophy and that book makes very clearly something that i hadn't really seen before that you know before darwin there are plenty of people talking evolutionary theories the thing that darwin really really turned the page on is that this is a there is no purpose to this there is no you know there is no will in this and right so now suddenly begin to say okay well we're back to the medidivine realm we're back fundamentally to the greeks to to all of this stuff and and really the the thing that the hebra's do and it's and it's again i i also came across you know these transitions i was doing a long study through the book of ezekiel and just continually being amazed at this prophet who you know some things might have been schizophrenic having these wild dreams and doing these these wild enactments and in captivity in babalon to have the chutzpah to have god show up on his royal throne over babalon and say oh by the way i can show up here too and it ain't nothing to me and so i'll use the babalonians and i'm still accomplishing my will even as they destroy my temple which y'all have destroyed anyway by violating the covenant you know so on and so forth and so i begin to see you know at christianity you know very clearly the faithful heir of the hebrew scriptures in terms of the conceptualization of the conceptualization of not an impersonal realm which is sort of manifesting things and then all these agents vying for power within it which is basically polytheism but this other vision of well god is not a part of the system god is you know god is being but then how does that then translate into this crazy world of babalonians and burned temples and jobe's suffering and then obviously climaxing on on someone who you know someone who basically is upsets his own people because he's not sufficiently anti-roman and is rather incidental to the romans like yeah we can kill him that's not a big we kill lots of people and you know and i'm you know basically what i've been doing over the last couple of years is trying to piece these things together and i found i'm finding your book a really helpful missy illogical prolegomena in terms of maybe some ways that on the cover yeah yeah maybe some ways that christian preachers need to talk and conceptualize reconceptualize well on earth we're talking about what sacrament you know the other day i usually come up with ideas when i'm making my videos not before them but you know i figured out that in a weird way you know because what is a dollar a dollar is a you know a dollar is not a physical thing right it's an agreed upon symbol set that's right this is a sacrament right here oh that's well okay so this is interesting it's an agreed upon symbol set that that um that we can all use you know it uh very handily and you know um it's very practical and whatever else but if it represents the highest good for which you will sacrifice the other things the other goods then it's a sacrament right that's right yeah yeah i wanted to i wanted to jump in on a couple things that you yeah go ahead you're you're um okay you're you're the one world that's that's not the god world right the right the the metaphor the the meta divine realm the meta divine realm so one of the key distinctions i see between those two realms that you articulated is um fate and freedom yes so so in in yes you have these agents that are striving with each other but of course the stories that we that we tell in that realm are these terrible tragedies where you know you're gonna you're gonna kill your father and sleep with your mom and then you do everything you can to avoid killing your father and sleeping with your mom and it's precisely the avoidance techniques that lead you to kill your father and sleep with your mom um and so um history is like there actually isn't history right history is a category doesn't exist in that there is fate often this will be in a cyclical kind of realm everything that has happened that is happening has happened will happen again um and it's only um the transcendent god that ezekiel is pointing to in the throne above babalon that makes both and simultaneously human history and human freedom possible and even even even meaningful claims and one of the things that happens uh you know i i'm i'm utterly convinced by the science that evolution explains you know human biology well not just human but biology on the planet earth today and if it's anywhere else in the universe but one of the things that follows from not not a scientifically circumspect theory of evolution but from a kind of darwinistic ideology is that freedom is an illusion right you get back you get back into this sense that if if the natural you know world is what it is and does what it does and there is nothing to transcend it um then freedom can only be an illusion uh and so then we're in a really awkward spot because then i think c.s lewis points out well if your freedom is an illusion then you were fated to think that your freedom was an illusion and then you're really stuck right what do you like um so so you actually can't know at that point you can't know if it was an illusion or not because you were just faded into it right uh it's a really unsatisfying sort of worldview because it and it and it's self-refuting in these awkward kinds of ways and we all experience our freedom in in some way or other and we try to make sense of it um but within within those ancient categories which are often returning in new guises uh and this happens over and over again that the ancient categories that were transcended by judaism and christianity as we see the eclipse of judaism and christianity in the judaeo-christian worldview they will these things will reappear whether that's transcendent political claims right i mean worship the god or emperor i don't know if you've noticed any rhetoric that looks a little like that i don't know i think if i think if uh i'm thinking that when he leaves residence in washington dc he might move to utah because utah just decriminalized um polygamy and i would think you know i when i when i look at our current resident of the white house you know people debate him but i think we we just have sort of an emperor because he kind of does what an emperor if you read history it's like you know he's kind of hemmed in by all of our culture and laws and everything but if he had his way he'd have a he'd have a harem he'd have a bodyguard i mean it's all there right i mean we can we can look at you know individual examples of course but you know um but i think in general our our political um uh rhetoric uh has has taken on elements of um the transcendent that were strongly critiqued by for example the early christians in rome but as the christian worldview fades we become less able to see uh the distinctions between say politics and religion that christianity actually introduced into the world uh or well judaism first let's be honest judaism and then following that christianity to the wider world um but it's it's it's been pretty common for human history to not distinguish between politics and religion and and right now we we say we distinguish between them but that's only because we've we've we have a completely inadequate definition of religion right we can actually say religion is just privatized thing that you do with your friends and family on sundays and politics is where the real world happens as soon as you've said that all you've said is um uh politics is religion and this other thing is a hobby and that's the appropriate categories for talking about those things right um but anyways within those two right it's it's the judaio christian worldview that that you're highlighting from this book this other book that you've been reading um that makes possible things like the distinction between politics and religion that makes possible the idea of human history and human freedom that makes possible things like um religious tolerance we're told that that you know uh and there are some christians who sound like theocrats but really the the real religious intolerance is is the um sacralizing of the political yes on and i would say on we we picked on you know uh the president but this is this is both sides this is happening on both extremes there's a sacralizing of the political commitments that reduce what we what we typically call religion to a hobby and this is where this is where the the real sacrifices are demanded and this is where um we brook no opposition yes we the the enemy must be destroyed yes right yes and not not just silenced but you know eradicated eliminated and all of that language then comes no that's right i i agree with what you've just said have you um have you heard there's an english there's an english writer named tom holland have you ever heard of him i haven't okay here's another giving you another book recommendation tom holland is a oh if you look on my channel you'll see some things from him he's a my first i first came across his book rubicon he he's an english writer who started writing about the the classical period and loved sort of the sort of the classical stories of you know crossing the rubicon the roman emperors he had a book persian fire where he deals with you know the the greco-persian war um and he wrote a book then he wrote a book on islam which you know he basically late antiquity he and he had some suspicions about the um a little bit of the propagandist tale of the rise of islam and so he did he's a historian and he he writes history in a very popular way but he's a he's a historian and he got into a lot of trouble with that book about islam because he basically was saying that the the islamic origin tale that is told by what we currently look at as the religion of islam really doesn't if you apply what's been rigorously applied to christianity over the last couple of hundred years to islam uh there's some interesting things arise and some skepticism about that well obviously he got a lot of pushback from the islamic world on that and so someone says to him says to him you know why don't you do it to your own religion he's kind of he's been raised you know nominal anglican in a bit he's like well i don't have a religion so then he decides and you can see this the roots of it in his book on islam he starts doing this to christianity and he just is the his latest book is entitled dominion and it's a i think i i think you're exactly right and that we have now gotten to the point where we can begin to see christianity's influence again because we're beginning to see its recession right and that book dominion so for him you know he basically is telling people you know essentially what renee garrard had been saying too the only language you have to critique christianity is christian language and whereas you're denying god vigorously all over here you're promoting a morality that essentially you've simply inherited by christianity and is completely unthinkable from the pagan world right because their morality was fundamentally different and christianity christianity radically reoriented the world right but you can't see it and you imagine that somehow because you say god does not exist that your system is some in some clean room by which it's been untouched by you know by christianity's it's just preposterous so i i really and i think it would be a very interesting book for you know i try to you know wonky books like this a lot i don't i got a pretty smart audience but um a book like dominion can is can be popularly enjoyed by people and they can begin to understand his point so right um but i well i i love renee garrard and and he would say that that basic insight he had was was actually nich had it first nich is actually the the honest atheist who sees the the christian genealogy of the morals of the west uh and and understands uh that when christianity goes so do the morals he thinks that's a good thing i mean he endorses that move uh so christians aren't going to agree with him there uh and neither will garrard you know um but but nich actually saw that that dynamic with remarkable sort of prescience and it's it's it feels almost silly to watch you know people who might consider themselves to be nich's heirs in the atheist uh you know limelight uh who who are painfully naive on this point um and and want to live on the sort of coattails of christian morality uh well undermining the the cultural possibilities for those and and so then as as the christian worldview becomes less obvious i think you're you're right david foster wallace tells this joke and the the thing i mentioned about the the two young fish swimming along you know right and the old fish says how's the water boys and when he's out of your shot one says to the other what the hell is water once the christian water is drained out of the pool we can actually see what it was what was floating in it right um but right now i mean we're getting it's becoming more clear and some voices are helping us see that i think renee garrard is an incredible voice for helping us see that um i i'm uh i'm really grateful actually that that you can see in my book which seems to be about a very narrow specific kind of topic um a series of connections to these bigger questions about transcendence what we mean by god uh the history of the west you know um uh uh freedom fate i mean it seems to me that you like you get it you you've read the book and you've understood the the the sort of streams that are feeding into it and and the deeper intention behind it so there is one particular question which which for me is very important for catholics and protestants uh to understand one another clearly in this because one of my great passions is christian unity and i have a kind of anxiety when i watch christians disagree with each other when they actually don't understand what the other christian believes like that drives me batty and so a really important part of my book is let's listen to each other because we don't disagree nearly as much as we've been told yeah you know and that's the story you've shared i'm not i'm not going to say we don't disagree at all i do say in the end there are disagreements and i propose a way forward that that um uh you know make some bold claims i'm not i'm not whitewashing things or whatever but i but i want to make sure that we actually understand what the other person is claiming so i'm doing that work on a very specific question that's important to christians right the lord's supper the eucharist but also i think it does have this broader application i like to use it missiological prolegomena if we do not understand the worldview in which we are operating and what the christian alternative to that worldview is um we're doing worse than treading water you know it's sort of slowly coming up over our eyes right and if we can if we can get a glimpse of the christian worldview through this particular refraction of it but but there's there's dozens of other ways we could do it right providence and free will fate and history we could we could use all these lenses to get there if we can get a picture of the christian view of reality and see how that is a much more satisfying and a much more human picture than what is on offer in a post-christian world then i think we're well equipped to to speak into the longings of our contemporary culture which you know you you highlighted the sort of neo-sacramentalism if if jordan think what you will about jordan peterson's argument on this or that point if he's done anything he's highlighted for us the vacuum the spiritual vacuum that young men but not only young men but particularly young men are experiencing in contemporary culture they they're they're they're famished for something and and i think the christian worldview which is largely shared by catholics and protestants and which is to a large degree shared by our jewish brothers and sisters offers us something really satisfying and compelling and so i'm just delighted that when you read a book about a very narrow topic like transubstantiation you could see this sort of spider web that grows out from that and and all the different attachment points it has to all these other questions i i could probably if i had read if this book had come away my way three or four years ago i wouldn't have seen it because i would have understood the book in the light of well you know roman catholic protestant history and tradition and i probably would have read the book and thought wow that's really cool i'm you know but the first chapter i'll take that that's not bad yeah that's not bad and i think as i try and get a bunch of my colleagues to read it that's how they will read it but the introduction to the book i mean that the i mean the question of the question of the question of what on earth so these these two these two guys you know i am today i'll see if i can listen to the rest of their basically their deconstruction deconversion stories where these guys grew up deeply evangelical and now are consider themselves maybe hopeful agnostics when i listen to all of the issues that they bump into that contributed to their deconstruction i think it has everything to do with the so the meta divine realm and and theism are always in tension and and so what had happened what is happening is that as so i have these god number one and god number two so christianity is fully you know if i'd reread that quote from luther a lot of pantheists would get all excited because well that sounds like pantheism i was like oh no that's not mere pantheism um that is because pantheism this is this is this is fully colonized this is not the meta divine realm right where everything is just sort of one and that's right because if you read the classics you know they're always resisting the inevitability is that fate will somehow finally have its way and you can't you can't resist the rules of the meta divine realm just like materialists can't resist the rules of physics right even zeus can't escape the fates that's right even zeus so so what's happening now is that in this play between god number one which is sort of your your imminent god and god number two which is your transcendent god as in the oh gosh we can talk forever um i know i gotta let you go what happened in darwin and for a long time before that in christianity god number one sort of shrank from the christian imagination and evangelical sort of expanded god number two in order to try to compensate but again god was now in the system and that sets up all of the wrong moral intuitions for people and then they eventually just say i can't take this anymore and so then they go through another pattern this happens through various lifetimes for people you know their parents and so on and so forth generations but and then they they kind of reset to a to a paganism only to realize that gosh all of the good things that they have gained have been through this other tradition which continues to colonize it so anyway that's right right i was a video talking about this but i know i can't let you go and false dichotomies right i mean this god number two gets expanded and then you get a series of false dichotomies which lead to this cognitive dissonance which leads to people eventually building up in some cases what i would say the courage to actually leave the church that's right right and and what once someone has gone through the emotional work of that that's really tough to get back yeah because it's not just intellectual work it's emotional work because you're abandoning something that was given to you as a as a gift from your family from your culture whatever and it's tragic to watch i mean the paradigmatic example of this is the evangelical who's been raised to think the world is 6 000 years old goes to study scripture and the the the number of those people who become atheist and agnostics in grad school is is really tragic yeah um but but it was just a false conception to start with that set them on the wrong sort of path and and i don't think protestantism has no resources for dealing with it but a lot of the people who come out of that in a healthy way find their way into catholicism anglicanism eastern orthodoxy because in those contexts the false dichotomy was never there in the first place right right no i think that's right i think that's exactly right well i'm gonna let you go so you can have some lunch i'm going to post this tomorrow um and i will include some links to some of the books and things that i talked about in here okay um and feel free to wait in in the comment section now i'm gonna warn you that some of the people who watch my channel are going to beat a path to your your door whether that be your email mailbox or wherever that is but after this conversation there's a group of people who are desperately going to want to engage you more so in a nice way yes they're not coming after me with pitchforks and torches no i don't think so they're they're they're going to be really excited about this conversation okay well you know if enough you know comments come up that give us material for further conversation i would be happy to uh to engage again so i would love it i i can tell that you know again i when you know when you sent me an email and i first saw the book about oh okay and i read that first chapter it was like oh this is so important this is so important and it's way beyond well it's again it's why on earth did the reformation fight so hard about the sacraments well it was because of everything around it that's why it's important not because it's this little piece over here because it's central to the entire conceptualization of the world and this this change that um the whole story that we find in the bible brought to humanity so amen i yeah no i i think that's a great that's a great cap yeah it matters because it's so connected to everything else yeah so i i really i think your your reading of my book is going to help other people read it at a deeper level and i think that's very valuable so thanks so much okay brett we will talk again all right awesome thanks paul bye bye bye