https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=P9FHWqSEQ2c

 How you doing Fred? I'm good folks. Yeah? Yeah. What's going on? Uh well the A's uh won against the Giants and just last night the Lakers beat the uh Nuggets which I didn't want to happen. I wanted to be Denver and the Celtics. The other day the Celtics beat the uh Pete so they're gonna they got another game. They didn't have to go home if you win or go home and then the Celtics won and some guy had 26 points. I can't remember his name. I mean none of those guys are my team so but I still follow basketball because I give credit what credit is due and you know that's how I do my shoes. Anyway I'll be like this and like that and yeah uh let's see refresh me on the sermon again so I can remember what I keys that I thought were good. We're in that we're in that. Oh the second commandment. The second. Like white keys. No. Anyways. So anyways how you doing our fantasy football sir? I am owing to. I have off both my games. Oh hi mom. Reggie has left. Oh Reggie left. No Reggie left the building. Let me see how I'm doing on my fantasy football team today. Yeah and I'm losing today so I'm heading towards. Oh man it's gonna be a tight game. Who has the real way? Not me. Oh so we'll see. Okay we'll see. What quarterback do you have? Russell Wilson who's had a great season. Yeah he's kind. He's had a great season so I'm very happy with my quarterback. Oh is Kittle back? Because the night of the play today is he back? I don't know but I had Kevin Coleman and he got put on IR. What's the quarterback for the 49ers? Is he still good? Yeah he's going Oh all right. Well I got a chief for you just to give you a sneak preview. It looks like I talked to Paul and he gave me permission. We'll probably go down to Hope Sacramento and shoot a video so be in the looks out for that. We want to hear your comments and what we can do on the show and you can come with us and and just be with me in the video while we're kicking it just doing it like the Beastie Boys or whatever and it'd be really cool man and you're tight. So what am I forgetting? I guess that's it man. I'm glad you were able to see this. All right Paul let's land the plane. Thank you Rick. One love. All right thank you amen. Because I am great. I was raised around the infamous Sac State. I legit college greens and I got the means to play all you suckers just like dope beans. You want to play like this? You want to play like that? Enough chitter chat? My stuff is fat and yo my boy Paul is all of that. You got Gigi on the drum. I think we get some with the mission above. I ain't no bum. I come up. I'm not chucking. I don't even have to say that. I love chitter chat. Yo my stuff is fat. You you you shall be in church and stop looking at the girls with the mini skirts because God put me on to start to preach it if you don't understand. You're out of reach. I said read your Bible. Pray every day. That's the only you're gonna wait for. Amen. Peace.