https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=VoNk_bP5q-4

 I remember when I was younger the world seemed more structured and proper and it was a thing against which I could rebel and now it's like it's a puddle it's like I gotta help rebuild it so that I can rebel properly if that makes sense. Because it I don't know I don't know any better way to put it than that like it needs to be rebuilt so that I have something to throw rocks at because right now I just feel lost. I'm lost. Watered by sorrowful tears he unknowingly sprouts. His delicate head rears the will of future he touts. A hope from the lost. Belief is a nexus of humanity. Communication is nebulous. Like two drunken people trying to find each other in an echoing forest shrouded by fog. We talk past each other. Over each other. And through each other. It is so hard to understand. We are all unreliable narrators. We neither convey reality accurately to each other nor to ourselves. We simply cannot. It is too complex under the weight of infinity. However we believe what we believe about what we believe. This is how we navigate that complexity. However belief is not absolute truth. It is just a lens. A lens that can be molded adapted or destroyed. Destruction is the worst. I think I know things but I do not. Yet I must take it on faith for the aught. When Nietzsche declared God dead he could see the cracks in that unifying lens. Now it has been shattered into countless pieces. We each pick up a fleck of this shattered lens. A fleck just big enough to see ourselves. This feels like individuation approaching solipsism. If knowledge is power then God am I. If you believe that I've got a bridge you can buy. Frameworks of knowledge. Delicate things. Don't look too close as one faithfully clings. To say God is dead is to say the God lens shattered into disunited moral decay. Nietzsche wrote cynical condescending words about morality. He acted as if he believed himself above it. He seemed to combat his fear by writing morality off as weakness of spirit and religion as exhaustion. But he was kidding himself. A painful burn is for what I yearn in these thickets of blighted earth. In ash I'll find what's left behind and I hope that thing is worth. This post-truth era Nietzsche sought was a paradoxical attempt to step backwards into the future. He wanted to resuscitate dying unity by making a Kantian push at reinventing religion. However he went insane when the facade of his power politics came crashing down around him. As he tried to save a horse from its savage beating. What is my horse? What once was could be undone in a flash. And all the things you knew only a splash. Just ripples on the abyss of the infinite. Now you are awash with curiosity like an infant. Unachievable. Absolute. Materialistic proof. Not the answer. Disunited solipsistic diversity of belief is not the answer. Dialistic yolo consumerism is not the answer. Extreme partisan power politics is not the answer. I write them stories about themselves. And I will read to them if I have to. Here I sit, retreated in the self, the book of me sitting on a shelf. When I let my wife read that thing that I sent to you, at the end of it she says, it sounds like you're trying to create a new religion. And I kind of laughed it off. But like I think somewhere in my subconscious like I'm trying to get everybody back. Oh you want me to pray for you? Yeah I mean I'm definitely not going to turn it down. I'll pray for you. Lord you know all things. And I believe that you are the God of all providence. And that obviously strains relationships and trust. And things that we certainly don't want to happen, things that we think shouldn't happen, happen. And we don't know what to do. So Lord I pray that you would be with Voth. Lord I think you're using him. You're certainly working on stuff in him. And I pray Lord that you would continue to do this work. Afford him a piece that perhaps he has not earned. And Lord that is in a sense the reality of the Christian faith. That you afford us things that we do not earn. And you afford them to us not because of our capacity. But because of your generosity. So I pray Lord that you would offer him that piece. And that you would protect his children. And that you would work through his dreams and his fears and his gifts and his story. And afford the world a better order through it. So hear my prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen. I didn't realize you were going to do it just then. Yeah, yeah. The funny thing about prayer is that, you know, if you don't believe it, I'm just talking with my eyes closed. It freaks some people out.