https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=vrYvD1jADZo

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I go through the current status of my Sunday sermon. Politics for a while has been feeling increasingly existential for some people. Before I've made the comment that politics is now and religion is always. In some ways they occupy very similar wavelengths in terms of how people operate in their world. Some Christians were very concerned about Donald Trump and his Christian nationalism. Others are very concerned that there's sort of an implicit Christian imperialism with the other party. And so everybody has a party, everybody has politics. But these things sort of rise. Now this isn't new. The United States, unlike many nations of Europe, is not really sort of an extended tribe. It has always been a credo state. What I mean by that is when you become a citizen of the United States, a naturalized citizen, you basically swear an oath to the Constitution. The United States isn't peopled in the way that there's the British people or the French people. The United States is a multi-ethnic nation. But yet there's always been sort of a religion beneath it in some ways. And you can catch it every now and then if you pay close attention to the language. If you go to the Lincoln Memorial, you'll see in this temple, as in the hearts of the people for whom he saved the Union, the memory of Abraham Lincoln is enshrined forever. That's above Lincoln and the Lincoln Memorial. And in some ways, some people have suggested that Abraham Lincoln is the Jesus of American civil religion. He was martyred on Good Friday. Yes, the day he was shot in the Ford Theater was in fact Good Friday, 1865. He saved the Union and he freed the slaves. Let me get my mouse up here. Now one of the things that people are less aware of is how much of the language of the Bible is sort of sounds like and would have sounded like what other people in the Roman Empire would have listened to. This language from the Bible that we read as exclusively pertaining to Jesus, because for all of us, we've only heard this language as pertaining to Jesus, was actually similar in some ways to what was said of the Roman emperors. I just picked up a book, Roman Imperial Texts, a source book. And it's quite amazing reading through the book at the kinds of language and the kinds of things said of various Caesars. This is the introduction to the book. In the first and second centuries of the common era, the word gospel, literally good news, a good announcement, the Greek word euangelion, which then fully accepted as Latin as a loan word, was used to describe what actions or events associated with various Roman emperors had occurred for the wealth of the world. As in the inscription from Preen, number four below, we read of the gospels, the announcement of good news that the birth of the emperor Augustus brought to the world. Here's just an example, one of the examples from this book for Augustus. It seemed good to the Greek cities of Asia on the recommendation of the high priest Apollonius, son of Menopheilos from Acadia, since providence in divinely ordering our existence has shown esteem and a lavish outlay was embellished the good perfection onto life by displaying Augustus, that's Caesar Augustus, whom virtue has filled for the benefit of humankind while graciously giving us and those after us a savior who has ended war. Again, they're not talking about Jesus, they're talking about Augustus. Setting things right in peace and since Caesar, when revealed, surpasses the hopes of all who had anticipated the good news, not only going beyond the benefits of those who preceded him, but rather leaving no hope of surpassing him for those who will come. Because of him, the birthday of God began good news of the world. Caesar Augustus was called the son of God because he was Julius Caesar's adopted son and Julius Caesar had been divinized by the Roman Senate. And there's a lot of talk like this if you read those ancient writings, most of which most people today don't read. And in fact, you can find podcasts where people will read inscriptions to Caesar Augustus and then, aha, everybody believes this was written about Jesus. Nope, it was about Caesar. Now last week we looked at two world salvation at Philippi joining heaven and earth. And we looked at the slave girl who was freed from a demon. We looked at Lydia who invited Paul and Silas and Luke and Timothy into her home. We looked at the story of the prison guard who by virtue of Paul's behavior with the earthquake, we imagine the prison guard believed that Paul's very powerful God set them free. We saw all of this last week on display in Acts 16. And the story ended like this. Paul said to the officers, they beat us publicly without a trial, even though we are Roman citizens and threw us into prison. And now they want to get rid of us? No, let them come themselves and escort us out. The officers reported this to the magistrates. And when they heard that Paul and Silas were Roman citizens, they were alarmed. They came to appease them and escorted them from the prison, releasing them to leave the city. After Paul and Silas came out of prison, they went to Lydia's house where they met with the brothers and sisters and encouraged them. Then they left. When Paul and his companions had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica where there was a Jewish synagogue. And here on the map, you can see probably the route that they took to get over to Thessalonica. And Thessalonica was a very important city and exactly the kind of city where Paul spent a lot of his time and effort doing church planting and evangelism. When Paul and his companions had passed through Apollonia, Amphipolis, oops, see, this is why I do rough drafts, because I should have deleted this slide. One less slide is usually a good thing. Now some background on the city of Thessalonica. And we're going to be first treating this passage in the Book of Acts and then spending a few weeks in the first letter to the Thessalonians, because that letter seems to have been written quite soon after Paul's visit there. And what we'll get from the letter is a lot clearer view of what the nature of the Christian church was and the nature of Paul's preaching and teaching was there in the city of Thessalonica. The citizens of Thessalonica deliberately cultivated and solicited the benefaction of Rome. In other words, for this city, Rome was a very big deal and staying on Rome's good side was very important and was a key element of strategy for the city and its welfare. Pompeian flight from Rome resides there with his entourage in 49 to 48 BC. Now that's not quite a hundred years before Paul was there, but close to it. And many of the knights and senators who fled with him joined him there, making the city a second Rome. That was during some of these civil wars that Rome was having really before the rise of the empire. With consecration of a site for the authoritative convening of the true Senate. And again, what this meant was that Pompeii and those who were supporting him sort of set up an alternative government to Rome there in Thessalonica. That tells you something about its strategic location and the importance of the city. And again, when the tide turned against Brutus and Cassius, the city supported Anthony and Octavian. Now, Octavian is the name of the man who would be named Caesar Augustus. This paid off handsomely when first Anthony in 42 BC and then Octavian, having become the first emperor, granted the city status of free city, which gave it an independent form of government, allowing five or six politics, holding annually chosen magistracies and thus allowed to cultivate local patrons as well as those in Rome. In other words, the city was given certain privileges because of how it laid itself out politically for Octavian, who again later would be renamed Augustus. The Thessalonians erected a statue of Augustus, that's Octavian, with the upraised hand of a hero and a temple to Augustus. Again, that's Octavian as well, both of which Paul surely saw during his visit. The statue had been dated to the reign of Gaius, also known as Caligula, or Claudius, and it is one of the few objects recovered at the city which can be dated with certainty to the time of Paul's visit. It's perhaps in this context, so effusive an outpouring of honors for Augustus, Octavius, that one would understand Paul's condemnation of those who promote peace and security. Even more interesting, all of the Macedonians chose to honor Augustus by declaring that they were inaugurating an Augustan era, an era of unprecedented cooperation and commercial exchange between Macedonians and Romans. Already during the lifetime of Augustus, there were priests of the imperial cult there, and the presence of the cult as shown by coins minted there. This is really critical because in a minute we're going to read the story of what happens to Paul and Silas when they're in the city. Now when we read the story in Acts, it's going to sound like they're only there a couple of weeks, but we've got a lot of other reason to believe they may very well have been there a few months. Not as long as Paul would have liked, but when we read the story, you'll figure out why he had to leave. And if you've been following along with the story, you'll recognize that what happens is what we've seen happen again and again and again. But what we're trying to get at is, well, what's the nature of the climate of the city? Well for them, especially in the ancient world, politics and religion were nearly the same thing. And so this Augustus, we meet him at the beginning of Luke where Luke talks about a census by Augustus. By the time of Paul's visit, he's dead. So what you can see now is we're probably around 50 AD when Paul and Silas are doing this, which will place them basically during the reign of Claudius. The social situation Paul faced in Thessalonica was also complicated by the status of the Jews in the empire after the expulsion of the Jews from Rome in 49. That was also under the Emperor Claudius. While they were not yet found an inscription older than the second century, Thessalonian synagogue inscription, there is little doubt of the claim made in Acts 17 that the middle of the first century, Jews had a meeting place in Thessalonica for Sabbath meetings and other meetings. The inscription dedicated to the place of the Most High God, possibly with the addition of the name Yahweh and the transliteration. Even more important is the inscription found in a sarcophagus that refers to Jews named Jacob and Anna at synagogues, plural. This suggests a thriving Jewish population in the city in the second and third century that requires there was a Jewish presence in the city in the previous century. Whereas if you remember last week when they were in Philippi, there is no synagogue there. You're getting a sense that each of these different cities has different cultures, distinct histories, and so when Paul goes into these places, he's facing very different challenges. This particular city, for a whole variety of reasons, seemed to have been a city with a thriving Jewish community. So Paul enters in as his usual practice. A number of weeks ago I noted, if you want to get a sense of the kinds of sermons Paul preached, take a look at Acts 13. I think pretty much that chapter shows his line of argumentation and his thought there. And so for the rest of the book, we just get these short hands from Luke that Paul is going someplace. As was his custom, Paul went into the synagogue and on three Sabbath days he reasoned with them from the scriptures. Meaning and proving that the Messiah had to suffer and rise from the dead. There's the heart of his message. This Jesus, I am proclaiming you, is the Messiah, he said. Again, there's the heart of the message. And the response is similar to what we see in other cities. Some of the Jews were persuaded and joined Paul and Silas, as did a large number of God-fearing Greeks and quite a few prominent women. Okay, so again what we find in the synagogue are those who are Jews living as observant Jews in the middle of the Roman Empire. And especially in a city like this, their existence is rather tenuous because it seems the temperature of the Augustan cult, which was quite high and which was the fastest spreading cult throughout the Roman Empire at this time, the Jews would have had already in many ways to be really careful about their relationships with the surrounding city. Because an observant Jew would not be participating in the cult of the emperor like pretty much everyone in the city would be expected to. Now this was known of the Jews, but now here comes Paul and if in fact, as we read a number of weeks ago, this worship of Crestus, perhaps Christ, was the reason why Claudius kicked the Jews out of Rome. Probably the Jews, many of the Jews in this synagogue are not terribly happy to see Paul. Now these God-fearing Greeks, these are, and prominent women, these are individuals not of Jewish ancestry who are basically listening in on the synagogue, participating at one level or another, but not really part of it. And now they welcome Paul's message with enthusiasm. But other Jews were jealous and so they rounded up some bad characters from the marketplace, formed a mob and started a riot in the city. Now this is a pattern we seem to find all over the place. It seems to be fairly easy to find people who just kind of want to go out and start trouble, want to burn things, want to knock things over, want to raise a lot of noise and so, well, if this is how you want to move the magistrates of the city, this seems to be a fairly common way to do it. They rushed to Jason's house. Now what's interesting is there's no description here as to exactly who this Jason is, which means that he was quite likely known by many of the readers that Luke anticipated who were going to read the book. They rushed to Jason's house in search of Paul and Silas in order to bring them out to the crowd. But when they did not find them there, they dragged Jason and some other believers before the city officials. These men who have caused trouble all over the world now have come here and Jason has welcomed them into his house. They are all defying Caesar's decrees, saying that there is another king, one called Jesus. And right away you can see the conflict. Is it Augustus, the Divine Augustus, the son of God whose temple we have here, whose statue we have here, this son of God who has brought the city all of the wealth and all of the promise and all of the security and all of the liberty? Again, if I pull out that book, there's page after page after page after page of the accomplishments of the Divine Augustus and what he has brought. And now this guy is coming and talking Jesus, this is a real problem and the government should crack down on it and not let it go any further. When they heard this, the crowd and the city officials were thrown into turmoil because they have the favor of Rome, they don't want to lose it. Then they made Jason and the others post bond and let them go. As soon as it was night, the believers sent Paul and Silas away to Berea. On arriving there, they went to the Jewish synagogue. Again and again and again and again. This is how the pattern will go. But what are we to make of this? Now there's no cult of Donald Trump in the United States. We've had pictures of somebody in India who for a while was worshiping him as a god. To the best of my knowledge, nobody is worshiping Joe Biden and to the best of my knowledge, no Indian has erected a statue of him and is bowing down to Joe Biden. We do in fact have temples in Washington DC that any ancient coming to the city would look at and say, oh, these must be your gods because we worship the divine Abraham Lincoln for the blessings that he bestowed. He saved the union and he freed the slaves and he blessed the country with many other things and George Washington and Thomas Jefferson. There they stand statues and we make pilgrimages to Washington DC. We bring our school children there so that they may look upon the gods enshrined in marble and come and worship. We say, well, we don't worship them, but an ancient person would say, you don't? You sort of seem to. Oh, but we're not doing rituals. Well, isn't making the trip a ritual? When I was in high school, the senior class trip was in fact to Washington DC to visit the monuments. Now this was Eastern Christian High School. None of us would have imagined we were worshiping Abraham Lincoln, but you can't help but walk into the Lincoln Memorial and just, well, sort of takes your breath away. The size and the magnificence of the memorial and the statue. Many have noted it pretty much seems fashioned after the Temple of Zeus. Now this tension we've basically been working on in many ways for over 2000 years. In fact, even before the travels of Rome in Israel, God was king and David was his son. All these references to David being the son of God, you can find them in the book of Psalms if you understand what you're looking for. Jesus is crucified by Pilate with a sign, King of the Jews. Now the sign was a dig by Pilate at the Jews who were living in the region, which they didn't appreciate, but everybody understood the joke and its meaning. Jesus is a threat to Caesar. At this point is a pretext for mob action, but come 300 years later, Caesar Constantine will worship Jesus as king and the Roman Empire will be changed. European kings would derive their authority by divine right. They would be chosen by God to rule and it was imagined that, well, God bestows the monarch with the power to rule and then the monarch rules on behalf of God. And in fact, places where you still have constitutional monarchies like the UK and the Queen of Canada and the Queen of Australia, well, these things continue. Now in America, we're a little bit more revolutionary and so we sort of have this constant debate. Is Christianity a revolutionary religion? Well, on the debate goes. It's in fact on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial that the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. gives his most famous speech. And in that speech, he basically leverages the Declaration of Independence, one of our national sacred documents. I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed. What creed is he talking about? He's talking about the Declaration of Independence. We hold that these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal. That is not a quote from the Bible. That is a quote from the Declaration of Independence, a pretty clear enlightenment document. Dr. King will draw on that statement to demand that African Americans will be recognized as being included in those rights, as the statement says, given by God. Now most of us who sort of walk this line all the time understand that the New Testament asks us to pray for the King. It's a really remarkable thing that you would find this in the New Testament given the fact that it will in fact be Roman Emperor Nero who will kill Peter and Paul and the Romans will in fact persecute Christians. But figuring out how this works, well this has been a long and sometimes a very violent conflict. The divinity of Caesar was demonstrated in the world by his power. He was able to instill his will upon people near and far. His enemies feared him. His friends sought his favor and his patronage. Revelation was karmic. What do I mean by that? If you achieved success and good fortune, the gods were smiling upon you. And if you had ill health or misfortune, well you must have done something to annoy or anger the gods and so then you did sacrifices in order to once again get on the good side of the gods. Religion was in many ways deeply entwined with bribery. And it's into this world that Christ came. That's something that we don't think thoroughly enough about. In Dominion, Tom Holland writes, command and swagger were the very essence of the cult of Caesars. To rule as an emperor and imperator was to rule as a victorious general. In every town in Galatia, in every square, statues of Caesar served as a reminder to his subjects that to rank as the son of a god was by definition to embody earthly greatness. Now a lot of these quotes will talk about Galatia, which is what Tom Holland was writing about but if that was true in Galatia, it was perhaps doubly true in Thessalonica. And then comes Jesus. The son of God proclaimed by Paul did not share his sovereignty with other deities. The very inclusive thing that the cult of the emperor could rely on is that often the gods of the city and the gods of the emperor, you kind of put them together and they were very fluid that way. Jesus was not fluid at all. There were no other deities. For us there is but one God, the Father, from whom all things came and for whom we live and there is but one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom all things came and through whom we live. This is how they saw Jesus. And well, what was beginning as a rumble in Thessalonica would continue on to rumble through the empire until the emperor would call Jesus Lord. This conviction that a crucified criminal might somehow be part of the identity of the one God of Israel, a conviction that Paul in all his correspondence took absolutely for granted was shocking to the Galatians and the Thessalonians and the Romans and all of the places that Paul would go as well as to the Jews. No wonder then that Paul proclaiming to the Thessalonians that there was only one, there was only the one Son of God and that he had suffered the death of a slave, not struggling against it but submitting willingly to the lash, should have described the cross as a scandal. What we would expect from Caesar would be the kinds of things we expect in all of our superhero movies, that when things are darkest, when things come down to the bitter end, that the hero would rise up, break their bonds and vanquish those who tried to put them down. Still today many Muslims say, oh yeah, we believe Jesus was a great prophet but he certainly the cross because God would never let one of his prophets be humiliated and lose like that. God loves winners. We don't imagine Jesus, Son of God, submitting to a cross. That would basically exclude you from the title. The offensiveness of it was not something that Paul ever sought to palliate. That is, that it was a stumbling block to the Jews and foolishness to everyone else did not inhibit him in the slightest. Quite the opposite. Paul embraced the mockery that his gospel brought him and the dangers. We saw that last week. Recuperating from his illness, he would not have concealed from his hosts the trellis work of scars across his back. Remember last week? Beaten with rods at Philippi and tortured and then shown the door, traveled through a couple less minor cities and then to Thessalonica and yet weeks, maybe a couple of months of meeting, developing the church, another riot, out he goes. That's the pattern. The marks of the beating that he had suffered for the sake of Christ, I bear on my body the marks of Jesus. Put there by the empire, awaiting its perfection. What do we do in our own Thessalonica? And I think we can praise God that we really don't live in anything like this. I play around with words like Christian nationalism under Trump and Christian imperialism under Biden just to sort of confuse the signalings. How Christian was Donald Trump? How Christian is Joe Biden? How nationalistic was Trump? How imperialistic is Biden? You can go ahead and have those arguments and those fights all you want, but in many ways Abraham Lincoln in the temple of Zeus notwithstanding in Washington DC, we have a fair amount of difference and distance between what Paul faced in Thessalonica and what we live in today. I think we can praise God for that and be grateful for it. But it's not without its difficulties. And in fact, we continue to bear witness to the one whose body was broken on our behalf. The strange God who was killed by his enemies only to rise again and not to rub it in. Because of course, he came not to humiliate them, but through his humiliation to show them his love. And that is after all what we remember when we come to the table. On the night he was betrayed, he took bread and broke it and said, this is my body broken for you. Do this in remembrance of me.