https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=AsB9QTq6NZk

 Two, one, welcome to the Fred and Paul show. Hey, what's happening Paul? How you doing Fred? We got special guests. Oh dad. John's been dropped in for another week. John coming in with the Raptors. You have to speak up Fred, cause big John coming in with the Raptors. With the Raptors? Sonata. Yeah. All right, what are we gonna talk about today? The Dodgers? The Dodgers lost to Tampa in the last inning. They scored three runs, they were down by three, and they scored three runs, and Tampa won against the Tornados two and two. Two and two. Two and two, so whoever wins, four out of seven takes the title. All right. I'm always suspicious, I'm always suspicious when the final game is on a Sunday. Right. I always think it's orchestrated. Yeah. I'm very suspicious. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You're right. They're looking for big commercial revenue. It's like politics, you know? It's kind of like Paul told me to do a rap about Kanye West. I think he could have went further, because look at him now, he's doing Christian music. I'm gonna write him in on my ballot this year. And Kanye is the president. You're gonna win? Oh of course he's gonna win, when I vote for him, vote for Kanye. Kanye 2020. That's the official endorsement of the Freddie and Paul show. How about that? What about Trump? What do you think of Trump? He's kind of out of the picture. I'm not gonna talk about Trump. He's Hogwarts? I'm not gonna talk about Trump. Kanye 2020. Official endorsement of the Freddie and Paul show. There we go. I'm gonna write him in now. And while we are talking about government, today I'm here to represent the king and queen of the Netherlands, the House of Orange. And I am here to present to you as an official gift of the House of Orange. This is the emblem of the royal house in Holland. It says Holland right on the back here. And this hat, yeah, you should be wearing that the remainder of the show. And this is in recognition of the amazing wrapping in a Dutch church that you do. Okay, and I'd be happy to do, oh yeah, my people in Visalia, thank you for tuning in. And Ripon and my cousin Mark Holland. Mark Holland, get his name on the Freddie and Paul show. We'll have to send this to him in particular. Cause it's Ripon. Mark Holland from Ripon, California. Yeah, boy, this is tight. Thank you. All right, all right. So baseball. Temple one against the Dodgers. Temple one against the Dodgers. I don't know. I, yeah, the 49ers are playing the Patriots. I don't know where the Raiders are playing. The Niners are playing the Patriots. But I'm hoping for a win this week cause Reggie gave me lots of pop tips and I put them in my lineup. I got to keep you up to far. Guess what? What? Antonio, Antonio Brown. His friends with Tom Brady. Yeah. They wanted, they played together. Yeah. Now Tampa, they want him in Tampa. Yeah. I want him to go to Seattle because I have Russell Wilson as my quarterback and I want him to throw more touchdowns. Boo Hogwash. What are you guys talking about? Football. Football. Yeah. Anyway, in basketball, we're getting a few people, new people. I'll have to look it up more, but I saw we're getting a new point guard and another guy, so. A new general manager too, right? Right. Yeah, Lottie's done. Lottie's out of there. He was awesome though. Wasn't awesome? They didn't do well at all. I liked Lottie, but he didn't do a great job. All right, all right. Time for the wrap. No? I need a beat. We don't have a beat. We don't have time to set up a beat. You're gonna have to do a acapella. I'll just do this. What are you gonna do? Love God with all your soul and strength. Okay, go for it. He's got a beat. Okay, that kind of reaches. Ho, ho. Let me see you just say ho. Ho, ho, ho, Santa Claus, my foot. Let me tell you what Jesus really put. He died on the cross for our sins, and yo, he came in so we could win. Love God with all your soul and strength, with all your heart and mind. And love your neighbor as yourself, be faithful, just and kind. Love God with all your soul and strength. My boy CJ, he be got the dream. No Tennessee or nothing like that. My boy CJ's got a curl that's fat. Good to go without a word to say. They call me Freddie B from the USA. We got Holland on the hat, doing it like that. Don't forget about my boy Paul. He stands tall, that ain't all. Don't forget about Fancy Nancy. You know what you got going on with the dancing fish every day and every night. And love thy neighbor as yourself, be faithful and just and kind. Love God with all your soul and strength, with all heart and mind. And love your neighbor as yourself, be faithful, just as kind. All right, that was a good rap. Thank you. All right, guys. Time to land the plane. All right, here we go. One, love. All right.