https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=NaMA30fHN5w

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. How are you doing, Paul? All pretty good. Patriots have blocked. Patriots lost. Condolences to all my family in Massachusetts because they're all going to be depressed for the next few months. Texans won. Texans won. Tennessee won. And games going on today. Who plays today? Saints. Saints play today. I think the Saints will probably be the Vikings. So Kings, you say Kings won? Yeah, that's what Mark said. Kings won yesterday. No, they lost to... They lost to the end again to New Orleans. All right. They won against the Kings. Bad luck Kings. And the Warriors aren't doing good. No. Really? Yeah, Lakers... I don't like the Lakers, but they're doing all right. Let's see. I'm looking optimistic for the 49ers though. Because Dorothal is good. And Kittle, right? Yeah, Kittle. And what's the other running backs in any way? They've got a whole bunch of them. What about the 49ers? I don't follow the 49ers. I can't think of any of them. Can you think of one? I think Kevin Coleman's in there. They've got like three running backs that they use. What happened to... What's to the Rams you need? Rams dissapeared. I had the Rams on my fantasy team this year. You know you'd go well. And then we got to look out for baseball will be coming up not too long. Not too long. And I'm looking optimistic for the A's. The athletics. And it looks like the Giants will be pretty good. And a lot of people are giving us comments that we know our sports good. Yeah, they said that's why we watched the show. They get their sports news on the Freddie and the Ball Show. It's like the Jay Leno show or something. Anyway, let me do a little rap. Just a rap. A Jesus rap. Alright. You, you, you shall be in church and take a second look because that's the way to go. Praise God! Really though! Rhyming, puffing, coming on up. You gotta read the Bible, Psalms 42 for good luck. Rolling deep in my partnership flow. Jesus Christ is the only one really though. If you praise God, He will praise you. Follow Him as a disciple as a really cool dude. Jesus is the best in the West and in the East and in the North and in the East. Like I said before, rocking on the mic and you hear me roar. Roar! Anyway, anyway. 49ers play today, right? I think 49ers got a bye, don't they? Yeah, yeah, you're right. They got a week off. Seattle plays. Seattle's got to win their spot. So, we'll see. We'll see. Everything else going good, Fred? Yeah, good. Mom said no. Mom, I hope you get to feeling better. I did talk to her and she's feeling a little bit better so that's good. Maybe we'll have her at church either next week or the following week. Oh, one more thing. Happy New Year everybody. Hope you all have a good one. We'll be back again next week and take a second peek. Take a second peek. Land the plane. One, two, three. That was a good one, Paul.