https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=CkRjHmU42rw

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. This is our second one for today so I'll post them on different days. I already posted the one Freddie and I did this morning. No you can do an act one on the same day and an act two on the same day. I don't have time this afternoon to post it. Oh you always have time. You made time. You're like the time wanderer. Yeah. And anyway. Anyway, whenever it gets posted it gets posted. Okay. Nancy's in today. Nancy hasn't been around for a while so welcome Nancy. Nancy Nancy's saying hi. They've been commenting about you. Hello everybody. Hope you're having a good weekend and had a good happy Valentine's Day. Anyhow, it looks like Paul's putting me on first here. Unless it's okay. Paul had a sermon this morning on Matthew 5, 21 through 37. Okay. He's serving on the mount. Okay. Now the first part was prayer. And we pray and God doesn't answer our prayers. Very soon sometimes. And the worst is sometimes he says no. More rare. He must say no because it don't happen. That's right. Okay. The other part was we are to obey the law. Now if you go down I-5 and you're going down I-5 85, 95 an hour. Just for you. You know how long that is. You know. Whatever. That's not obeying the law. Okay we gotta wrap this up. We don't have a lot of time. Alright. So that's one thing we shouldn't do. Okay. We can't murder anybody. Of course not. But murder isn't the only thing. Right. We can't slander anybody. We can but you have to ask for it. What's the Greek word you have? The Greek word you have. I didn't have a Greek word. Well what kind of word was it? Araka. Araka. Armaic. Armaic. Armaic. Okay. Alright. Anyhow we are to be kind. Now the hardest part of being kind is to be kind to your enemies. Okay. Thank you for tuning in to the Freddie and Paul show. It's time for you to leave my house. And here we go. I'm supposed to be here. Go find it. A new state of rat. You said that and that's a fact. You got your point across you see. But I'm Freddie B from the 916 for Shigadee. So don't even get mad mom. Because when I'm on the microphone I'm coming like Donkey Kong. I step to you. I step to any MC that wants to challenge me in the whole DC. I am the big daddy that they call Freddie B from the 916G. Mommy might get mad. I don't get sad. I ain't even sin bad. I come up like this. I come up like that. Like Fred Sanford and Son. That's a fact. Pepsi Cola. Drink it too. I want a Pepsi Cola commercial dude. Don't you understand? Man command. We got Paul and he can do all he can. He'll be my side honcho. And we got D'Amato. Don't forget about America's Got Talent because I am the idol. But it's not American Idol you see. It's America's Got Talent. Like 1, 2, 3. I kind of wanted to hear it. Alright let her talk. Let her talk. Oh. I'm just waiting on Gordon. I think I was. You cannot. You have to try to be kind. Now that's the hardest is when you have to be kind to an enemy. You have to be kind to an enemy. And that is the hardest thing. I thought you were supposed to love them. You're supposed to love them. Love one another as you would yourself. You didn't say you were supposed to love your enemies. Love to enemies. Well that's the same thing. No. Okay. Not really. Well maybe not. Okay. Alright let's wrap this up. We've got to land the plane. Now you think if you go to church, if you do all these things, then you're going to be blessed and God's going to fill your cup with blessings. Well. No. Alright. Good works are not going to get us to heaven. She's right. She's right. Okay. Alright. Alright. Let's close the show Paul. Wait a minute. We are done. Gordon is in a hurry. Okay. I don't want to have to take the bus. Okay. Trust, obey, be disciples. Along the way we're going to have suffering. Now this suffering, you know, I'm having suffering and I'm thinking. Oh no. Okay let's end the show Paul. I'm tired. She's being dramatic. No. I don't need no drama on my show. But that suffering, Freddie, the suffering we have. Fine. I don't want to talk about suffering. It's a struggle. I am a positive person. Amen. I am a positive person. I am a positive person. I am the positive outlook. I am decent in order and I have the Christ spirit in me. And I am one seeking first the kingdom of God. Ask and thou shall come to you. Allelu, allelu, Jesus Christ. Ready? Alright. We're ready? Ready mama? One love. One love. Amen. Okay. I was just trying to hear you.