https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=BGODObovUa4

 Alright, welcome to the Freddie and Paul show. Hey Phillip, Jesus man, how you doing? Yeah! Phillip Jesus man is with us this week. Hi Paul as well, how you doing? I'm doing good Fred, how you doing? Well now that I got popped here, I just wondered, guess what? I looked at another place yesterday and I really liked it. Yeah. Anyway, um, but if anybody knows of anything that is... what am I paying now? I don't know. Oh, anyways, he's a Jesus man so he can talk and then I'll talk. Yeah, I've got this magnet that I'm giving away. I've been to Denver and I gave it several away and got orders to make some more. I went to a funeral yesterday and I met a lady that she's going to India and so she's going to take some to India. I brought to them to Australia when I went to Australia. And so that'd be the 17 different countries or 18 different countries that I got my Jesus name. Paul went to a steakhouse and they saw one on the wall. Yep. And after that fantastic. JR Texas Barbecue right here in South Sacramento. Oh I knew where that's at, yeah. South 47. Right. And over by the old camel soup, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I know these things. You do know these things. Right. And I went to Costco and a guy wanted one and so he's going to get one for his mom. So a lot of people like them and not just them for themselves but for their mother or what. So it speaks to people. Okay Paul, who's going to win today? Are the Niners going to win? We get some Bengals? No, it's the Raiders and the Bengals. Raiders and the Bengals? That would be a good game. They're about evenly matched. Bengals had a good game last week. I know who the 49ers are playing. I wish they did. 49ers, they both had some drama in terms of their wide receivers. Antonio Brown going to the Patriots. Yeah, that's bad. Because he couldn't get along with people. Yeah, he didn't like to coach either. No, no. What's his name? Yeah. Oh, come on in. Oh wow. We'll let you through. Scoot over a little bit. I'll be good. We'll move the camera. Alright, scoot over a little bit Fred. What do you want our audience? Then we got, basically we got the A's have been doing good. Yeah. And the Giants have been doing good, Phillip. And what comes up next after? I don't know. We don't have Nancy's sermon report to do because Nancy's not here. Nancy skipped out on church today playing hooky. Or maybe I could tell you. What do you think of the sermon Fred? What I thought is if you sin and ask to be, because you said repent. Yeah. If you repent your sins and ask for forgiveness, God will forgive you. Yeah, I did say that. But you have to prove, you need to learn from your sins. You should learn from your sins. Yeah. From your mistakes. That way you don't have to ask for forgiveness at another point. In other words, learn the first time, not the second time. Well, learn the second time. You have three times to learn. Oh, you have three times to learn. Is that what it says? Yeah, just like baseball. Three strikes you're out at the hole. I'm not sure that's what it says Fred. The Bible says you should forgive somebody 70 times seven. Okay. So more than three. He knows. Yeah, he knows. He's a Jesus man. Yeah. All right. Anything else we got to talk about? You got a rap in you today Fred? Yeah, I'm gonna do a rap. Okay. Here we go. Brother in deep in my partner six foe. Brother in deep in my partner six foe. But Jesus is the one that's got the foe. Rocking like this like Romeo. One, two, three. You know it's me. Freddy D from the SAC. Yeah baby Cali. My eyes chains are blinding you if you looking too long. Like Donkey Kong. Word is on until the break of dawn. All over the restaurant I was on. Feeling fast. Got some Jesus signs. Rocking on the mic like a nursery rhyme. Don't forget about Paul because he stands tall. And he knows it all. He gots it going like Donkey Kong like I said. And yo my name is Fred. His name is Fred. All right. All right. Is that a rap? Yeah. All right. We got to do it. We got to do the one love. One love. Amen. All right. Hallelujah.