https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Dgpt0Co94mQ

 Hi, this is Paul. This video that will come after this little note that's at the front end of it is a video that I primarily made for my church channel. Now again, I've talked about Living Stones Online and Estuary. For the most part, my channel is very estuary and Living Stones Online is very church. Sometimes I will post videos that I'm making for the church channel here. And I do that because the line between Estuary and Living Stones Online is pretty dynamic now. This is a very long video to try to answer the question that I've gotten in my channel a number of times too, which is with the Bible alphabet soup, which translation of the Bible should I read? Now I see this as both an estuary question and a Living Stones Online question because As a Christian, I have no problem reading the Quran because I should know something about it. I have no problem reading the Book of Mormon, so I should know something about it. As a Christian, I have no problem reading the Bhagavad Gita, various other religious texts because I should know something about it, especially if people in my community are dealing with it. But these religious texts are enormously complex and the Bible is as complex as any. And so I get this question a lot, which translation should I read? And this long video, now again, if you're a subscriber to my channel, you're no stranger to long videos. This long video is part of a series called Introduction to the Bible. This is the second in the series. You can find the first one back on the church channel. This long video tries to give a sense of what the Bible is and how it works through history. And so as is common to many of my videos, I'll dabble in some philosophy, I'll dabble in some history, I'll dabble in some church history, and I'll dabble in some biblical studies. And so I just wanted to give the little disclaimer about Living Stones Online an estuary just so this video could perhaps serve as an example of a video which is 80% Living Stones Online and maybe 20 to 40% estuary somewhere in there. So some of you will have no interest in wading into the question of which biblical translation is really the Bible. I think it's a fascinating question. And so if you like my content, you'll probably like this too. Hi, this is Paul. Last week I started a series called Introduction to the Bible. This is going on the Living Stones, Christian, New Form Church channel. Not my, well I might put a copy of this on my other channel. And last week the lesson was on what do we mean by the Bible as the Word of God. Now someone in the comments section asked a question, well which translation should I read? And as I listen to people debate this or comment on it, I often get the sense that they're saying, well one of these Bibles is the real Bible and the others are knockoffs. That's an understandable complaint, but one that requires a whole lot more thought. Now I've just started reading this book on the creation of the making of the King James Bibles called, a book called God's Secretaries. And right there in the preface he gives an introduction to the King James Bible which I thought was helpful. But that virtual anonymity is the power of the book. The translation these men made together can lay claim to be the greatest work in prose ever written in English. That it should be the creation of a committee of people no one has ever heard of and who were generally unacknowledged at the time is the key to its grandeur. It's not the poetry of a single mind nor the effusion of a singular vision nor even the product of a single moment, but the child of an entire culture stretching back to the great Jewish poets and the storytellers of the Near Eastern Bronze Age. That sense of entirely embraced and reimagined past is what fuels this book. The divines of the first century of 17th century England were alert to the glamour of antiquity in ways consciously archaic in phraseology and grammar, meticulous in their scholarship and always looking to the primitive and the essential as the guarantee of truth. Their translation was driven by that idea of a constant presence. The feeling that the riches, beauties, failings and sufferings of Jacobean England were part of the same world as the one in which Job, David or the evangelists walked. Just as Rembrandt a few years later, without any sense of absurdity or presumption, could portray himself as the Apostle Paul, the turban wrapped around his greying curls, the eyes intense and inquiring, the King James translators could write their English words as if the passage of 1600 or 3000 years made no difference. Their subject was neither ancient nor modern, but both or either. It was the universal text. I thought that was a very poetic way of engaging the mysteries of a translation with the perspective of a translation is not merely a translation. But it's very understandable for people to get confused. There's of course the King James Bible, which reigns still supreme in some ways in the religious landscape of our English language world. There's the New American Standard Bible, a rather wooden translation that has certain qualities. Many people enjoy it because of its word association powers that help people sort of get beneath the English language and hope to get some sense of Greek or Hebrew word meanings. There's the NIV, which broke into the conversation in the 1970s, fueled by the Christian Reformed Church and other evangelical scholars who were looking for an alternative to the predominantly mainline translations. There's the ESV, which is an updating, in a sense a similar translation to the NIV, and that it's a response to mainline-ish translations, one that simply came later. There's the New Living Translation, which really isn't a translation at all. There's the New English Translation, which has its pedigree from the internet. And there's the LXX, which people might say, why is 70 in Roman numerals a translation of the Bible? And we'll get into that. The Bible has been translated for thousands of years, and Christianity as a religion embraced its Bible in translation. That's going to be part of the story that we have to dive into. Translation is always controversial, because you cannot translate without interpreting. And at least to our modern minds, we don't want to see an interpretation. We want to see the original article. But that's part of the story of modernity that I've been speaking about in my videos on my own personal channel in terms of how do we really see and what can we see. Which leads usually modernists to ask things like, well, which one is the real Bible? And so we're going to have to wrestle with that question. Now how do you get a Bible? 30, 40, 20, 15 years ago even, many people would go to something like a family bookstore. And you would walk into that place and you would find a whole row of Bibles, Bibles for the housewife, Bibles, the NIV Study Bible, the ESV Study Bible, the Hardware Man Study Bible, the American Life Study Bible, the Study Bible for People with Depression, the Study Bible for People Who Want to Conquer Their Obesity. On and on and on and on, Bibles were produced and repackaged and recovered, but we tended to get them in a store. Christian Book Distributors was selling Bibles through the mail and you could get a wider variety of Bibles through the mail. Then of course along came Amazon and Amazon started as pretty much a bookseller and suddenly you could not only get Bibles but you could get commentaries, you could get whole ranges of things that you couldn't find in your Christian bookstore. So suddenly bookstores started to compete and they would have VeggieTale plush toys and all sorts of other things that you know Bible knickknacks, little plaques on the wall, things with Bible verses and basically servicing Christian communities. On and on this has gone, CBD is still around but they are online. Family bookstores are for the most part closed and gone, which sort of frustrates a lot of church people because you get a lot of church supplies at that. Some larger mega churches would have bookstores on campus usually selling the books of the pastor of that church and a few other authors that the particular church graced with its imprimatur of authority and orthodoxy. Some of this marketplace is inherent in the story of translations and the story of Christianity's relationship with translations and the ideas about what is a translation, what is the truth and how do we know it. Now bookstores were always limited in their offering and the internet for that reason has pretty much displaced it which is why the bookstores are closed. But the Bible and its study is very old indeed and very complex, more complex than probably you can realize and at the end of this video you'll probably have a taste for just how complex the whole matter is. And we have to begin with human communication because we, unlike any other creature we know, are subtle, complex, nuanced and have a range of capacity in communication far beyond we who wield it even ourselves realize. And just the little picture I have up on the screen, you can see some of it there, just the eyes, the mouth, the hand gestures, the clothing, the composition of the photograph. Human communication is enormously complex and enormously subtle and we are amazing creatures at communication and so to be communicated with requires a bandwidth at least as great. We can transfer thoughts and ideas, emotions and information in vastly more ways than anything in the animal kingdom. The human face alone is an instrument of communication unrivaled anywhere in creation that we know of. Body language, gestures, sounds, speech, clothing, you all know this. You know this in the approving look of a lover, in the condescending look of a superior, in almost any imaginable instance we are without even recognizing it, without even knowing exactly how we're doing it, filling ourselves with communications from others. And it comes to us embedded in culture, comes to us in moments in time but as I think the author Adam Nicholson was that the author of God's Secretaries, seemingly timeless. That's us. That's human communication and what we do with it is just amazing. Now human beings have been communicating with each other in many ways for a long time. These are some pictures from the Museum of, I don't know, it probably used to be called Museum of Man and we'll get into some of those, that politics a little bit later in this video but the Museum of Humanity in San Diego, California in Balboa Park. They have these reproductions of these huge rock formations from Mesoamerica, I don't remember just off the top of my head and the text is too small. I think, I believe these were the Mayans and all of these carvings and for most of North American, the history of Europeans in North America, we had no idea what these things are saying and scholars have decoded them to a degree and it is simply full of communication. Pictures, symbols, all sorts of things but they didn't have alphabet. Alphabet would come later, come with Europeans to the Americas. Now these pictures and symbols communicated ideas and concepts and stories and immense arrays of things but not so much in language as we know. Now language obviously comes before a lot of this symbolism and we are enormously powerful in language. One person can communicate ideas, change behavior, change our realities by using words, stories, history. Tonight is the first debate between Donald Trump and Joe Biden. By the time many of you see this video, the debate will be over but everyone will go through all of the words that they use and we've seen many times in the history of contemporary presidential debates that a single word can change the course of history. That's how we are. That is how powerful language is. That's how powerful speech is. I'm now using video and YouTube and communication exhibiting just how powerful all of this is. The Bible is God's Word and again in the last video I talked about that. What do we mean by that? What do we mean by Word? What do we mean by Logos? What is the power of words to reshape our world and drive and change history both in how we look at it in the past and how together we march together into the future. Individual human beings become families with words. Families become clans with words. Clans become tribes. Tribes become nations. Nations become peoples. Peoples become principalities. They become these superhuman constructs by which we have figures like Uncle Sam. Now if I would say to you is Uncle Sam real? You might say well no he's a made up character. I can't go someplace and lay my hands on Uncle Sam but every time you touch a US dollar you touch Uncle Sam. Every time you pay your taxes or abide by the speed limit you profess your belief in Uncle Sam and your submission to Uncle Sam. Uncle Sam is very real indeed. Uncle Sam is a symbolic character of the imaginary which we think oh that's only imagination. That's not real. Oh no it's very very real indeed. Real enough to change your behavior. Real enough to fight wars. to create as we sort of do in this country one mind and that one mind has multiple minds between it below it and those have multiple minds below them and then we get to the individual human being and we discover that we have in many ways many characters and personalities and stories within us and these things sort of fractal up. What facilitates this? Language. Language does this. Now what are letters but an attempt to reproduce language? Why is reproduction of language so important? Letters communicate sounds and so letters are ways for us to record speech and this is why you have court recorders and court recorders don't actually sit there and type English. They type a certain transcription of speech but what they do is they take this full audible nuanced thing that we together you're hearing right now via this recording speech listen this recording and commit it to letters and words and paragraphs and books and by virtue of this someone can reproduce the speech of another. Now this gets very complex because often what we put in books hasn't been spoken it's thoughts and then they get reproduced and often throughout most of human history reading was you would read the text on the page and it would come out your mouth and you would reproduce the speech and then you would hear it with your ears. Some people and they're noted sometimes in the ancient world even as late as Abraham Lincoln some people would read a text and hear it in their heads not recreate speech with it to be heard by the ears. All of these different aspects are important in the whole process. They're so important that even a character like Plato had misgivings about this practice of alphabets and recording language and recording speech yet Plato of course we have his words and he wrote books and so Plato is remembered and his name recognized today because in fact he wrote letters and books were written and now today college students read his writings hear it in their heads don't bother to articulate it and hear it with their ears but all of these layers are important parts of the entire picture of communication and what's going on with this question of biblical translation. So we're reproducing sounds from another time it's a time machine of sorts and place and what that does however is dislocates the speech the speech is out of context a simple answer of yes can be vitally important or perhaps I do but the context of those two little words I do matter greatly in terms of the meaning of those two little words and so reproducing sounds to another time and place dislocates the speech from the broader physical social relational context it is a reduction and reductions limit what is actually communicated and that can be deceptive. Translation out of context affords entirely new insights however if you read something in one context and then read it in another you now have in a sense the collision of two worlds whereby you see the new world in light of at least your perception of the previous world and usually the collision of those worlds create whole new visions and ideas of what is real what is true who are we what are the possibilities what are the downsides. Now this is part of the reason in my last video that we talk about the Bible being God's word I will sometimes hear people say the Bible is the words of God that's that statement requires a lot of thought and a fair amount of consideration and I usually don't use it I usually use the word of God for this reasons why are you saying that the words aren't inspired I'm not saying that at all but we have to be a little bit careful with this question when we get into the question of translations. Now some religious traditions emphasize the words of God they have a dictation theory about their holy texts they believe that their texts were dictated to someone who recorded them on paper and generally speaking when you have traditions of dictated or recorded texts they tend to be resistant to translations because everybody understands that all of the letters and all of the words were taken down as such and so for them to be represented and communicated they must be communicated as such so for example if you really want to know the Quran you'd better learn Arabic because it's in Arabic and there are other religious traditions that have that make similar assertions Christianity does not now even when I say that some of you will know traditions that either come to the edge of this or fully are basically assertive full-blown most of those traditions however run into problem because well are you going to elevate the King James version of the Bible are you going to elevate the Latin Vulgate and very quickly problems develop and so I think it's preferential to talk about the Bible as the word of God but be a little careful about the words of God. Resistance to translation sometimes is lost in translation. My own Christian tradition prefers to speak about organic inspiration and what does that mean that means that the God in Christianity is the author of creation he's the author of history and he's the author of salvation all of this work is authored by God well what do you mean by authored how does that relate to books well clearly I'm working a metaphor and it's a highly complex metaphor God in Christianity is the author of creation history and it's salvation from our rebellion so that's another piece of this and part of this gets into okay let's say we lay our eyes upon an inspired text my eyes are not inspired I don't read perfectly I read through the filters of my own sinfulness I am going to need assistance and help in understanding no matter how divinely inspired a text is that is before my eyes and so organic inspiration asserts that the Bible is God breathed God moved inspired breathed through the authors compilers of the Bible committees scribes that we will never know of all sorts of things conspired to achieve for us the Bible even the translations that we have before us all within their times and places and cultures and languages that produced the outcomes that he wants in fact to produce the book that he wills now I'm going to bring in a an important figure in the history of my own tradition sometimes called Dutch Calvinism because it comes through the the second generation reformer John Calvin John Calvin in his very popular book in the in the reformational period the institutes of the Christian religion played a great emphasis on the work of the Holy Spirit why well John Calvin was a pastor and a scholar and an author he was also a French refugee who was living in Switzerland in in Geneva and it was in and out of there during the period of just in really the second generation of Protestant reformers he was a popular preacher and he wrote the institutes of the Christian religion and a number of sermons whole rafts of commentaries wrote a tremendous amount during his life remember the printing press is fairly new and in some ways the printing press was the internet of his day now he asserted that the Holy Spirit is needed to for us to understand this the Bible correctly and so that feeds into this picture of translations here because even if you're reading the Bible let's say if I use the word the autographs these are the imagined we don't have them the imagined the most original most sublime manuscript of the Bible themselves of the books of the Bible of the parts of the Bible I would assert that even if you had the fullest knowledge of Greek and Hebrew in the culture of the day you would still need the power of the Holy Spirit to work upon us to help us to understand and interpret the Bible correctly so the Holy Spirit guides the readers of the Bible to understand his word this doesn't mean that we don't read without errors but it we should read with humility always trusting that God will guide us not just in terms of the mental images we have while reading the Bible but our application of the Bible our application of the Bible to our lives our application of the Bible to our contemporary situation the place that the Bible is playing in the whole conversation all around us now many scholars agree that the Bible has a prehistory even before pens or quills or all the various ways of writing texts in the past were devoted to paper the Bible contains within it many stories some of them very very ancient stories and these stories were repeated retold reshaped for generation from person to person again this emphasizes organic inspiration the God of creation is the God of history is the God of salvation it's all one process okay so stories were repeated retold reshaped for generation to generation from person to person told and molded and that's part of the reason we see the stories in some of the shapes they are now part of what's powerful about this is that stories are memorable that's why we like stories we have a natural capacity for for narrative we sort of conceive of our lives as stories and that's how we remember things and we remember things that fit into the story and we tend to forget things that don't fit into the story because again reality is far too complex for us to actually be able to apprehend or comprehend much less memorize and so part of the selection process is story and so much of the Bible is story a good deal of the Bible is poetry more than many of us recognize well why poetry ancient song these are all ways of keeping words faithfully remembered and also poignantly presented because there's a sort of natural error checking built into poetry because well in Hebrew poetry you've always got sort of these couplets and and the words and the concepts are supposed to cohere and so you'll in fact find that much many much of the Hebrew scriptures is written in poetry but it's written in Hebrew poetry and that poetry is again part of linguistic error correction in order to maintain the fidelity of oral traditions through time even though of course oral traditions are also at play in the community processes by which texts are shaped now in the story of Israel the Temple of Solomon was a very big deal the Temple of Solomon became the epicenter of the religious life of the Hebrews now part of the story of the Old Testament that you can read in books like well Exodus judges first and second Samuel first and second Chronicles first and second Kings is and then in many of the Hebrew prophets is the struggle over well where should the God of Israel be worshiped how should the God of Israel be worshiped just last Sunday preached on the second commandment you shall not make for yourself a graven image over time it's quite clear that the cult now we don't mean that as in terms of a modern cult but the religious activities the cultic activities of sac of bringing sacrifice of prayers all of these things became increasingly centralized in the temple in Jerusalem the only place where prescribed offering should be given much later in the story unlike Abraham and Jacob and Isaac give all these sacrifices all over the place early in the book of Judges people are doing sacrifices on local shrines backyards on and on this tended to lead to other things the centralization of Israelite religion was fundamental for many aspects of its development and so this eventually was centralized at the temple and and really the only proper place to do sacrifices would be at the temple although all other sacrificial places were seen as suspect well the temple was destroyed 586 587 BC by Nebuchadnezzar and the Babylonians this presented a crisis how can you continue to worship God if you don't have the the prescribed place and the prescribed implements you're not able to perform the prescribed ritual well it's quite clear that there were annals and documents and very ancient books and writings and stories that the Israelites had well prompted probably by the Babylonian exile they began to accumulate these writings and reshape and remold and do everything that they needed in order for the people of God to stay together remember we talked a little bit before about language the power of language to take all kinds of individuals and create a family and then a clan and then a tribe and then a nation and then a people for a people to go on through history to have their own story to become something like Uncle Sam and imaginative people and we talked about for example you'll hear politicians tonight you'll hear the presidential candidates keep talking about the American people as if we're all thinking one thing well that's what language does and and when nations act in a sense that's what they're doing and so the crisis of the destruction of Jerusalem and the destruction of the temple was how can the people continue to be a people now the book the Torah the law and the prophets the law the prophets and the writings what would become the Hebrew scriptures was the answer to this question the the book the Torah the first five books the prophets almost all the rest of the other books than the writings Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes Song of Songs all of these and Daniel Hebrews that the Jews often put Daniel in with those writings these all become the foundation for the people not only their thought lives but the practice and so what develops are the people of the book Hebrews compiled this material devoted it to writing and established community practices around the material compiled the books into libraries scrolls could only sold so much and so scrolls got bigger and bigger eventually technology afforded putting loose leaf paper into books and the Bible basically means the book it is the book and so now suddenly you have the proliferation of of all of these things and for example in a in a synagogue today you can visit a Jewish synagogue and they have the Ark which is up in front and the scrolls are in the Ark and if you think about the symbolic way in which the Ark preserved humanity from Noah's flood the Ark in the front of the synagogue preserves the scrolls from the flooding chaos of the world and the book preserved the people from the flooding chaos of the world and so what you had in the synagogue were prayers songs readings interpretations and by this devotion to the book the people could survive the Babylonian captivity the people could survive and maintain their identity they didn't have Uncle Sam of course that's the American picture they had themselves the people of the book the people of God and that's how transcending each individual human life together they could go through history this created in many ways the people after the Babylonians were destroyed by the Persians or taken over by the Persians Cyrus had a different vision for religious how to manage the various religions of the conquered peoples and so he funded the reconstruction of the temple in Jerusalem and you can read the stories of Ezra Nehemiah and other places in the Old Testament how they came back and the temple was reconstructed and sacrifices were re-engaged and there was a lot of local politics going on between the people who were left in the land and and the people who had been established in the land by previous conquests like the the Assyrians and the Babylonians and eventually the temple was reconstructed and sacrifices were offered but the initial Babylonian captivity changed the practices of the Jews forever because only a remnant returns to the land and in the diaspora or the scattering of the people amongst the cities of the great empires that had conquered Israel the Jewish people continued to practice their faith in synagogue form there's a lot of discussion about this but for the most part the conservative Jews would would not do sacrifices in the new land the service of the book the worship by the people through the worship of the people of the book through the synagogue worship that in some ways at least at this point during the second temple period was alongside but sacrifices could be done in Jerusalem but the other things would happen in the many places throughout the Persian Empire and then the Greek Empire and then the Roman Empire and various empires ongoing through history well in the Romans would destroy the second temple and then it would revert back to synagogue worship but synagogue practice continued alongside temple worship most Jews were scattered throughout the ancient empires and so they would make trips pilgrimages and such to Jerusalem for festivals now in a little before the birth of Christ there were a number of scholars during the Greek period Alexander the Great of course conquered the world well didn't conquer the world according to us but conquered the world according to the people that were living in the midst of the world there's the flexibility of the word world in that and he unified the world at least a certain portion of the world around Greek culture and Greek language Greek became the trade language of this portion of the world and people would have their own tribal language they might have variants of tribal language languages and accents in different places but any educated person would work in Greek now there were some Jewish scholars in Alexandria Alexandria is in Egypt it was named after Alexander the Great it was one of the most important cities of the world at that time and the story goes that 70 scholars how do you write 70 in in Roman numerals LXX which became the abbreviation 70 scholars 70 scholars translated the Hebrew scriptures into Greek now this is an important milestone because a lot of the Hebrew texts that most contemporary translators use to translate the Hebrew scriptures we use the the Masoretic text which is the Hebrew text but this translation from about the first century before Christ is handy because it gives us some clues into how they were reading the text then and what texts they had available to them then now this gets us into something which is hard for us to appreciate that the printing press is a relatively modern invention and almost all books throughout most of human history had to be copied by hand and whereas they had meticulous ways of trying to ensure accuracy through copying and copying could be enormously accurate copying produces variations just as oral traditions produce variations and so the Septuagint this early translation of the Bible into Greek is a very useful tool for scholars to get a sense of what was happening in the minds of these scholars in Alexandria why did they choose the Greek words that they chose in Alexandria and so this is an important tool and in fact this translation of the Bible would become a very important thing for the history of Christianity so the Jews continued to to use the Bible in Hebrew and even today young Jewish men and women are trained in the Hebrew language and they go to Hebrew school and they're taught to read the scriptures in the Hebrew scriptures in their original language and if so if you visit a synagogue you will hear a lot of Hebrew being spoken because it's the worship is being conducted in the original language now Jesus and his followers I'm just gonna touch a little bit on Christian theology I do a lot that a lot more of that obviously in my sermons and my Sunday school classes Christians believe that Jesus replaces the temple the Gospels talk about the curtain of the temple being torn in two Jesus talks about destroy this temple in three days I will raise it up and his listeners I think quite intentionally on Jesus part connect Jesus body with the temple Jesus curses the fig tree Jesus clears the temple he overturns the money changers these are all symbolic representations of Jesus replacing the temple by the sacrifice of his body replacing the sacrifice of of animals on the altar of the temple and the book of Hebrews in the New Testament makes that quite clear Jesus resurrection announces that a new age has begun not a one general revelation at the end of time but the beginning of that revelation now in Jesus as the first fruits of that revelation and that that drew many in Jesus day to say we are anticipating the resurrection and now living in an age which is already and not yet of this new age that Jesus inaugurates with his resurrection Jesus then ascends to heaven which is the control room of earth that's how the ancients understood heaven to be when Jesus is raised to the right hand of God the Father Jesus is administrating the rule of God on earth now if you begin the book of Revelation you'll see Jesus is holding things like the seven stars or what are those seven stars well astrologically those seven stars or the seven planets that that people watch to say well this is determining what's happening in the world and so in the book of Revelation when Jesus is holding the seven stars it's a way of saying that Jesus is Lord Jesus is ruling over history Jesus is ruling over creation right now Jesus is enthroned and ruling now Jesus promises his Holy Spirit to his disciples which arrives at Pentecost Jesus changes the language and transform it and this is one of the crucial pivot points with respect to Christianity and well what will become Christianity and what will become Judaism because very much the followers begin by believing that they are the continuation and the fulfillment Jesus is the fulfillment of the story of Israel in fact in Acts chapter 1 after the resurrection Jesus is surrounded by his disciples and they say to him now will you restore the kingdom to Israel that question had some very specific content in terms of the expectations and what the disciples had in mind Jesus pivots then and says it's not for you to know the times or the hours but you will receive power when my Holy Spirit comes upon you and you will be my witnesses and the church is marched out into the world with its mission now Jesus 12 disciples were 12 Jewish men from the Galilee region with close ties to Jerusalem because Jesus when he comes down to Jerusalem always seems to be saying staying with friends we may well imagine that many of the people the disciples many of which were middle-class small business owners when when they would go down to Jerusalem for festivals they would probably stay with families Jews throughout the diaspora likely had family ties maybe even property around Jerusalem why because if you were serious about your religion you would travel to Jerusalem semi-regularly to participate in the feasts and so what you had in Jerusalem was sort of a an amalgamation of the Jewish world that was the epicenter that was the the beating heart of Judaism in the Roman Empire and the Jews some estimates are that the Jews were roughly 10% of the population of the Roman world so they were they were a significant minority in the Empire they had some special special status a la Julius Caesar a lot of stories about that and so Judaism as we call it they didn't call it that but as we call it had special status in the Empire and was recognized and they they had some legal exemptions by which they didn't need to defile themselves by participating and what every other Roman would have to participate in in terms of civic cults and local cults and local temples and all of those kinds of things this later would become an issue with respect to Christians because Christians didn't have those same legal exemptions that the Jews enjoyed in the Empire but where we are in the story right now is many Jews would travel regularly to Jerusalem and we can hear about that in the book of Acts when it's described that well there's this miracle of tongues and people are hearing in translation the preaching of Peter and the prophesying by the people on which the Holy Spirit fell they were hearing it in their own tongues so again right at the beginning of Christianity we have this blessing of translation and there's a list here how then can each of us hear in our native language Parthians Medes and Elamites residents of Mesopotamia Judea and Cappadocia Pontus and Asia Phrygia and Pamphylia Egypt and parts of Libya near Cyrene now some of these individuals were today we would think of it now they didn't think in these terms they didn't have genetics or those kinds of categories then some of them were some of them were ethnically Jewish or genetically Jewish some were some were incorporated into the nation by way of what we would think of today as conversion and there were ceremonies for that for men it involved it involved circumcision there were also in the Empire many God fears people not who didn't have Jewish biological heritage but became interested in the Jewish people in the Jewish religion and were participating to one degree or in the synagogues that were dotted throughout the major cities of the Roman Empire and so it's quite likely that some of those people were in Jerusalem as well and actually a lot of this population would would become the Christian Church in that gradual transformation from sort of a Jewish out group into a what we today think of a religion distinct from the other religions and if you if you read the book of Acts you'll see how the Apostle Paul will go to all of these synagogues he will preach in them and some people will listen to him and say tell me more about this resurrected Jesus and other people will listen to him and say you've really got to get out of here because you're corrupting our tradition if you imagine that theological fights or fights about the Bible and interpretation are new they're not new at all this is basically a standard part of any religious tradition that is shaped by texts okay so Jews from around the Empire on the day of Pentecost come to Jerusalem for the feasts and they've heard about Jesus Jesus has made some waves there in fact because this region is the epicenter John the Baptist a little before Jesus had made significant waves and groups of followers of John the Baptist had in fact spread throughout the Roman Empire and they're around even to the second and third century after Christ the on the day of Pentecost there's the miracle of tongues and they hear about Jesus in their own language it's a sort of a miraculous translation many from the diaspora were added to the Christian community in that day and again it's hard for us to recognize they themselves might not have recognized are they are they are they Jews or are they Christians and again those categories weren't present to them like they are to us today now generally speaking the Jews that were spread out throughout the the cities of the Roman Empire tended to be more wealthy than the Jews that were living in Judea and Jerusalem and so the diaspora Jews were an important source of revenue and for the for the people living in Jerusalem and the temple was in fact for that in that case an important source of revenue for the entire economy but the temple was also very important for the maintenance of themselves as a people to for for the Jews in the Roman Empire they had homes families in Jerusalem and widows it seems would resettle in Jerusalem you know we think of it in retirement but if you're deeply religious well you want to be by the temple and maybe you've lived for years making a fair amount of money so that you no longer have to work and your family can support you and so they'll buy a house in Jerusalem and install grandma in the house and she'll run it and take care of it while the family will make trips back and forth and back and forth that's a very believable scenario and so it appears that some of these widows became Christians while some of these widows from other places in the Empire while most of the initial converts to Jews to to Jesus and those who were following him were from the Galilee and so then we read in the book of Acts that a conflict arises in those days when the numbers of disciples were increasing the Hellenistic Jews these are Jews from other places in the Roman Empire among them complained against the Hebraic Jews these were Jews from the Galilee and Judea those those are names of provinces in the Roman Empire were overlooked in the daily distribution of food the church was collecting a lot of their property and making sure that all of these widows were taken care of and some were saying hey there's inequity the Hebraic Jews are being better taken care of than the Greek-speaking Jewish widows well why would that be well because almost all of the church leaders are family members of these Hebraic Jews and well the family members probably weren't as present for the there weren't as many of these Hellenistic Jews and well they want to deal with this it would not be so the 12 these are the Apostles and at the head of the church the 12 gathered all the disciples together and said it would not be right for us to neglect the ministry of the Word of God tells you what these witnesses were doing they were rehearsing the stories of Jesus they were interpreting the Hebrew scriptures in live Jesus they were doing all this work and this is called the ministry of the Word we can see the elements of synagogue mentality and practice at the basis of this it would not be right for the 12 gathered it would not be right for us to neglect the ministry of the Word of God in order to wait on tables in other words there's a differentiation of task brothers and sisters choose seven men from among you who are known to be full of the Spirit and wisdom we will turn this responsibility over to them and we'll give our attention to prayer in the ministry of the Word this proposal pleased the whole group and they chose Stephen a man full of faith and the Holy Spirit and Philip procurus on Nick on Nickanor Timon Parmen Parmenas and Nicholas from Antioch a convert to Judaism now pay attention to this group they all have Greek or Roman names Philip who is Philip Philip is the father of Alexander it's a Greek name Stephen well Stephen and and some of these are quite Roman names and here ones even a convert so right away well and then we're gonna say well they're gonna start waiting on tables well very quickly they become leaders in the community and they're preaching and what language do imagine they're preaching in they're probably preaching in Greek and what language do they read the Hebrew scriptures in they're probably reading it in Greek and when they quote the Hebrew scriptures what language are they quote what book are they what translation are they quoting it from the LL the LXX the Septuagint and to very get quickly get the picture that very early on in the story of the church the church is working through translation begins at the day of Pentecost and continues to flourish from there now Stephen gains preeminence and in fact Luke in the book of Acts speaks of Stephen he borrows terms that he used of Jesus in the book of Luke so the seven named deacons help with the distribution they all have Greek or Roman ish names and they're Jews quite likely born in the Empire one in fact is a convert is somebody converted into Judaism but now he's come to Jerusalem and he's become convinced that Jesus is the Messiah and resurrected from the dead and the inaugurated reign of Christ has begun and this is all beginning and so he sees this very much in line with the Jewish story that he is inherited so they also begin to teach now this starts another little problem in Jerusalem between as we'll see played out in the book of Acts between those Jews who listen to this new story of Jesus and his resurrection and think this is a corruption this is a corruption of the true path and others say no this is the path itself now bear in mind the temple is still standing there so you still have sort of this two-phase worship at the temple worship ministry of the word notice the language now ministry is what is that that service and again if you look at the sermon I preached last Sunday this you shouldn't have no other gods before me you shall not bow down to them or and then the word in Hebrew is can be translated worship can be translated serve it can be translated till the field it's a version of which becomes servant and in fact so you see that the book replaces the altar sacrifice Jesus replaces the temple you see all of this is happening sort of underneath the surface there they're they're they're they're they're building it up in language and well some of the diaspora Jews who are in Jerusalem are objecting to this new language and this new group of Jesus followers and a conflict arises and Stephen has been saying some of these things about Jesus that Jesus replaces the temple and replaces you know at Jesus trial it was brought up destroy this temple in three days we will build it up now many of these diaspora Jews are zealous that's a very important word read NT Rice NT Wright's biography of the apostle Paul they're zealous and protecting the temple because the temple is the the beating heart of their people of their identity of everything and here's Stephen he is he is he is demoting the holy place now at the beginning of the book of acts you find well the apostles in the temple courts teaching and preaching so that's part of the whole live conversation but some of these Jews from other places in the empire have they been circumcised are they are they keeping today we would say are they keeping kosher but that's that's rabbinic Judaism are they are they following the laws are they are they keeping Torah are they doing the right thing there's a little suspect but and so and so with this it seems that the that the the need to maintain themselves in utmost purity and that's part of the pharisaic tradition i don't mean that in the a pejorative sense in any means this comes to a climax quite reasonably between Hellenistic Jews who are against the teaching of Jesus and these Hellenistic Jews who are in favor in the teaching of Jesus and this arises in the stoning of Stephen which is in the book of acts and this man Saul who we'll later call Paul is right there holding the cloaks giving approval to the stoning of Stephen they are trying to stamp out this heretical sect of their religion and get rid of it and we know that the this conflict goes along cultural linguistic lines because these Hebraic apostles stay in the city the heat's not on them but these Greek-speaking converts flee the city but when they flee what do they do they preach what language are they likely preaching in Greek what what they're they're basing themselves because they see themselves as heirs of the tradition of the Jewish people and so they're they're preaching and you can find lots of sermons in the New Testaments and Paul's letters and other letters and the book of acts they're all based on well they're people of the book this is the ministry of the word and so that's what they're doing and so the church spreads and we find this in one of the most important cities north of Judea and Galilee in Antioch Antioch what is Antioch Antioch is named after Antiochus this is again back to the Alexandrian and the different little sub-empires by his generals that form in the area now those who had been scattered by the persecution that broke out when Stephen was killed traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch preaching the word only among the Jews because that's what they considered themselves and that's what they did in the synagogues and and that's what happened but as we had seen in the Jewish diaspora and in the synagogues other people were watching and listening and some were attracted to it and wanted to learn more. Some of them however men from Cyprus and Cyrene who were used to living in this very cosmopolitan world went to Antioch and began to speak to Greeks also now again when the New Testament says Greeks there they're not thinking about someone who is ethnically Greek necessarily might be but there's someone who is predominantly a citizen of the empire someone who moves around seamlessly through this eastern part of the Roman empire and they speak in Greek and they read in Greek and Greek concepts are around because remember Alexander the Great had had colonized this whole area and so they're arguing and talking and sharing to Greeks but these people are not necessarily god-fearers who have been in the synagogues nor are they circumcised and some of these Greeks begin to say yeah we we we're convinced of Jesus' resurrection and and we want to participate in this too. Well what does that mean? What's supposed to happen now? Telling them the good news about Jesus' resurrection about the Lord Jesus about their God who ascended to heaven and is ruling the world and holds the seven stars in his hand who is Lord of the world. I thought Caesar was Lord of the world. No he's over Caesar he's over everything oh and more and more people become convinced of this. The Lord's hand was with them. What does that mean? They were effective more and more people come to believe this and a great number of people believed and turned to the Lord and start well what do they do when they're a Christian? Well there's some moral expectations and they participate in what increasingly it was synagogue worship but now is increasingly sort of transformed into these other services that are happening and they're meeting in people's homes and so basically what you have in Antioch is something of a gentile synagogue. Now to have a a real synagogue in a town you needed 10 Jewish men and they would become sort of the stakeholders and then you could have a synagogue. When we get to when we meet um a little bit later when we meet Lydia we will discover that there's no synagogue but there's some women who have been convinced. Now it was a little easier for women to participate because they didn't need circumcision and um yeah ancient world no anesthesia uh cutting off that foreskin as an adult male. Yeah you're really down on that religion if you're circumcised that's that's a really big deal and so then we find these these women out by the river and they're led by a woman Lydia and that's a little bit later in the book of Acts and I wrote a blog post about that quite a few years ago. But so Jewish Christians in Jerusalem didn't quite know what to do with this because how what what category do we think of them? Should they should they be circumcised? Are they going to have a synagogue? But there's other other synagogues that are kicking us out and there's resistance there and and so they send up Paul and Barnabas and say well you we trust you two I mean you're bona fides in our realm so you go up there and sort this stuff out and it's an Antioch that well the news of this reached the church in Jerusalem and they sent Barnabas to Antioch when he arrived and saw what the grace of God had done he was glad and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with all their hearts he was a good man Barnabas full of the Holy Spirit that's what it's been said of Stephen before and faith and a great number of people were brought to the Lord so Barnabas goes up there and the thing just gains momentum and then Barnabas I need help um um who could help me? This guy Saul he he yeah he participated but boy does he know his stuff and he's powerful and he's convincing so let's bring him there so he went to Tarsus to look for Saul that's where Saul was from and when he found him he brought him to Antioch said you need to come with me and you need to help me okay so for a whole year Barnabas and Saul met with the church and taught a great number of people the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch because they weren't Jews they didn't know what to call them and and and so they're following Christos the Messiah that's Christos is the Greek word for Messiah and so they must be Christians and that's for the first time what they were called there so they took the ministry of the word from synagogue practice probably in Hebrew for the Jews who began to believe in Jesus but Gentiles didn't know Hebrew and they weren't being circumcised so they used the Greek translation from Alexandria and that was the ministry of the word that was the word of God to them this translation by the the 70 scholars in Alexandria just a century or so before and they added to this synagogue worship also the meal of Jesus do this in remembrance of me the breaking of the bread and the drinking of wine and there's a whole lot of scholarship and debate about you know was this formally ritualized because of course Paul writes in the book of Corinthians it was this and it's a very complex cultural mix because you Gentiles who come into the church don't have all of these prescriptions and care that these the Jewish synagogues had developed over a long period of time and so that's a lot of the sorting out that has to happen in the early church but you have synagogue practice you add Jesus meal and you add to that the teaching of the apostles and now they're passing around letters from apostles so letter from Paul letter from Peter letter from John here other documents being passed around and there's a great sifting out that happens and preachers coming from other places and they have to be hosted and you know it's a very live situation it's a very it's very organic it's all bubbling up and everything is sort of being sorted out as they go and some of these letters become what we today call the New Testament and of course what language are they in they're in Greek the practice of these new churches it's happening in Greek now Northup Fry who has some very interesting lectures on the King James Bible we sort of started talking about the King James Bible notes that Christians read their Bible in translation and this is fairly unique it's more unique than most of you realize because many of us are very accustomed to reading things in translation many religion the quality the spiritual quality of the book is connected to the words again dictation theory theory they are replicated in a particular speech and so the speech has to be replicated but Christians believe that the Holy Spirit is helping with the translation we see that at the day of Pentecost and it's part of the process from start to finish and so not only do we believe in organic inspiration but we believe in in a sense organic movement and development of the church as the church goes forward and this gets us into this question of the Bible well what is the Bible it's it's in some ways not just the book itself it's what God does through the book because again we can read these words and replicate the speech and even if you know Greek and Hebrew and can read a manuscript from maybe even a very early manuscript from the third or fourth century after Christ and replicate the words in its original language there's a whole lot else going on I'm not a first century Jew raised in a particular time and place and so right from the start the book of Acts does and John Calvin picks this up that the work of the Holy Spirit in the midst of this communication process is is what's really most important and vital now that doesn't mean that translations don't have strengths and weaknesses they they certainly do and we're going to talk about some of those but but it also means that well God can make up for our own weaknesses and do work through his word that we can't necessarily anticipate it does mean that whether it's the Hebrew or the Greek or the King James or the NIV or the ESV etc etc it's all the Bible because God is working through the book and we are studying very closely with the book and it's the ministry of the word but what exactly happening is again moved by this God the God of creation the God of redemption the God of history moves by his spirit through this process and so when people say well that's not a real Bible yeah it's a real Bible but it's it's not just the book and so we see as we've seen in the story God uses emperors like Alexander and later Constantine and he uses scholars like these like these Jewish scholars that translated the Hebrew scriptures into what we call the Septuagint the 70 and he uses translators God uses all of these things to accomplish the work that he chooses now this this story continues because most of what we've been talking about has been the eastern part of the Roman Empire but there's a western part and the Roman Empire had two languages Greek was the common language in the east and Latin was the common language in the west and so you know if you were to be a cosmopolitan member of the Roman Empire you would want to learn Latin and Greek and probably other local languages and perhaps languages from your own ethnicity and it wasn't uncommon even today it's not uncommon it is in North America where we're fairly mono we're fairly you know one language we work with English and English has become a world language in many respects but people managed many languages now obviously in drips and drabs the Bible would get translated into Latin and some of the Gospels were translated first in Latin and other things would get translated in Latin and these books would circulate by 382 the bishop of Rome wanted something a little bit better and so well commissioned Jerome who was a who was a scholar to write a better Bible to translate a better Bible and Jerome was quite industrious in this and he's a very interesting character you can you know he's worth he's worth reading about and learning from he's a very interesting guy and he he comes up with a translation of the Bible it's not just all from him but he does most of it and from from Hebrew he worked from Hebrew text and he had to learn Hebrew so that he could translate the Latin and then also Greek into Latin and that became known as the Vulgate and for the Western Latin part of the empire that really became the Bible so again we see Christians working from translations in the eastern part of the empire in the Greek speaking world they could work from the the the Old Testament and then as the as the list of what was authorized as canon as these are faithful representations of the work of the Spirit in our lives as that list became formulated you had the Bible in Greek in the east and the Bible in Latin in the west that difference in language is going to continue to shape the churches in these in these different places and after basically at towards at the beginning of the second millennium there's a split between the Greek churches and the Latin churches and the bishop of the bishop of Rome basically says I'm the head of the church and the patriarchs of the Greek church say we we're authorities too and a fight breaks out and there's the great schism and they they excommunicate each other and in a sense the church splits and there's some doctrinal things that are different because different because them partly because of the language and some other things and so different traditions develop language shapes theology and again you might say well well that shouldn't be but again remember the story of our God he's the God of creation he's the God of history he's the God who works through time he's the God who works through books he's the God who works through relationships he's the God who works through politics now the bishop of Rome as Roman Empire see there's lots of political layers to this bishop of Rome's becomes Pontus and that used to be a title that Roman emperors had he's the bridge between the divine world the world of heaven and the secular world down here below and so well these two traditions start going in different directions you have the Greek and you have the Latin now a lot of time will pass and there will be crusades and Italians will make money transporting people to the holy land and people still want to go to Jerusalem and so there's a lot going on and all of this back and forth between Greek between Latin and Greek and East and West whereas many things had been forgotten then you get you get Italian you get the Italian Renaissance and suddenly they're all excited about ancient Latin and ancient texts and languages and books because books are these powerful things and so suddenly Aristotle is is brought back over to the West and people are excited about Aristotle and scared about Aristotle and so Aristotle is going to have to be incorporated into the story and Aquinas does that European scholars are increasingly finding these ancient texts and paying more and more attention to these ancient texts and late late um in the late medieval world beginning of the modern world you have the invention of the printing press that's going to change the world there's a lot of enthusiasm about Latin sources and Greek sources and all of these scholars are now studying these things and now with the printing press what had been dusty manuscripts and monasteries dotted throughout people start hunting these texts down and they want to print these texts and sell these texts to other scholars and share them among scholars now once you start comparing text and you're reading them closely what do you begin to notice well copy mistakes you have an understanding of text and well at some point someone's going to take that vulgate Jerome's translation which is very old indeed as has been the Bible in the West and start comparing it to Hebrew Old Testament and Greek Old Testament and they're going to start evaluating Jerome's manuscripts Erasmus of Rotterdam and you can read about Erasmus in this really terrific book fatal discord Erasmus Luther and the fight for the western mind by Michael Massing Erasmus of Rotterdam very interesting character nice biography of him in the book here creates a multi-language edition of the Bible with the Greek text and the Vulgate side by side and notes about their differences and he'll go on to do more and more columns and different translations and different texts now with the printing press this stuff starts getting passed around and people start men start noticing that there's some when Jerome was translating the Vulgate he was doing it for the church and so little things would get added and little things would be shaped that were doctrinally important but they weren't in older editions of the text which well so then what is the source of authority well it's it's coming from the witness of the apostles but is Jerome an apostle or is he trying to translate John the Gospels Paul Peter what are we to do with these differences now Erasmus didn't push that but it raises questions about the Bible and the church and their relationship does the Bible create the church or does the church create the Bible is the Bible a teaching tool created by the church in order to construct the faithful in the dogmas of the church or is the Bible the witness of the apostles that is intended to critique later developments of theology within the church well Erasmus's books become wildly popular and one Augustinian monk named Martin Luther is all over them and he's terribly excited and he's reading these things because he wants to know the truth he wants to get back beyond 1500 years of church history to the very lips of the apostles to to their witness to the the pure spring source because all of us know that when when a river comes out of the mountain it's pure and clear but as it flows through the increasingly urbanized cities of Europe well the water gets worse and worse and muddier and muddier and each each each town throws its refuge in the stream and so we want to get back to the sources and so let's let's take well now we've got multiple Greek texts and there's little differences let's find better Greek texts and let's work on these differences and what are we going to do with this with this with this Vulgate and with the well Jerome certainly thought he was speaking the truth and being helpful but some of these manuscripts that we know are before don't have those now Martin isn't just pressing these issues he's got a number of ways in which he says you know our church is letting down the people he's both a scholar and a pastor and so he posts 95 theses on the door of the church in latin in order for scholars who also speak latin because that's the language of scholarship in the west for other scholars to debate and discuss them well some of the theology students translate them into german and make a pamphlet out of it on the printing press it's like they posted it on a 4chan or some other internet bulletin board because these ideas that luther has are explosive and the church is very prickly and very touchy because they're always trying to put down heads of the church heresy okay and so well martin you've got to come and answer for these things and martin's kind of a prickly fella himself and he says um i'm reading the bible and i think the doctrines of the church should be critiqued by the bible and so if there's any way that these writings of the church fail according to the bible and i'm now reading it in greek and learning hebrew and i'm doing all of this work to understand the clear source from its the clear source and purity from the beginning so i'm going to critique you mother church and you'd better not shut me up well there have been some practices of shutting people up who would do things like this jan haas a century before not too far from where luther was was burned at the stake for asking similar questions as luther and there are other other people who've been asking these questions for a while and people were dissatisfied with the corruption of the clergy and germans were dissatisfied for all the money they were sending to italy for the for the art projects and the construction projects of of rome that was trying to embody the glamour of ages past now because rome was kind of a rome had been neglected it was sort of a it was sort of a let's call it a neglected museum that people were trying to you know bring back to life and but all that tax money and all that all that all that land that was held by the church and not paying taxes so the local princes and there are all these political economic cultural feuds going back and forth and well luther's prince who had recruited him for wittenberg and bought all those relics and had built that university and was trying to make wittenberg a place to be was not about to see luther burned at the stake so he basically kidnaps luther and locks him up in a castle luther wasn't terribly happy there he was he was kind of annoyed but his life was being saved and what is a scholar to do when you give him all sorts of time well he writes he's got a lot of things he's chew on and he gets angry and angrier about this and starts writing these texts and they get smuggled out to printers and and printers are loving it because luther's just giving him the text these luther's not getting paid and printers are selling copies like crazy and here's the thing about book burning you can't out burn a printing press burn my books go ahead i'll sell more and so the printers keep printing and printing and printing and luther's the best-selling writer and erasmus feels a little feels a little slighted because you know erasmus is a loyal member of the church that just wants a little bit of refinement and some academic conversations but luther is setting the world on fire sometimes literally not luther himself but luther's followers and everything is being disrupted and one of the things that luther does is make a translation of the bible why well europe has been urbanizing and people have been getting education and more and more people are reading and the price of books has gone down because of the printing press and so luther says well it's the priesthood of all believers all believers should relate directly to god and and believers should read the bible with their own eyes and not everybody can read and so well maybe worship services should be done in a language that people can understand and the bible should be written in a language that people can understand and so luther creates a translation of the bible in german and of course the printers are more than happy to sell it literacy rates are increasing in europe cities are growing education is improving the printing press makes books far more affordable luther believes that christians should read the bible for themselves and study it on their own and in fact people start reading the bible and listening to preachers and think did you get that reading right suddenly everybody's a scholar everybody's a biblical interpreter this is a very dangerous idea as alistair mcgrath notes in his wonderful little book christianity's dangerous idea roman church authorities knew the hazards of this the bible is big and complex and there could be a proliferation of interpretations and and and the church authorities knew this and luther was he naive because luther sort of thought once we get the bible out there people will read it and the and the the corruptions that the church has has let come in they'll be washed away and we'll refine the church and we'll all be one well even luther and karl stadt and some of his other friends couldn't agree on necessarily what should be done and suddenly there's this proliferation of interpretations and readings and applications in the churches and in some ways the the religious authority said well we told you so but you couldn't put that genie back in the bottle and everything lets loose in europe part of what happens though is german well what is german german sort of a family of languages and you have all these little have all these different ways of speaking germans and all these different places and towns and from what i've told you still sort of have that but now once luther puts it into words remember what words are again they're they're basically how to speak it's recording before you had cassette tapes or video tapes or youtube and so what what what these books do with the printing press and the bible is suddenly languages are being regularized and so what we find is that these bibles become tremendously popular now everybody's reading the bible in their own language the printed bible starts to regularize language and these copies of the language begin forming and shaping these languages so that now they become instead of latin having to speak latin to do commerce or or having to speak latin to do theology or law now suddenly these vernaculars are standardized and can be used for these things and we also are going to see the rise of nation states and so we'll have the french speaking french and the spanish speaking spanish and the english speaking english and germany it's going to take a much longer time to coalesce as a nation but we wouldn't have these nation states perhaps if we didn't have the bible not in the shape that we have them now this changes the world so this happens with other languages too and well there was there was the tindale translation of the bible in english but well the king james version and again this book that i just started reading partly prompted by doing this well this is going to shape the english language and it's going to shape politics and it's going to shape the church and it's going to shape everything just as we saw the latin greek difference shape things well now we're going to see the different languages in the bible in different languages shape different churches around the world the bible shapes the language which shapes the world and the language is going to shape theology so for many even in the church today the bible in the english language world is the king james that bible won supremacy its phrases form our language it's it's the common tongue among multiple denominations and some people joke about the bible and its original king james and some of the dynamics that i see in churches around the king james aren't that different from some of the dynamics that were around the volgate at the reformation period that people are like oh we've got all these smarter ideas from original text no the language is the volgate don't differ from it well you have to again ask the question well what is the bible is it a book or is it that which happens around the book these are very difficult questions there's an implicit theology of language that is embedded in these translations and that these periods of time they didn't have much theory of language you had some with aristotle and some some philosophers but they get built into translations now remember the question that we started out trying to answer is pastor what translation should i read well i want you to understand what kind of a question you're really asking that this thing is tied to all sorts of things and instead of say raising the stakes to get the answer exactly right i want you instead to trust in the power of the holy spirit to use the bible that you have you and then maybe also some ideas about well where you can go further than that so communities what happens is that communities translate for their needs protestant idea of bibles creating the church prompts communities to start translating bibles according to their theological interpretations and so this this this thing that happened with gerome that erasmus points out and luther starts complaining about the protestants start doing too and of course the roman catholics feeling a little spurned about having lost huge chunks of the church start saying aha i told you so i told you this would happen okay fair enough but it's always happening and you see this tanaq is the jewish translation of the hebrew scriptures into english it's a terrific translation but if you put that next to a christian translation and pay close attention to certain things a lot of jewish communities will say oh these christians they keep translating their theology back into the old testament just compare tanaq with certain christian translations of the old testament someone might say well if you want to see what's going on learn the original language so part of what happened in the protestant reformation was this tradition that clergy should be taught the original languages and so my seminary training included greek and hebrew sometimes just enough to be dangerous but this is part of what's going on and this is continuing to be changed by technology so you have jewish translations in english complaining about christian translations in english of the bible you have roman catholic bibles that you know certain word choices by scholars and committees are a little bit nuanced in order that well this this be in accordance with our community and the dogma within it but now when you have conversations with protestants well let's talk about that word let's talk about that tradition and well look behind me at all these books this is what happens you have jehovah's witness bibles and the protestants will complain well let's let's and if you're you're if you're if you know a little bit something about jehovah's witness apologetics you know exactly what verses to point to and say what about this translation here what about the greek behind it let's talk about that and we have the christian reform church's history with the new international trans the new international version if you find some old bibles in the story of the niv just google the story of the niv uh the christian reform church and some other denominations were increasingly uncomfortable with the mainline-ish interpretations that was well the christian reform church was quite happy with the revised standard version not all some preferred the king james but we think we need our own translation that could actually be helpful for the work of the church so again we shouldn't be too hard on jerome because well whereas johan jerome might have been a little bit more free with adding some words and some phrases into the text well we like to shape the text and interpretation shapes translation that's a reality a little bit later so after the second world war you see another proliferation of texts and you get into the 70s and 80s well publishing houses look at so zondervans publishes the niv and the niv is wildly successful it's much more readable than the revised standard version or the king james and becomes very popular zondervan starts zondervan which is a publishing house grand rapids has zondervan urdmans and baker publishing houses that were deeply connected to dutch calvinism and the christian reform church well the niv is selling like gangbusters and suddenly larger corporations say there's money to be made and selling bibles because bible sales among mainline churches it's kind of diminishing but that niv boy that's selling like hotcakes there's money out there and them evangelical hills to be made and so well publishing houses start getting bought up by harper and some of these other publishing houses and then suddenly christians get a little bit nervous and like hey how do i know these secular publishing houses are going to treat our bible well and so new bibles proliferate and some of those start to sell and well then if you listen to eric weinstein talking about the proliferation and the degradation of degrees well i'll tell you something there was a period of time that i was seriously considering getting a phd in something like biblical studies and i looked at it i said you know um if i would get a phd in biblical studies i would probably still work as a pastor in a church because in many places to actually teach in a seminary you'll make less money than you'll make in a church so it's really a labor of love but it's true because the world is awash in christian phds who have degrees in theology and such and a bunch of them are running around looking for work well what do they love to do they love to translate they love to do all of this stuff so suddenly well books are all over the place translations and and scholarship is proliferating and there's there's versions of the bible because the bible is the best-selling book of all so hit your wagon to that train and if you can if you can translate the bible and have it really go and have it really sell you can make a lot of money so selling bible sort of becomes like selling soap because you know about a century ago procter and gamble realized that soap is soap cleans our body cleans our dishes cleans our clothes cleans our floors but if you really want to make money with soap we'll add a little sense and add tinker with the chemistry and sell soap a thousand different ways and you can make good money from selling soap so that's sort of what happens with bible sales and when the internet hits it really goes crazy because scholars now don't need a publishing house to intermediate them and publishing directly bible gateway you can look at how many different bible translations on bible gateway you can in fact even listen to audible versions of the bible in that cabinet i have a whole bunch of cds that i ripped because i wanted to have the the bible in auto in audio version because i'm an audible listener and sometimes when i work on a passage i'll i'll take a look at it in greek and hebrew and i'll look at four or five different english translations and i'll read commentaries but often i find that it's it's very fruitful to listen to it instead of reading it because listening is different again remember what speech is now consumers don't even have to buy anything they can just go to bible gateway and read it or listen to it and they have all these different translations and in fact um the proliferation of translations just explodes even more with the internet because biblical scholars are giving it away and you can go to something like study.calvin seminary.edu and find this scripture study app where sort of like a modern day erasmus you have the greek and the hebrew and there are the greek and the and the english and they're right next to each other and you can do these little word studies there's little helpful videos and this is just little calvin seminary in grand rapids michigan developing this app a little later i'll talk about some of these bigger apps that develop but you can learn a lot about the bible on the internet but what you very quickly learn is that the proliferation of learning means a proliferation of interpretations and how are you supposed to work through the interpretation well where's the standard well this is where the protestant catholic thing gets initiated well the standard is well the bible well but we're talking about the bible yeah and and so well this is where scholarship comes in and this is where we believe that the work of the spirit works through this stuff and so you know do we have the judgment not to just find interpretations we prefer that sometimes called exegesis versus isagesis where we read what we want into the text this is a perpetual problem but now again go back to the belief and the prayer that the holy spirit would work through the bible convict us of sin guide us refine us reform us because does god judge us on how we read the bible if you read the new testament god judges us on what we do with our lives after having read the bible so how can we know well we rely upon the holy spirit the god of creation is the god of history you won't get everything right so hold your interpretations with a bit of humility it's not your grasp on god or the truth or your grasp on the truth that saves you it's his grasp on you so start well there's a lot more that we have to say about how to read the bible and in fact that's going to have to go into another video because this one is plenty long already as some of you well know but the beauty of youtube you can pause it do something else and now i'm going to put this video on my personal channel too so there will be an audio copy of that so if you want a podcast version you can get it i'm trying to figure that out in terms of the church website as well but what bible do we begin with this was the question they asked and you're like boy pastor if you had just told me three little letters like niv or esv or kjv or net right from the start you could have saved me the whole video and that's true but i wanted you to know something about what goes into this question because i want that to be in your mind when you read the bible and that you look for guidance of the holy spirit when you read the bible and really the first question a lot of people ask is it a book or a screen because for many people today the bible that they're using is on their computer screen or their tablet or their smartphone and you can get bible gateway has a lovely app logos has a wonderful app even the church software even the software on the living stones church app has a version of the bible in it now i haven't looked at that one closely maybe i should but many people i know today read the bible on their phones or listen to it through their phones now books have advantages that screens don't and screens have advantages that books don't screens afford multiple translations and aids on my smartphone i have greek and hebrew and commentaries and all those things and before covid if i was traveling or waiting in some waiting room or sitting in sitting in some place i could pull out my smartphone and work on my sermon right from my smartphone pretty handy listen to the bible through bible gateway or for free or you know with uh with your logo sap and sometimes listening is better than reading but that gets us into the question of manuscripts because if you remember the story well erasmus well here's the vulgate there's lots of copies of that being printed but then he starts rummaging around in monasteries looking for greek manuscripts and okay i found one but then i found another and now i'm putting the greek manuscripts next to each other and they differ which one do i prefer and that launches this whole question of textual criticism which is sometimes called lower criticism where you're looking for well what should it be should it be the text that the church has embraced and found useful some christians go there should it be a text that scholars are trying to get back hopefully to the most original text some some people in church go there and so part of the branch of the bible is what is the age and what type of manuscript is this translation of the bible built on because when you put those two english translations next to each other like in the king james version you'll find all of these extra verses about things like angels coming down and stirring water and the gospel of john and all these other verses in the king james version that you read the niv they're not in there oh but then they put them in a little footnote because people feel left out and how are we to regard that or how about the longer ending of the gospel of mark or how about the story very very popular story of of jesus and the woman who was being stoned for adultery and all these little footnotes about older and better manuscripts of the text don't have that how are we to regard this well that's where we're getting into some of these issues between translations too so newer translations generally speaking are built on the more ancient manuscripts and they'll relegate some of these things to footnotes and that sort of disturbs christians and sometimes christians say i like my king james and it's just all there there's no pesky footnotes and the language i have and okay i won't necessarily bother you but as a pastor i'm going to pay attention to both of these things now translations are also political and the king james version is a very political translation you think well not political for me today no because the politics are 500 years old and in fact genesis 1 is a very political text well it's not political for me well it's actually fairly political now too but genesis 1 is fairly political if you've got egyptians and babalonians with their creation mists sitting next to you remember we're talking about organic inspiration we're talking about god moving through history and time okay the bible is an outside the flow of human events the bible is within the flow because god is not just the god way up there separated from the world he is holy holy holy but the whole earth is full of his glory so he moves through history and time and politics and all of these things to accomplish his ends see you can't translate without interpreting but here's the other thing you can't read without interpreting either that's how we are so you can't translate or read without interpreting and so different traditions will fight about implied interpretations one of the issues that's going to come up within some of these modern interpretations is gender inclusive language if i say man do you hear human or male and some of you will roll your eyes and some of you will have a fit but it's a question of it's a question of communication it's not just a question of politics but politics very much comes in and so different translations some of you might have noticed there was a speech there that i read in the book of acts and today and in the niv that you will find the most recent edition of the niv i'll say it that way where brothers and sisters and then you go back into the greek and it just says brothers you say well why did you add sisters ah now we're getting into the details of interpretation do you want a bible that is very easily read because it's implied that you're speaking to a mixed crowd that there are women in the crowd and you're not just addressing the men but a hundred years ago if you would stand up in church and say brothers all the women would seamlessly translate and interpret that they themselves were included and it's only when later sensitivities arose that people began saying you've i would get this sometimes with a sermon commentary if i would say if i would use a male pronoun or something fortunately the second person is gender not gender specific but you've excluded half of the congregation in this and then of course i would sort of smile and usually make nice but then if i was in a more prickly mood i'd say did you ever read the ten commandments you shall not covet your neighbor's wife doesn't say you shall not cover your neighbor's husband why is the ten commandments addressing men why what is the difference between a son of god and a child of god in the first century context you see you can poke at these issues but if you dig into these issues they go down a long ways and they might not be so shallowly political as we might imagine which again is the reason for this very long introductory video there's lots of theories of language and meaning underneath the surface that are at play too most of the time we don't have to think about them or appreciate them but they're there so the difference between translations and a paraphrase and there's even interpretation between those two words translations tend to try to render especially the older translation sort of a word to word association and it's so it's almost as if we're trying to read the greek but in english and it's a particular style of translation that many theories of language today well it doesn't really work but it depends on what you're trying to do with the bible because if you're trying to get a sense of the lexical range that means the meaning range of a greek word and how it's used throughout a body like a book in the bible even throughout the whole new testament or the new testament and old testament between the septuagint and the greek new testament because you know they were reading it that's kind of an important thing and a translation that has that kind of word for word correspondence if you don't know anything about the original language can kind of be helpful then you have like strong numbers and certain concordances and all these old tools that are fortunately in public domain and you can use with profit to study the bible but here's the question are you studying the bible for because you want to know more for information are you reading the bible for inspiration in order to manage your mood emotionally are you reading the rod the bible for formation are you trying to mold yourself as a person according to the image of jesus or according to the archetype or principality of a people or a tradition there's a lot going on with this now translations tend to be a little bit stricter about the wording and that because greek and especially hebrew word order is very different from english word order as it goes in sentences so translators have to try to fix this and so translations that try to keep the words you know we'll try and limit the number of words we translate this one greek word in terms of english words and we'll try to represent the word order translations try to in some ways leave the ambiguity in the translation so when you read this you say is this meaning this or is this meaning this and you can't get it from the translation and a good translator if there's ambiguity in the greek because there often is or in the hebrew because there often is they'll leave that trans they'll leave that ambiguity in the translation and it's for you to chew on but a lot of christians read that and say i don't like this i don't understand this that's right because the ambiguity the good translator has left the ambiguity in and that ambiguous space is sort of a space of playing with things so now which way are you going to interpret it yourself now it's up to you paraphrases tend to take some of that work out they just read the hebrew and say this is what it means here's a rendering of it in english i'm not worried about word correspondence i'm not worried about about about word order i'm not even worried about leaving ambiguities in i'm going to take the ambiguity out for you here it is a lot of times people like that but if you read a paraphrase like eugene peterson's the message eugene peterson in a very savvy way says this is a paraphrase you will not mistaken this for a translation by any means i'm going to make it contemporary and in fact you can find you can find bible trans bible paraphrases that are really wild because they're reading it they're interpreting it and they're giving you a rendering in english that's a paraphrase it's different from an interpret it's different from a translation again with respect to this ambiguity all this highlights that you read the bible in a community as well you should and you should do so intentionally because the bible was written in communities and the bible should be read in communities and the difference of these communities are part of the interpretive function okay your if you're and this is why if you're connected to a church or a tradition they will usually offer tools and these tools will be in harmony with the tradition now do so self consciously and understand what's going on you're a person in the middle of history it might feel a little bit captured at times but now you have all these sources on the internet read a catholic bible read a jewish translation of the text read translations of the text that are 500 years old read translations of the text that are 100 years old and you can begin to escape the captivity and begin to have a better understanding of the interpretive decisions that are being made that go into this bible that you hold in your hands but you should find a community to learn the bible with because the bible is very large and very difficult and you're already going to interpret it within a culture so find a community that has a little bit more nuance and probably some scholars and probably some wisdom and that will help you because again the goal is how to live out the bible in your life not to just accumulate information or knowledge about the bible so most of the comments now some of those of you have hung in here with the video for the interpretation and the application are about to be rewarded but those of you who are catholic or orthodox or not christian or something else might complain because you didn't touch us well i'm a protestant and from the christian reform church and so my comments are within this realm and again this video is intended for my church audience not so much the estuary audience but i think there's i think there's there's value in this video for them so i'm going to post it on both channels as i mentioned before the new international version has a special relationship with the christian reform church and so this version has been not always with the politics in the christian reform church right now if you go into a christian reform church and you find a new revised standard version they're probably sort of over on the main line-ish wing and if you find an esv an english standard version they're sort of over on the conservative young restless and reformed end of things but understanding how translations actually have families both of those translations and their existence in a in a christian reform church will exhibit a degree of assimilation into the broader fights within the church world so the new international translation was started in the 70s and or first came out in the 70s and was a translation that attempted to be fairly conservative but broadly evangelical but quite readable and all of those things involve trade-offs okay so yes there is interpretation built into it and if you if you google niv complaints you will find pages and pages and pages of them on there we have niv bibles in this church and i use it often but sometimes if you noted my sermon sometimes i'll use different translations of the bible as well depending on looking for something that will render the point i'm trying to make sometimes from the greek or the hebru or what's going on beneath the translations the niv quite controversially began with something they called dynamic equivalences now again a paraphrase is sort of reading something and saying this is what it means coming up with words out of whole cloth translation is i'm going to try and render these words and stick as closely as i can yet having it make some kind of sense in english what the niv would do is try to do both and we'll try and do a translation and but sometimes some of these phrases will will just be completely lost like i was going through exodus and um and there's a passage and where the there's a differentiation between the egyptians and the and the hebrus and there's a there's a very interesting reference about a dog at about i have to work from memory now a dog sticking out its tongue now the niv renders it something about a dog barking and see what the niv is trying to do is give some idea of because language and culture are deeply connected some idea of what's beneath it there and so the niv will try to do something like that and scholars will look at that say ah that was a bad way to do it you should render it just the way it is and let people be lost in the cultural frame or you should tell them exactly what it is in a paraphrase and say you know not a creature was stirred not even a mouse take some language from another famous poem and put it right in there but people will understand the meaning of the passage then when we got into the 80s and 90s the questions of gender inclusive language got in and so you had oh do i remember these dates off the top of my head you had sort of the first edition of the niv which was quite conservative in fact um there are stories from some of my colleagues who were in seminary back when certain when john steck and bass van alderen were participating in the translation of this and they would involve their students and in the original rendering of the niv for example they would just simply borrow from the king james version because they knew that would connect with its audience that's not an illegitimate move to make so for example if you go back to the original niv you will have and um you have the valley of the shadow of death which is just this lyrical beautiful language from the king james version which makes its way through western history the valley of the shadow of death i still prefer it it's not a great rendering of the hebru it's a dark valley but dark valley valley of the shadow of death i will fear no evil that just sings and it rings and it preaches so the niv decided to keep it in now one of the things that the niv did and got into a lot of trouble for was it kept the committee keeps keeps meeting and keeps revising and keeps relooking at things and then the printers kept changing it and so then a church would buy some bibles at this point and then some bibles at that point and they're both called niv but then the language would be different and the churches say hey wait a minute we're all reading this text together remember the recording function we're reading this text together and we're stumbling over words you changed the words how could you so okay we'll stop doing that so then when it got to the gender inclusive thing they started with the t niv today's niv because they want to keep the niv because that's such publishing gold and now they have like brothers and sisters and then everybody's like oh now you're really changing my bible the greek says brothers it says brothers why did you add the sisters well we're adding the sisters because modern sensitivities people lead out so you have this whole political fight and the t niv have a copy right there they sent me a free one and it came out because they're trying to sell it to churches remember this is big business and the t niv went nowhere and so what did they do they revised it again and well they just try and make it a little bit more prominent in terms of the not have so many additions but the niv today they sort of pulled back on some of the gender inclusive and redid it and talked about well when the greek is ambiguous we'll have the ambiguity in english and and when it's when it's definitely male we'll keep the male and this just gives you a little taste into what goes into the politics and economics and philosophy and theology of biblical translations and so some people quite rightly say we should have just left well enough alone with the king james version ah but in my father's house there are many mansions and when you say that to an english person a contemporary person they think mansion they think of like the the monopoly guy and his his thing and they think of millionaire acres in the game of life and you think the scratchy game at mcdonald's and you might get a mansion or a mcmansion or something like that a mansion is is a house that that donald trump lives in a wealthy man but it was a manse in old english and a manse is just a little place to spend the night and so in my house through my father's house there are many mansions you got preachers all over the place talking about the wealth in heaven and the streets paved with gold and if you stay true to jesus and keep tithing to this church and don't go to that other church but if you stay here i promise you in a mansion in heaven but that doesn't really that's not really what jesus was saying so it gets complicated and that's why this is a complicated question so the niv is a fine translation if you've got theological objections to it i've got some more to choose from that are coming but remember if you're picking your bible by your theological objections you can't really cast you know throw shade at biblical scholars who are interpreting and doing the same thing in their translation because aren't we supposed to be reformed by the bible and not changing it to suit our needs as you can see through this whole long video these questions get hard so the king james version the old faithful and you can find it still has value again valley of the shadow of death it's just beautiful but in my house there are many mansions it's a little misleading but in terms of the word association doing word studies strong numbers the bible is so fundamental to the english language you should have one and you should know it and to have a variety of passages memorized in the king james version will serve you well in connecting with christians across the board vitally important translation it remains today even though it's built on the textus receptus so now you have a manuscript problem beneath it and that's why you have some of those manuscript issues some people want that some people don't again we're bringing our interpretive filters to the bible here when we're making those choices between translations they didn't have access to the better to the better manuscripts and so something like the niv is built up upon a critical text and they'll put stuff in the footnotes because again there's a publishing audience here and the niv is sort of pitched towards moderate evangelicals not hardcore fundamentalists they're still using the king james bible maybe not mainliners they've pretty much continued authorized version revised standard version new revised standard version and we'll see if they produce any more beyond that then there's the new living translation which is very popular and those of you who have watched my sunday school class pre-covid know that when i do my sunday school lessons i have a column that's in the original language often i'll have a column that is in the lexem english bible we'll talk about a little bit later then i'll have a column that's in the niv then i'll have a column that's in the new living translation and the reason i organize the columns that way is i want the audience to see where people are tinkering with the language because generally speaking if you look at the places that the translations diverge that gives you an indication that well the greek and the hebrew perhaps aren't terribly clear or rendering it is theologically complicated or controversial or it just doesn't really match culturally in english so that's where you can really begin to see the difference between translation and and paraphrase the new living translation i believe comes down to us from a bunch of the living bible which was a paraphrase done in the 70s very popular but they felt a little in can they felt a little insecure apparently about just being the living bible and so they call themselves a translation but it's not much of a translation it's really a paraphrase now again it's very popular in my experience people really like it at least a lot of the people that i tend to be in church circles with because the pre-chewed material it's more pre-chewed than the niv and pretty consistently renders middle to conservative broadly evangelical interpretations of passages again let's let's give jerome his due because you know you can point to jerome and say ah you shouldn't have added that stuff but new living translation adds stuff all the time to have it match up and in my experience doing bible studies with people as the format that i showed um they like that i like the new living translation i thought i'm not surprised that you do it's it's telling you exactly what you want to hear from it but in the context of a little deeper bible study i want us to wrestle a little bit with the interpretive filters that we're bringing to the bible because there are ambiguities in the text that we should wrestle with and we have to evaluate them theologically in terms of the exegesis in terms of the book in terms of all of the tools and filters that we are able to now some of you might say but i don't have all those tools and filters i say that's exactly right and so read the nlt but ask yourself why are you reading are you reading it devotionally are you reading it for comfort are you reading it for study if you're reading it for study and you really want to dig deep you might want to have some other bibles next to it and look for some of those differences so you'll be able to dig deeper and you'll be able to learn and and become more educated by doing that and you might say well that's a whole lot of work and that's why i say find a church that does serious bible study find a pastor who he's you might not have a phd in biblical studies he's got his own filters but find a pastor that is going to want to participate a little bit in this endeavor to to draw us just a little bit deeper into asking some of these uncomfortable questions about the bible and and pushing ourselves to say well what is the truth always praying for guidance from the holy spirit that that the lord lead us and listening to traditions and christians and scholars ancient and modern in fact this this whole commentary series is based on bringing church fathers and other ancient preachers into the conversation as we as we do the work of of of studying the bible so my the nlt it's it's it's it's nice for reading i'm gonna have to do another video about more how to read the bible but i figured okay which bible the nlt it's out there people really like it personally don't care for it much the niv has less pre-chewing so but if you like it read it it's okay the esv so as i mentioned before you have the authorized version you have the revised standard version which happens just after world war ii and then with even more scholarship you have the new revised version version includes the inclusive language that then offended some people and there's some other decisions made by the nrsv the new revised standard version in my opinion the nrsv is an excellent translation but there might be things that people find objectionable again own your gerome moment in there and so a newer translation that came out within that family is the english standard version which i think is also an excellent translation and again they tend to bend a little bit more towards reformed conservative protestant but they do try to maintain some ambiguity and they're they're trying to do do what's right with it what they don't want to go down is the inclusive language thing so if you find that to be a stumbling block the esv will be a fairly safe version for you it's very popular among conservative and reformed communities right now and that's why i say if you go into a christian reformed church many of them will have the niv if you go into a christian reformed church and they have pew bibles that have the nrsv in them we'll see a lot of pew bile bible buying has gone out because now everybody's got smartphones but are they looking at their fantasy football scores on their smartphone or are they reading the bible pastor i'm reading the bible or really are you checking your text messages but anyway so if you go into a christian reformed church and you find an nrsv well they're a little to the main line leaning in the denomination if you find the esv a little bit more conservative reformed lining it and i they're just kind of straight down the middle crc if you find this niv 1975 well they're there in the spectrum a really wonderful translation that you can read free online is the new english translation and what sets the new english translation apart is has tons of helpful notes now part of what publishers start doing is they want people to i have dozens of bibles in my office okay i've got lots of them but one of the ways you can get people to buy more bibles is to add different notes and so you had the niv and then you had the niv study bible which was you know fairly moderately evangelical sort of liens reformed and the niv study bible made a lot of money i have the niv study bible that was given to me by my parents as a christmas present and dad and mom signed it and that means a lot to me now then it was just kind of you give me a bible for christmas you know i want i don't remember what year it was or what i wanted but um i'm deeply grateful for it now so the niv study bible and then you had this proliferation of bibles and then you have um all these bible studies built into bibles there's a serendipity bible that's serendipity lessons for all the bible and on and on and on and on publishers have managed to do all of this well the notes are uneven um something like the nat has has really excellent notes that i think are they're both helpful for someone like me as a pastor who can stand to be reminded of things as they read through the text but they're fairly short and in a computer format that's really rather delightful because you can sort of click and go deeper and it's all online and i assume there's probably an app you can read most of these again through the bible gateway app and through other things like that people will ask me about bible software i i bought my first computer in 1991 and i was fortunate to i was looking for a bible software package that had because i was speaking with the missionaries that were already in the dominican republic and there's one bible software passage package that had a newer version of the bible translate um a newer version of the bible in spanish and so right away i started buying logos and it came in these little floppy disks there was one that had the you know one that had the program and one had the couple translations or so and that's where i started with logos at that point there were all bunch of competitors for this and logos has as really there are still some competitors out there but logos has has really sort of taken the market and their strength is that they have huge numbers of books within their library what they are is you can get the program itself for free but then you you buy the books and they have huge numbers of books and their books aren't just like kindle where it's just sort of a representation of the page they have links and analysis and all of this stuff now you can spend a lot of money on logos and i don't necessarily recommend that you do that because you can get a lot of stuff free on the internet including ancient texts and all that but if you're going to study this stuff deeply um now after let's say that was 1991 now after almost 30 years of using their software i've got a pretty good library i know people have better libraries than myself they have a free book of the month they have discounted books they have all of this stuff ways to get you to buy more books but it's a terrific platform and one of the things that i use quite a bit and i didn't plan on this they have a lexem english bible they have their own publishing house that they that they put out they have their own scholars that they work with um and and their lexem english bible with all the tools that it has in logos is a i find it to be quite a useful tool um it's a little better than the n i than the than the king james version if you're looking at words and literalisms and some of that because it tends to major on a fair amount of the literalisms and so if you're looking for an english bible that that sort of captures what the what the king james could but the language is archaic and you have a contextual issue i often use the x lexem english bible now i use that in fact so often with my study sheets for the sunday school class that one of my members said can i buy that bible in on paper and i'm not sure that you can but what you can do is you can get it with the software i don't know if it's free with the software because i'm way past the free version i should probably try somewhere to find a device and load up what i can for free to see what you how far you can really push logos for nothing and then maybe for an extra of twenty dollars or fifty dollars or a hundred dollars which you get maybe at some point i i can put a video together for that but what the software does obviously when i was in seminary if i was studying a biblical passage i would take a greek or a hebrew text i would put that on the table i would take the the lexicon which is kind of the the english to greek or english to hebrew dictionary i put that on the table i would take an original language concordance i would put that on the table i might have a couple other commentaries i would take up a whole table just to study a passage now on the computer i can have all these different windows i can click to different things and the number of texts that i can go to it's dramatic but it doesn't necessarily mean i'll write a better sermon so but computers have afforded all of this and if like most people you don't have the ability to learn greek or hebrew a lot of these tools can help you dig a little bit deeper maybe dangerous dangerously so but dig a little bit deeper into perhaps what's behind the text and why the different translators have done what they've done but all of this again brings us back to what you're reading the bible for because how you read it is important in some ways maybe more important than this entire video and which translation you use are you reading for inspiration are you reading for information are you reading for formation itself and so there's lectio divina there's reading the bible in a year there's in-depth bible study when you focus on say one book of the bible and on and on and again i think if you really want to go into this you can't do it alone do it with others and it's really helpful and this is in fact why churches are set up the way they have hopefully there is someone at your church who knows a little bit more about bible study than you do and maybe even someone who has a seminary degree and is interested in bible study because you can do a lot through self-teaching with this but there's a near endless the bible has been worked over for 2000 years in the christian tradition even longer in the jewish tradition and so there's you don't have enough time in your life to exhaust these things and so all of these tools can be helpful so do so in community you can do that virtually maybe you'll have a group of people online maybe you'll look at my sunday school lessons that i have online pre-covid and i hope to get back to that soon you can do it physically in a church you can do it historically you can look at the history of interpretations and passages and that leads you to many many places and so just the translation is not enough but what i suggest to you is that you just start and um maybe a little advertising so i've got estuary and living stones online i will probably do more of this type of thing and living stones online because that's what we do in church now sunday sermons are little 30 minute talks i do that stuff in the office but i try not to bring too much of that stuff into sermon with a sunday school lesson or a bible study at least one that i run because bible studies can have different purposes too sometimes bible studies are a little bit of inspiration and then some joys and concerns and that's what people need sometimes bible studies dig deep and often maybe you'll have a bible study material often some of the better bible studies just use other sources to to learn how to dig deeper and to overall take each opportunity to study a passage to not just learn more about that passage but to learn more about how the bible works and in the words of my old testament seminary professor if you only have time to read one book about a particular biblical passage read the book it's in well what does that mean the whole bible yeah the whole bible and also if you're studying a passage in the book of jona read the book of jona because the meaning of the passage is situated in the meaning of the book which is situated in the world which is situated in the bible Bible so there's a very long video i don't even know how long it is but it's very long and but maybe disappointing to those of you who just wanted the niv the esv the kjv the jerusalem bible tanakh the king james version the new revised standard version not the new revised standard version not the today's niv with that inclusive language on and on and on and on and on and on but i want you to know something about the bible because the purpose of this course is introduction to the bible so hopefully by now if you've gone through this whole long video you've learned a little something about the bible and whether you're a believer or not when you come to the bible you can have a little bit of understanding about what we're doing with this book and why we're doing it with this book and how we've been doing it with this book for thousands of years