https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=DgvDYMQvU4w

 Hey, this is Paul and I thought I'd just start my own little just chatting stream. I didn't see anyone up there doing much of anything. I thought I'd talk about a few things before. I got to put the link into the invite. Let's see. Let's drop that in there. If anybody wants to join, they can come on and let me know what's on their mind. Look up my... There we are, two watching. People are, hey, there's Luke. How you doing, Luke? I've been doing some thinking about a variety of things. One of the things that I posted one of my Brando's conversations today, the other one didn't get posted, which was fine. Thinking about how to engineer this and how to break some of the logjam. Yeah, Thief in the Night. There you go. Watch John Vervecky and... I did watch that, Luke. Oh, there's Rod. And there's Mark. I did watch it and I was immediately captured. What logjam? Yeah, what logjam? Yeah, when trying to get Randall's conversations. I was immediately captured when Nate asked the question about the transfiguration and then John made the question about pluralism. And then a lot of the talk was pretty esoteric. And again, I enjoyed the conversation, but I wondered how broadly people would be able to participate in that conversation. One of the things I've been thinking about, yeah, it's high-level theology philosophy. That's exactly what it is. And there's absolutely nothing wrong with that. And I could see that as being really important for the people participating. But I just wondered how many people can participate in that. And then it also made me think about the way in which... I think now we are all theologians for some reason. Jacob thinks that's a problem and solution. I disagree. Imagine that Mark and Jacob are not agreeing on everything. I absolutely can't imagine that that would be. So, but I've been very much enjoying all the little live streams. Grim Grizz is on at a particular hour where I can catch it fairly regularly, which is a lot of fun. I've been really appreciating Grizz's gift for metaphor and language. Hey, there's Mark. Little chat with Mark. Pull Mark in. There we go. Hey, Mark. Howdy. What you been up to? Haven't you noticed? Rallying against your... Navigating. Let me type that in now. Navigating patterns. You got to pin that link, by the way, that you put to the thingy. Otherwise, it's already scrolled up the screen. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That was one of the reasons why I came in to tell you that. But no, I like this discussion about how theological should we be getting. And look, it's not about whether or not... Jacob and I agree on 90% of stuff. I was in this live stream a while back with Hezzi, and they got theological. And I said, oh, you guys are getting theological. I don't know anything about this. I'm out of here. And Hezzi made the comment on the stream, well, Mark, why are you in this corner of the Internet if you're not theological? And I was like, oh, boy, do you not understand this corner of the Internet? This is a theology button. Like, you've got a major mistake here. Like, you're not understanding. Peterson's not theological. Verbecki avoids it usually when he can. Right? So that was just a fundamental misunderstanding. And then I talked to Jacob about it on and off a little bit later. And he was like, no, no, no, the whole problem is theology. And once we fix everybody's theology, everything will be fine. And I was like, I don't even think that's possible. Like, I don't think that's possible. Like, what are you talking about? That sounds insane to me. Most people can't talk theology. And even if they could, all you're going to do is what you do with philosophy, which is find more things to disagree about. That's all that's going to happen. It's just going to be more disagreement and more disagreement and more disagreement because words are sloppy. Well, I, you know, I was actually what video was it? It was an orthodox. It was an orthodox video. And they got theological right away. And someone made the point about, you know, basically, well, if you don't, if you have bad theology, everything's going to be bad. And, OK, yeah. And my theological, my church tradition is deeply theological. But you can make you can make your theological precision and correctness and idle as well. Well, and I think that's a knowledge first attitude. Right. Is that is that theology is running everything? And I don't think theology runs everything. I think participation runs everything. Requires zero zero propositional participation or propositional communication to do good things in the world. And so why would theology be the thing that runs everything? I think participation runs everything. And theology is just the poor communication of of that. Well, I. Now, participation is obviously endemic. And if you want to navigate participation, just even to riff on the name of your channel, you're going to need you're going to need the propositional. I mean, we especially because outside of outside of initiative, you know, initiation rituals and and very thick in-person communities, very much what happened once written text came into the world. A lot of our. Coordinated participation is going to flow through propositional channels. No, no, I look, I agree with that. That's not my argument. Isn't no more proposition. I've never said anything like that. Right. What I'm saying is epistemology first, the knowledge first. The knowledge is the highest value thing. And if that would make theology and philosophy, depending on which side you want to put, you want the science side. That's philosophy. Do you want the religion side? That's theology. I think that's the error. Like, that's an error. It doesn't drive from the theology of the philosophy. Those are expressions of the participation. And that's a huge difference. I mean, this is the modern problem is knowledge first. Knowledge is the highest value. Right. That's where Sam Harris went wrong. Like Sam Harris is already at the point where he doesn't care how many children have to die for him to be right. That's effectively where he's at. And that's a very sad place. I put it on Twitter, man. In multiple places. I have no fear. You can't take you can't take any more than me from me than has already been taken. Go right ahead. Right. And that's what happens when you have that attitude, that knowledge is the most important thing. I just don't think it is. So I think we can we can think about partaking. Right. So taking part, which is becoming part of a whole. Right. Which is that's what participation is. You're participating in a whole. Right. And so now you have an orientation towards the whole that informs your identity. Right. And I think that's that's what you do. And you can make descriptions of that. Right. You can you can do that in a group of people. Right. Where you get politics or you can do that in relation to God. Right. And you can you can you can make all sorts of systems to to. Try to either explain or to gain agency within these arenas. Right. But but the problem is, right, like, why why do you want agency? Like like, what are you what are you trying to do when when you're trying to to get a grip on these things? Well, you're executing an agenda. And are you sure that's the agenda that needs to be executed? Well, and and and I think I think Manuel, your point, too, about wanting is key because wanting is is often missed in knowledge. Knowledge sort of leaves us with this with with this this personless state. And all of us agents are wanters and we pursue what we want. And that's often just sort of left out. Right. And so so but but we we can be informed, right. We can conform. Right. And and in our confirmation, we we can want the right thing. Right. But that requires us to transform first. Right. So so in to see ourselves as part of the whole. Right. And when we have vision as our part, then we can want the right thing for the body. We can partake correctly within the body. But but if we don't do these things like or if we keep switching bodies all the time. Right. Like now we can become a shapeshifter and we don't have sufficient grounding for our own identity and and our own agency. And and we end up being confused and lost. And I think I think this is what's happening. And when you look at what philosophy is, I've been looking at Hegel and all the mysticism and stuff around this. Like I did not like what I see. But what what I see is all these philosophers, they're they're they're having this framework and they're they're making the world or the intelligibility within the world conform to the frame. Right. So in some sense, they're they're like like planting a flag somewhere. And then there's these natural ripples out from these axioms. And then they try to shape the world into these axioms. Right. And then when people try to participate in that. Right. Because because for fake, it talks about this. Right. You can see the world that these people are seeing. You can start living like that. That's an option. Like if you take on these axioms, you can start seeing what they're seeing. That is true. But they're seeing their selfish, narcissistic framing because they they're superimposing their wants on what they're looking at. And then you're you're adopting their wants. And you're not you're not aware of what you're adopting. Right. Because all you're all you're seeing is, oh, look at this intelligibility and all of this this perceived agency that you're getting from the framework that you're adopting. Right. And then it's like you go from one philosopher to another philosopher to another philosopher. And it's like like drugs. It's like, oh, my God, like more. Right. But more importantly, Manuel, I think I think, you know, you kind of kind of kind of skirted around the really important point in my mind, which is what are you submitting to? Because in philosophy and in theology, you're submitting to the language and the propositions put forth. And I'm no, they should be expressions of the thing you're submitted to, which is the participation. In other words, the philosophy by design will always take you away from reality. It gets you further from reality. And hey, you can go further from reality. Not this. This guy is just going to bring a lot of reality into this space. I know that that's that's what he does. Yes, he does. Yes, he does. Welcome, Graham. Good to see you. I was trying to watch this and it was unbearable. So I thought I'd come on and make it more variable. He came to arrest me from the twins. I haven't quite named you two yet. Mark and Manuel, your twins of a kind. But I haven't really named the kind of twins you two are. I've heard that if you were hanging out on our Discord server when we get into it. But OK. But but I haven't been able to sort of capture exactly because you do have sort of a duel. The two of you really embody a certain thing and I can't quite. Yeah, it's called the same reality from two entirely different perspectives. Welcome to the world. Hmm. Well, I wanted I was about to ask Eminem here the question about. So we've had three of Vervekis after Socrates out and the fourth one just came out today. I haven't watched the fourth one yet. I want to hear your thoughts. I watched the first one. It was terrible, absolutely terrible. I'll never watch another one at all. I'll stop watching after 10 minutes. Like the framing was so bad that like I like nothing good could be presented within that framing. Like, wow. Yeah, like my my my three hour chipmunk trolling stream of the episode was more effort than the guys inhabiting the awakening from the meaning crisis server. Yeah, well, I undoubtedly let's look. I mean, you said it, Paul, like the text vanishes too quickly. That's just sloppy. They can't get the scheduling right. These are not good. Like, I know they're not like things happen, but these are not good signs that the work is being cared for. They took down the meditation stream, the full series of meditations. They'd been asked to put it back up. They told me they were putting it back up. It hasn't been put back up. The whole thing where they put a picture of a head and they move it and then they've got the color around it and they move that at a separate rate. I can't stand that. Like that actually hurts me. I'm like, oh, this is terrible. But more importantly, I mean, John's changed and his message has changed and he's been hanging out with Guy Sengstock, who's a sorcerer, and he's adopted sorcery habits. And I wouldn't mind if he were aimed at the good, but I don't think he is anymore. And I do mean anymore. And it's a change. And I just see a change and I don't like the change and I'm not in. All right. Well, there's Mark's opinion. So you knew you'd get one from me. Yeah, it was a surprise that I got an opinion. I know it was a shock. The thing that turned me off is like he started off, right? Like he starts introducing all of these people like fast, fast, fast. He's not providing contacts. He's just like spouting them out. And then he starts this story about these Indians, right? Without introducing why it's relevant. And he goes through the story and I'm like, what's going on? What's going on? And then he's using all of these terms, right? Like these terms, whether you have to have a lot of background information in order to understand what he's talking about, and he's just throwing them into the story. And then at the end of the story is like reframing the whole story backwards and presupposing that you can understand this reframing of the story that he's giving you. Right. And I'm like going in my head like really hard trying to get like, OK, like, like what is he doing? And like I'm not sure. Right. And like in some sense, I feel what he's doing is he's trying to get you excited. Right. Like he's trying to enchant you. Right. Like he's trying to take you with him, but he's not making an actual argument. Like he's just not. He's just saying things and then presupposing that you accept it. It's like I'm not I'm not in for this. Like I'm not going to do this. It's all magic. Wow. Mark has props he's learned from Grizz. Oh, I got tons of props. I just use them more now. I got tons of props. All right, Grizz. I want to hear what you have to say. Have you watched any of it? Yes, I have. I specifically last night went into the secret episode. Which is episode number two. You can tell it's a secret episode because even Paul Vanderklay skipped it and the algorithm never recommended it to me. It went straight to three. And I discovered that the reason for it is because in episode two, he shows he says the part out loud. Kind of. And like basically it's like that Socrates' big shtick is participatory knowing. And that's what he's selling. No, that's that's. Yeah, I understand. That's what I saw. So I became instantly terrified that what this after Socrates series is, is like I'm going to use Socrates to pimp participatory knowing and then offer you all these courses because I'm selling I'm just selling you my friends. Yep. And that's that's the big concern I have after I found that part. As far as like me having to pause it and read the things. I don't know. It's stylish. I don't I don't know what the popular style is for kids these days. Maybe that's I'm not going to criticize the style of his production value because the lobster monkey army was supposed to be a replacement for CAA and it's not yet. So that he's having to use those poor people and not consult with us is my personal failure. Not anything to do with his production. Well, I left I left this comment on on one of your videos, Paul, the one about understanding Christian deconstruction, right? So Socrates pisses everyone off by questioning everything and never entering into cooperation in conversation and then dies for it. Jesus cooperates with everyone and dies for it, however, resurrects. Right. Socrates is the ultimate opponent. Like absolute like I agree. Right. Well, where does the hermeneutics of suspicion come from? Comes from Socrates. Like I don't think you think that's a bad thing. And I agree. Right. But that Socrates like he's not all goodness in light. Right. And I think that's part of the problem. Remember, boys and girls, if you hear the phrase hermeneutics of suspicion and have no idea what's being spoken of, the dog Herman was neutered. And now he's very suspicious every time the owner asks him to do anything. And Sam, Sam, I want to do a fringe encounter with you. Sure. God loves me because he sent me grim gris. I know he loves me. And now everyone knows that I have a patron, which thank you, shadow cabal. But in case you didn't know, I also have a sub stack, which I've just released, like the God mass and an insert from the paintball for Jesus book. So I have to pimp that and run away now. Bye, everybody. Talk to you soon. All right. Oh, this is this is I'm loving who's coming here. All right, Sam. Have you watched any of the after Socrates? I watched the first two episodes. OK. Thoughts? It's different than I expected. I don't know. I don't know. It's a little bit more meditation app than I was expecting from him. And I know that he's trying to escape mere propositionalism and mere classroom instruction and that sort of thing and focus more on embodiment and stuff like that. But, you know, this would be another interesting thing to talk to him about. But like as a Christian, I, you know, I try not to get my spiritual practices from anywhere but church. Right. And so I feel like that that's like, you know, it's flirting with some line that that I don't want to mess with. I'm not surprised. I'm not surprised by that. This is this is very interesting. I you know, part of my and I said some of it in the one video. It's really I've made this point to Luke a number of times. It's really difficult to preach against proper proposition based being so based in propositions in especially in sort of the Jordan Peterson style YouTube land because unless you do something that's sort of pure art on YouTube in a cinematic way, it's all simply going to be laden with propositions. And and I was thinking about about about John's, you know, attempt to sort of bring in the non propositional into it, at least in the first episode with sort of the guided meditation practice, which was very similar to what he did in in Thunder Bay. And I just thought people are going to be washing dishes, driving their car in many ways, sort of the the found time. It was interesting. It was interesting listening to Jordan would talk about the fact that, you know, he's making his way through awakening to the mini crisis while he's washing the dishes, which is speaking to that conversation. What did you think of that conversation? Oh, because I was there for most of it. You were even though if I if I if I listened to it, it didn't look I wouldn't have known you were there for most of it. But your but your participation was very much appreciated, Sam. I thought you were not to say anything. I mean, just you just have to know that Nate and Jordan and John are going to do exactly what they did in that video. I think I think Nate and I were also caught off guard. Sometimes, you know, when it's best to be silent. Right. And sometimes that's when you feel like I'm not sure what I have to add at the current moment. So I'm just going to wait until this train gets closer to the station that I'm at. But that was an interesting that was a wild conversation. It was. If if you can understand it. I mean, these two are just if if you were if you were to, you know, twist my arm behind my back, I was there and I have done a lot. I had done a lot of homework for that conversation and I didn't understand a lot of it. Well, so, you know, it was you know, it was similar to what happened a bit with my conversation with John and the other Jordan B. Cooper, where those two I mean, it was quite interesting because immediately a love fest ensued. The conversation about Luther that didn't talk about Martin Luther. Right. So we can. And what's interesting about many of these conversations is that especially in the initial ones, which is why I almost do always do personal disclosure and story first, is because if they don't have a relationship, they need to spend some time together. You know, basically, this is all non propositional communicating to each other. This is a safe space. We can trust one another. No knee capping, no cheap shots. We want to be friends because we want to play together. And so good. Yeah, because I get allergic when I hear that because I know that's true for some people. Right. And like, I think that goes back to the hermeneutics of suspicion that there's a lot of people, right, like that that are not familiar having healthy relationships. Right. So they're having a presupposition when they step into a relationship that they need to be careful and they need to overcome that thing. But like, I think that when you're when you're presupposing that that's there, right, like you create the world that you're adapted to. Like, so we had this conversation with this guy like the day before yesterday on the Discord. Right. And he thought he was connecting to us and he thought he was open. Right. And we had we had the totally opposite experience. Right. Like, like, like he he was he had a type of openness, but he was not open at all. Right. Like he was really stuck in his own interpretation, in his own way of being. Like he couldn't reach out in relationship. Right. And but when I go into a conversation, right, like I don't need all these things. I'm just supposing that they're there. Right. I'm supposing that the potential for relationship is there. And then when it when I don't get the reception, then I'll just adjust accordingly. But if you're going the other way around, like you're assuming that it isn't there. And then that you need to build it up like like what are you building up? Like like what is enough? Like you get you get you get into this identifying against the potential problem. You get stuck in this in this space that that's not healthy. OK. But but it's also the case that all three of these guys are academics. And if you've been in the academy long enough, I mean, people, the academy can be a knife fight. That can be. It doesn't have to be by default. But I think that's that's the baseline assumption that Manuel is talking about. You know, there's the suspicion, right? Like, oh, if they don't know each other well enough, they're probably going to get into a knife fight. And it's like, I don't know. And look, that can backfire. I mean, I think it was Monday. We had a discussion with somebody we've been talking to for months on the Discord server, on text, on voice chat with cameras on. Right. And we find out he's incapable of entering a conversation in good faith by his own admission. Like, no, no, no. Whenever I hear anybody say anything in a conversation, I question them on it. And I asked him point blank, you ever question your own statements in the conversation? He said no. And I said, all right, then. Well, we're done. You cannot be in a conversation with another person. So, Mark, what did you think of the Jordan Wood, John Vervecky and two more silent participants? What did you did you watch that one? I'm terribly insulted. Luckily, it wasn't my channel or else I would be mad that I didn't get your views. I wanted them to spend more. I mean, because when when Nate leads off with the transfiguration and basically wants to know what happened, I thought and then when John starts on that, I thought this could get really interesting fast. And it went off into what's a person, I think. Yes. For a really long time. Yeah, it was one of those things. I also felt like Jordan Wood was a little bit more in I'm being interviewed as a subject matter expert mode as opposed to I'm having a dialogue mode. And maybe that's part of him adjusting to this corner of the Internet. But when you're when there's four cubes on the screen, you shouldn't be two thirds or more of the words. So maybe you should. Maybe it's not a procedure or formula that you can apply. I don't know. I also like one of my things is I'm just like I have like a compulsion that I need to feel like I'm being understood by who I'm talking to. Right. And so it's really important to use as clear of language that's at the level that the person that you're trying to communicate with can understand. And so I feel like in my conversations with Reveke, I intentionally simplify my vocabulary to try and do that, cause him to do the same thing. Yeah. And those two Jordan Wood and John Reveke have the opposite effect on each other. And part of me was wondering, are they actually saying something or do I not know what they're saying? And part of me is like, I probably can tell if they're not making sense. And my suspicion is they're not actually making sense at the present moment. But there's this offhand chance that they're they're way beyond me. And I've just lost the trail. Well, this is one of the things that I get really frustrated about with Reveke is he brings in his own framing when he's answering questions. So he steps out of the frame in which the question is presented to him and then he says, well, this philosopher or well, like if you're going to use this term, right, instead of relating to what is presented to him. And Jordan Peterson also has has a tendency of doing that. But Peterson has has a way of weaving a narrative. Right. So from the narrative, you get a common understanding, a common grounding. And that's usually generative. Sometimes he gets lost or something. But usually when when Peterson does it, it's generative. And when Reveke was doing it in the meditation series, like that was also really, really good. Because there was a bunch of people that were lost in what they were experiencing and how to deal with it. And then he gave them a grounding from which they could participate in. Right. Like like they could find order in their own chaos. But when you're when you're in an interview, right, when you're in a conversation, adopting the attitude that no, I'm going to superimpose my framing. Right. Like in some sense, you're saying, well, the question that you're asking is not sophisticated enough. And like, I know, I know your question better than you know your question. I'm going to nine dot you on this one. What does that mean? No, no, no, no. Look, Sam, he did. No, I can show you. He did this recently in his Ralston talk. I didn't listen to the whole thing, but there was a dust up on the server about it. And the question he was asked is what do you think about the idea of the will as the central creative agent of the world? And instead of just answering the question, he immediately jumped into he doesn't because free will doesn't replicate the science on free will doesn't replicate. He's skeptical about will. Right. And then and then he went on with more gobbledygook. And like there was a big dust up because I said, well, who's skeptical about will? And just because you can't replicate something scientifically, say the concept of free will doesn't mean it doesn't exist. Like that's that's that's that's ridiculous. That's that's, you know, the evidence of absences problem. Right. It just doesn't. That's not the way the world works. So yeah, I tried to. Yeah. I tried to ask him about theosis because, you know, the Neoplatonists talk about theosis even more than Jonathan Peugeot does. And and I was seeing if he would go there with divinity. Right. Because he generally avoids the G word or the divine word. And so I was seeing if I could get him like you and your neo-Neoplatonism. Do you have a theosis part of it? And the answer is seen. I don't remember what the answer was. They didn't talk about theosis. Yeah, no, it was. Yeah. I said they. Yeah. They really wanted me to watch it. I'm glad I listened to it finally this morning, the whole thing. And it was I found it fun to sort of try to keep tracking with everything. But like you, am I really understanding where they're saying and what they're saying? And I wanted more. It was it was interesting. Anyway, welcome, Chad. And everyone, guys. All right. Hey, Sam. Bye, Sam. All right. Love you, too, Chad. And Chad's got my current favorite. You know, my favorite channels always change every week. But this morning I get up and I always check Friday morning nameless. Good channel. Always interesting. Chad, you brought in the little now I should say I contacted Daily Wire and my my copyright strike is getting removed. And I have gotten permission to use 10 minutes from each episode of the Exodus series. So it's not quite the free hand that Jordan waved on Twitter at me. But it's so I'll I'll find I'll find something in each of them. And I had an excellent conversation with with one of their reps over email and she was a delight to work with. So good on that. And then, Chad, you posted I'd seen in my feed the the controversy between Crowder and Daily Wire came up. And so you had that you had that in your video. What's do you guys know any I don't know. I feel like such an Internet newbie. These things come up and it's like I have no idea what's going on. Well, I didn't know anything. All I did was like what you had where you just see something popping up in the feed and it's like, oh, there's something going on over there. And then I decided to watch a little bit of it this morning and it just got me thinking about something more salient, which was that this is all clearly like there's always like this interesting drama around leadership. And so like that was something that was salient for me. And I thought, oh, yeah, this is scaling all over the place. And then I started thinking about, oh, this has been around forever. And then got to thinking about how that relates to me and how I have difficulty with people. And so that's what the video I mean. Did you guys notice the amount on that contract? A lot. But it's not that much when you think about it. $50 million is not that much. Well, not when you think about how because in the contract, he has to actually pay for all the production. He has to pay for his employees. He has to pay for the gas. Yeah, this is Tim Poole's point was, oh, yeah, Tim Poole did a tweet about it. That's all I caught. Like, I only caught Tim Poole's tweet. And then I'm not done with Chad's video. I'm trying to finish it. Yeah, the point was because and I think it's a big misunderstanding. It looks like Crowder's agents and an idiot basically is the impression I'm getting because Crowder wants to do his own production because he doesn't want anybody messing with his message at all. He doesn't want any chance of that happening. And so it really is a fight over whether or not you're part of a structure. And it's like, oh, well, that's more that sounds like a really familiar discussion to me right now. And it's like, well, he's rejecting being part of a structure out of probably a misunderstanding, to be fair, because they're all friends. They all know each other. So it's really weird that he and I haven't seen the whole thing. But, you know, and I'm only looking at Chad's video. I'm not going to do a deep dive on that nonsense. But it looks like it's really just a misunderstanding between people who should be friends, but instead have middlemen interpreting and giving advice and, you know, crazy stuff because the numbers not that big. Tim Bull was like, look, man, it cost me several million dollars to do my show and Crowder's got a better set up. I bet it cost him more. And that was just a starting negotiation. But the other thing is, is so when he can take all of the content with him after the contract, all except for the major movies that they would make or the major specials they would. So that was another part of the deal. So, like, and I imagine this will be the same with Peterson. So at the end, when Peterson is off daily wire, daily wire will own the Exodus series. Yeah, probably. Maybe not. Probably. I hear Peterson got a lot in his deal. Well, they Jeremy Boring in the in the clip that Chad put on in his video says, no, this is standard for us. We don't want your damn content. We just want we just we don't want exclusive content rights for anything that's not in our entertainment arm. And, you know, unless there's specials that we that we call out because we're going to do all the production. And that's what he was explaining. He's like, no, this is a good deal for Crowder because all that stuff that we would keep, we would pay all the production for. And it gets into this whole thing about, well, how much does it cost to produce this stuff? Well, it can cost quite a lot. I don't know what Joe Rogan's pay. And I mean, he only has two guys or something. But what I what I understood last time I checked. But well, I know none of our channels cost us very much. I'm probably the most expensive channel here. I don't know about that. I mean, oh, yeah. Well, there's a hundred bucks a year. Yeah. And I use everything for free. I mean, the InShot app that I used to edit, I've not paid for a subscription for that. I you know, all the clips I take are everything is copyrighted practically. So I'm never going to pay somebody. Have you ever gotten a strike on your YouTube chat? I've never gotten a strike. I've been blocked though a few times. Yeah. Yeah. So I've never gotten a strike at all. But Nehema asked me where my Patreon was, which I thought was hilarious. I mean, I'll take it as a compliment, but I don't know. Did you send her to Grim Grizz's Patreon? Speaking of Patreon, I want to talk about something with you guys. Well, first of all, Fleabas asked, we need we need an update on your pastor. Any updates on your pastor, Chad? Did your pastor, has your pastor been watching my channel and I imagine away from a Calvinist minister? No, I imagine he is watching or has watched things. We met for an hour. We had a really great conversation. And it's limited to he's always doing something. So there was another one of the other groups was coming in to have a meeting. So he had to get going after an hour meeting with me. But we'll have more conversation. You know, I told him, you know, like, yeah, I mean, it's great. I'm in a Lutheran church, but honestly, I don't know what any of these confessions mean. I honestly don't care. I mean, at the end of the day, I might I my life rests on on the principles of alcohol. It's anonymous. And that's where it's going to be. And so I believe, you know, I I don't know. I don't know what any of that other stuff means. It doesn't really matter to me. You know, what matters to me is, is is my spiritual life growing or something standing in the way of me being able to grow with God and be of love and service to others. That's really all matters. He was cool with it. I get it. How did how did he hear about all this stuff? Now, did you mention this stuff to him or just he just came up with Jordan Peterson? He said that. No, I didn't mention any of this. He had been watching Peterson off and on for the last five years. And then John Burbaki came across came across conversation with John Burbaki and Jordan Peterson and then the Jordan Cooper. So, yeah, no, it was good. It's good. I just felt it was good for me because I've been really skittish around talking about my my this corner like and I wanted I don't want to be the weirdo. You know, that's going to be disrupting anything. But I want to be able to have more than just going to Sundays and sitting in church on Sundays. This is real for me. I want to participate in participation in the game. I mean, action and very action oriented. So I don't not just give me a sidelines guy. I don't want to come in and run the show here, but I want to be I need to be a part of this community. So it's good. Good. Good. Well, that's kind of what I wanted to bring up. Right. Like like you need to be in a structure right to inform your participation. Right. And if if you're if you're lost in in your participation, right, like because you're changing structure too much. Right. Like you need to find this coherent identity. And I think that's that's the thing that that's missing for a lot of people. Like they they don't have the time and the space to settle down enough to to ground themselves in relationships because we're talking about intimacy. And intimacy is is a connection that is developed over time. So there's there's an aspect of growth. Right. And there's there's an aspect of of being informed and informing the other. Right. And doing that dance. And you need to create the space for that in your life. Right. And that's not only with an individual, that's also within a structure. Right. Like like when you have a role like you you can grow in that role and you can find your place and you can find yourself in that place. Right. Like if you don't have like like you say, Paul, right, like we can't look at ourselves. Right. But we can look at the way that we are in a thing. Right. Like it provides a mirror to look at ourselves. And if we if we don't create these things for ourselves, we don't create these opportunities where we can have right attention and that attention can be pointed towards the good. Then and the church gives that. Yeah, the church is an amazing place because it has the stability of going there every week with a specific purpose. Right. Face to face. Right. Like all of that. Yes. And if you're if Chad comes in with, you know, one week with his wife and the next week with another woman, everybody at church is going to look at this and say and the Internet doesn't you know, part of what we're doing in this little corner is we're sort of, you know, pecking at intimacy with each other because we get to know each other a little bit. And but that made Thunder Bay so important because, you know, when I got to sit in the back of the room with Mark, you know, and we could talk and he had said she had Sally Joe's things. And when I got to meet with them on, you see Manuel in Germany. And I mean that suddenly the intimacy level just rises. Right. And and that's why, you know, I agree very much with what you had to say, Manuel, and we need that intimacy and part of the question we have is where does the Internet that's too broad. Where where do these Internet tools fit within that landscape? And it's really well, I have an answer to that. Right. Because when when you're saying, well, yeah, I actually have an answer. Like when you're saying there's these people and you need to get to know them right like you need to go to that story first. Right. Like I watched this series where there's this artistic person that every time she goes into a room, she does one, two, three, four. Right. And then she closes her eyes and then she she steps into the space. Right. So she has she has a hard time adjusting and she has this ritual of of entering the space. Right. I'm like the Christian way would be saying a prayer or whatever. Right. Like in a Jewish household, you touch the I don't know what it's called. I'm not Jewish. I'm from New Jersey. I don't know any Jewish words, but I seen the stuff. But but but what what is that? Right. Like it is a way to answer in the right spirit. Right. So you're engaging in a new spirit. Right. Because it's a new space. And you're in a different spirit when you when you answer. Right. Like so every for Vicky talked about the discord in this way. And I didn't like the way he talked. But like in principle, it's good. You have chaos in your life. Right. And then you come to this place and then you can you can shed everything what's going on in your life. And you can participate in the same space. Right. When I walk in the door tonight, if my wife is sitting on the sofa, I'll walk in, I'll give her a kiss. I'll ask her how her day was when you begin the worship service at church. You know, it used to be in the CRC, you'd have a silence. Now people are chattering. People are fellowship. Then you have the call to worship. Draw the attention. Now you're very right. You're very right. Yeah. We had the thing before the meditation. We had we had it. We didn't speak. Right. Because that would be disruptive before before we enter like this space of quiet. Right. Like then you put all the scales in your head. But the point I'm making is that there's there's something important there. And what does being aligned do? Well, like I'm sitting at home. Right. Like so I like when I go outside, I get stressed. Like that's just what happens to me. Right. So the fact that I can engage from a place where I'm safe and I'm not stressed is really, really important to me. Right. And then I have this button disconnect. Right. So whenever I feel overwhelmed, I have the button disconnect that can just save from whatever chaos comes at me. So if we're talking about what what what can the online space provide? Well, all these people who are struggling with with what is it? Well, it is it is a type of intimate connection to sit in front of someone face to face. Right. Especially if you have artistic tendencies, right. Like when you get overwhelmed by by the amount of signal, you can decide how much signal you have when you're online. Yeah, that's true. That's true. Well, and that's and that's that's what's really important, right. Which is to say, look, platforms are filters first. Right. And so on Discord in particular, what are you filtering for? The first thing that happens is the filter. OK, you're filtering for people who want that or need that level of safety. Well, why are most of them there? And particularly with with voice, not not so much with text, because people are more used to getting in text chats. But that's that was the burgeoning of the Internet with used that news and IRC and like all that stuff and forums and all that. Well, the answer is, well, they either have been traumatized out of quality connection intimacy. Right. Or they don't they need to build up procedures for how to interact with people. And so you have to be very careful how you handle those people. So in some sense, the Internet brought people down to a very low, highly propositional, very dangerous and very flat sort of existence. And so now that they're there and that's what the filter catches. The question is, well, how do you build them back up so that they can leave? Right. And this is Joey's point about bridges of meaning. It's a bridge. You get on one side of the bridge where you're sort of stuck and you're trapped or for whatever reason. Maybe you're like Manuel, maybe you maybe you have an illness like me, whatever it is, it's hard for you to get out. And then all of a sudden, you know, you get you lift those people out and then they leave and then they're gone. And they're not. Wait, wait, wait. You have an illness. I didn't know you had an illness. Oh, yeah, I have a I have a I have an immune system disorder. I didn't know that. Yeah. Yeah. Well, today I was today I took Joey for a walk, actually, because I'm on Discord with Joey and I was walking through the woods because he was one of the ones that you got to get out every day and walk. Yeah, you're right. I do. So I took him with me and I walked through the woods and then I was like, you know, I think I'm OK. I think I'll go to the store to go to the dump because I had to go to the dump. I go to the dump and I was going to go to the store and I'm like, I'm not going to the store. I'm out. I'm out of breath. I didn't do anything. I went to the dump. It's like, oh, wow. Well, if you're immune, you go to the dump. I mean, this sounds like the last place you want to go with an immune system. No, it's not. It's all internal. So I like my immune system is fine. Like I could be around sick people all day long. I won't get sick. But what happens is it just flares up. And then so like if if I for example, if I if I if I would have breakfast like five days in a row or seven days in a row or something, the odds are I would hit afternoon and I would just fall asleep, just completely fall like five minutes notice. You're about to be like asleep. I fall asleep on the couch before. But usually I managed to make it to bed and then I'm out for between 20 minutes and four hours. It kind of depends. That's an immune system flare up where my I get this called the cytokine storm. Right. In this case, get knocked out. So I I can't just go out for the day all the time. Sometimes I can. Sometimes a thunder bear was fine. I got back from Thunder Bay. I didn't do well. I had to adjust all my meds and then eventually I got my meds right. And now I'm doing better. Although, like I said today, today I thought I was going to be able to go for a walk, go to the dump and go to the store. And that didn't happen. So it all depends. And now I did a seven hour live stream the other day. I don't know how, because if you told me I could, I wouldn't have believed it. Five hundred ninety views, no less, between the two channels, between Jacob's channel and mine and navigating patterns. So sometimes everything's fine and I can I can do what I do. And sometimes, you know, I'm just I'm just not not up there. So how do I spend my time? Well, I spend a lot of it online because kind of sometimes I have to. I can't go out. I just don't have the stamina to even walk around some days. So I'm kind of stuck on my chair. I went to my parents for Christmas and New Year and I'm still out of it. Like I've had a couple of good days, but like I'm my sleep schedule is a wreck. I like I'm I don't have energy. I have headaches all the time. Like it's like, OK, like you do something in the world and then, yeah, you got to pay the bill. Like that's that's life. Wow. Right. And these filters are important, Paul. So like Clubhouse, for example, which is I love it when he says Paul, you say it just like my cousins. Keep going. Sorry to interrupt. Right. They they started out on in on Apple, on Apple. Right. And it was a great place when it was only Apple. And then when they switched to Android, it really ruined. It wasn't the only reason the place got ruined. But really, it really destroyed the platform because the filtering mechanism for the platform changed. And that changed the platform because platforms aren't the thing. Platforms are filtered first. And when you're filtering for Apple, you're going to get a certain demographic of people. Well known. I see on the higher end of the income curve. Get all the low life that have and like me to some extent. And so it's important to know about these about these filters and then to adjust accordingly. And I think that's why it's so important. I know I I suspect you read the mail. Right. Manuel and Teo and I did it did a stream because Teo gets it. The difference between the meaning crisis and the crisis of faith. And you know, you guys see you talking about a crisis of faith and fair enough, and you should do that. Fine. This is good. You need that. And sometimes crisis of faith turns into meaning crisis. Absolutely true. But if you're starting from a meaning crisis, I think you need very different tools to help people. And that's the difference between the between the discourse service. That's a good point. Hey, Chad, we got us. We got a scene. There's a scene crisis more than anything. I think. Say more. As well, I think we just wait. I think this is actually so all the little dusty dustups and stuff, all the little the little weird stuff that happens, I think is it's annoying. But there is a value to it because I think it's just like a like that. I know I know I think I'm really crap out of me, but I love them. You know, and I think Mark and I talked about this the other day. It's like, you know, we we stick and we stay whether we like it or not. Right. If I really make claims that I care about something, well, then I'm going to stick around and I'm going to work through it. You know, and so all of the little bickering and stuff, the reason why I say we have a scene crisis. And I think the crisis is being solved. I think all of the crises that we're having in this little space or that we claim to have are kind of being addressed. The intimacy crisis is being addressed. The meaning crisis is being addressed. The crisis of faith is being addressed. The scene crisis is being addressed. What do you mean by the scene crisis, Chad? Well, seeing each other. Oh, OK. Yeah. Oh, yeah. But that's intimacy. That's yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. But yeah. So. So, yeah, I think all that's important. But like I like what you were saying to somebody said, you know, like so like the Chicago meetup was great. You know, that was awesome. I you know, I I I was a little I wasn't as animated in person because I'm not I'm not animated in person. So we we talked a little I had plenty of opportunity to talk with people and spend time with you and stuff. But, you know, I got the sense that I didn't want to fanboy you and I didn't want to cry with you. And there's a lot of people want to talk to you. It was great. Next time we see Chad, I want a big old hug. It was delightful meeting your wife. And it was so it those those in person, they can be a little overwhelming because there's a lot of you. But it was, you know, I have I'm so glad for last summer. Oh, it was great. I loved it. And I didn't feel like I got I didn't get get enough. You know, I was like, oh, this is great. I got to see him. I got to see you eye to eye and shake your hand. And we did get a hug. And it was like that was great enough for me, man. You know, like like I did, you know, it was it was great. But like so I'm trying these other things, you know, and I wrote you a letter. But I wrote some other people letters on here. And I'm trying that because I want to do other embodiments in the real world, something that's not reduced down to ones and zeros, something that isn't I have to work a little more at it. It's you know, there's something about it. So that's one thing I've been encouraging along these little streams. Whenever I get a chance to give a plug for bust out a notepad and a pen and get somebody's address and write them a letter, you know, it doesn't seem like it could be that much. But you never know how much it might be until you're actually doing it. And it's a it's a communication that I mean, you might think, well, that could never go away for good. Well, how do you know? You know, it could go away for good. Yeah. So who did you get it? Who did you get? Who did you get a postcard from? This postcard. I have a few. This is a very old postcard. This is from my friend, Karen, who is in the Bahamas. So when she went to the Bahamas years ago for vacation, she sent me a postcard. Well, I thought it was from someone from this little corner. No, no. But I mean, I have postcards and I keep I keep this stuff around the desk sometimes. So yeah, yeah. What's that? What's that? Whatever announcement. All the birth announcement. And this is an invitation for a party. That's from that's from somebody we met online. Yeah. This is from my parents. It's like, well, it's it's and that and that to me is is the the treasure of of all of this because, you know, watching a YouTube channel, that's just churn. That's Sally's painting. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Watching a YouTube channel, that's just churn. But making these connections, building the relationships. I mean, you're both you're both right with this intimacy crisis. So this little book, this intimacy crisis thing. And, you know, that that's connected with the the marriage crisis that we've been talking about. Yes. Because people I mean, it takes marriage is a it's a tremendously tricky. Oh, I like breaking up here, guys. Even getting to that point is very difficult. Although in many ways, marriage is is sort of, you know, holding somebody's hand and jumping in the deep end. Right. Well, and that's and that's the thing, Paul. So you see the marriage crisis is just the expression of the loss of intimacy at the highest level. Right. And then and then and then, you know, somebody somebody asked me it wasn't the last stream I think we've seen before. You know, because I did this live navigating patterns thing and I'm going to do another one this Friday, seven Eastern. And they asked me this. I want to talk about that. I want to talk about the marriage crisis. And in the in the in the in the in the live stream chat. And I said, I'm not talking about the marriage crisis because I've never been married. So what the hell do I know? And what you what you need to worry about is the dating crisis. And then Sally Jo corrected me because Sally Jo often corrects people when they're wrong. She's very good at it. And she said, no, no, no, the problem they need to fix is the hello crisis. Now, another subject, Peterson and the College of Psychologists. Chad, you mentioned that and that partly because you mentioned that I made that video and I'm continuing to think about it. Dr. James, Dr. Jim in the comments, Dr. James, who's local here. We have our meet up tonight. And so hopefully he'll come to the meet up tonight. But the estuary meeting tonight. But thoughts, thoughts on I, you know, I, I haven't actually watched the Peterson Michaela video straight through. But there are moments in that video that are I mean, what one of the I think one of the things about Peterson that that people don't get is he can be extremely transparent for a guy now of his status and who's been, you know, shellacked like he has. Maybe he talks about his family. It was that's not that's not common. So thoughts on the College of Psychology and that'll I'll say something real quick. And I sadly got I got to get running because I got to get to this meeting. But my big thing is I notice this thinking about this years ago when when he first started talking about Socrates, which I didn't know much about. So I was introduced to Socrates Peterson and and I did put this in that video I made. But I was like, oh, it's weird. Is he like doing the Socrates thing? Like, is he going to be Socrates? And then the question crossed my mind the other day. It was, is he going to drink the hemlock? You know, like he does sometimes he does have a messy Messiah complex sometimes the Christian Messiah complex. He does lean into that. But yeah, like I think I. Go ahead. I think it's the best thing ever. Like, like, I don't I don't think he's he's doing much of his work anymore. Right. So I don't think it's a big loss. Sad maybe for his honor. And they're going to shoot themselves in the food so hard it's it's going to lift Peterson status a lot. Like, like if you want to have the world flip back, like that's a moment that allows the world to flip back. So like I'm I'm all for it. Like, I didn't quite understand you, Manuel. Well, Pichot talks about that the world is upside down. Right. OK. So like this is upside down. Well, this is clown. So in other words, in some ways, this is 2016. I mean, one of the things one of the things that happens is you're sort of only making Peterson stronger when you attack him like this. Right. Right. That's what I saw immediately. And more importantly, you're making yourself ridiculous, which is right. I'd like I don't care about Peterson being stronger, but I do care about them like being ludicrous and being shown for what they are. Right. OK. Well, and that's and that's what it is. It shows that Tim Poole was on this ages ago. Right. He kept he kept repeating. I don't know if he still does this. I haven't watched him in years, but he kept repeating play stupid games, win stupid prizes. And the thing is, the game that they're playing is stupid and they can't win. And so they're going to attack somebody who is unassailable and they're going to lose. And it's simultaneously bad because at one hand it shows the power of the individual. But that's bad because then everybody gets the idea that, well, I'm just an individual like Jordan Peterson. No, no, you're not. You're not. You know, we get into this with people all the time. Maybe you can self transform. But but I don't think you're the Buddha. But maybe you are. I'm not going to say you're not. But I'm skeptical. Right. It's the same thing. Like, maybe you can face the college of whatever and get your license taken and still succeed in life. But I'm betting you can't. But you don't you also don't have to. And if you keep playing postmodern power games against people who are playing a different game, those postmodern power game people are going to lose every time. And the more they lose, the fewer people will want to play that game. They'll be like, well, this game doesn't work. This game sucks. And so I think it's great for exactly the reasons that that Manuel outlined. I think it's fantastic. I hope I hope they I hope they I don't know if they did take away his license. I hope they do, because that's just going to make him better. Well, I was as as I saw in the video, I was just dumbfounded at the stupidity of picking this fight with him, because number one, they hold no real power over him. He already can't really practice as a clinical psychologist ever again by virtue of his fame and everything that has happened to him, even if he wanted to. And so why would you I mean, again, I think even if you were I just blows my mind, I just can't imagine sitting in that room and that there was nobody in the room or maybe there was because I've been in meetings where it's the world view. It's the game. They think that they're playing a game where they have power and they want to exercise that power, their will to power to shape the world. Like fair enough. Very Nietzschean. Nietzsche was wrong, by the way, like very, very clearly. All right. And and and that's their that's their game. That's not a broad statement. That's what they want. But it's so bad. It's and that's the and that's the old you'll notice even Peterson doesn't quote Nietzsche's philosophy. He quotes his prophecy. And I found that when I figured that out, it was less fascinating. You want to know more? Watch my video on Peterson and his trick on navigating patterns. Almost a thousand views. We're going to get there. Right. But that's that's part of he's he's quoting even young. He doesn't talk all that much about young psychology. He talks about his prophecy young for young side this way. Young thought this was going to happen because of this. That's all prophecy talk. None of that is it's psychology talk. There's a little bit of it in there, but that's not what he focuses on. And and and that's and that's part of the charm of Peterson is that he is playing that higher level game. You can you can as a Christian, I'm sure you have your arguments about him and whether or not an Oz Guinness did this in in Episode 8 of Exodus, which I pointed out. Right. It's an hour and 20 minutes in right where where the Joe defends him basically says what I say, which is he's got a way of talking. It's secularist. So I don't come back at him and say it's God emanating from above because the secularist. Their eyes will glaze over. Yeah, exactly. That's that's where this crisis of faith versus meaning crisis conversation comes in for me is that exemplifies a crisis of faith person. You can you can make the claim. No, no, no, no. God emanates that down on you. And even if they don't believe it, they understand what you're talking about conceptually. But with a meeting crisis person, all you just said was blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. That's all you said. They couldn't. There's no chance that they could understand at a conceptual level what you're talking about with emanation. And this is the thing that I've been focusing on. It's authority. Right. So where do you gain your authority? Right. Like either it comes from above, right, which ultimately ends up in God. Right. To whatever system that trickles down to you. Or it's in emergence somewhere. Right. So what are the options for for having an emergence authority? Well, you can have evolution. Right. You can have yourself. Right. Like like your projection. Right. Like or you can have some some ideal. Right. You can have this this logic or whatever that you're using to understand the world. And then that that logic is is the way in which things emerge. Right. Which I think is actually what the way that for me talks about neoplatonism is not as an emanating structure, but as an as an emergence justification structure. But what's going to happen? Well, like if if you're understanding the world as true evolution, things emerge or if you're understanding the world as true, my will, things emerge, you're going to exhibit certain patterns. You're going to exhibit certain relationships in the world. And you can see see people rightly. You can see in their behavior what the type of authority is that they're relating to. I'm not saying that they universally apply one type of authority, but they do in a certain situation appeal to a type of authority because else they don't have a justification. And it's like looking at people like that has been really, really interesting. And then you see like, OK, like these are the forces that move the world. Like there's just inevitable conclusions. Right. Like postmodern power narrative is an inevitable conclusion if it's a battle of wills. Like if we're in a battle of wills, what is going to be the supreme will? Well, the will with the most power. Well, I want to I want to I've got to close this stream in 15 minutes. I'm going to give you all the warning. But Josh, you've been in the comments section. I've appreciated you're always encouraging me. I but we've never chatted before. So just tell me a little bit about yourself. Yeah, I've talked to Mark a little bit, a little bit new to this little corner of the Internet. I'm a climbing arborist down in southwest Colorado. Yeah, I just I stumbled into kind of fell into this area, falling down the Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Paz, you kind of little rabbit or whatever. And I came across you was I was raised Protestant. My father got into reform theology a little later on. Pass that on to me. We used to ride up and down to Telluride, which is about to go to work, working construction in my younger life, about an hour and 15 minute drive. And we listen to a lot of Arcee Sproul, Adrian Rogers. Later on, we listened to Robbie Zacharias. Robbie was a big influence on me. That didn't his career did not end well. But, you know, I went to one of his conferences and he did, you know, I mean, I don't know what he did in his personal life. I can't speak to that, obviously. But but he did change lives. You know, he did he did he did present an Eastern way of thinking about Christianity. His book, Meaning Jesus from the East or looking, seeing Jesus from the East, I think it was or something like that was a was a good book. I think it was his final work before he passed. But, yeah, I just been a longtime Christian, but I didn't really I've always had. I was raised to interpret the Bible literally, and I got to a certain point in my life, and that wasn't really working anymore because basically every sermon I was like, yeah, what about this? What about this guy? I listen to YouTube a lot, you know, and things like that. It wasn't until I came across Jordan and kind of speaking a little bit to your point, Manuel, about authorities and that I I I did take Jordan as authority. He was the first guy that I that I came across that talked about my faith with not scrutiny, but use the Cain and Abel story in the Genesis in the Adam and Eve story, approach it in a different way from a mythological way that I didn't that I had never that that had not crossed my death. I had never really come into my way of thinking. And when he did that, I was like, oh, this is different. I went through a divorce when I was about we finally got divorced. I think I was about 31. No, no, I was probably about when I finalized when I was about 32. I'm 36 now. And that but during that time, I decided that I was going to figure out if I was going to take this Christianity thing into my later into my next chapter of my life. And if so, I want to figure out what it's about. You know, like, let's let's really, you know, I'm just going to when I when I'm trying to figure something out, I often will break it. I will break it open to see how it works. And so I just attacked, you know, I critically thought about every about every level of Christianity. And when and then, of course, I came across Jonathan Paz. You he was approaching Christianity the same way. And I was like, OK, I'm not alone. I'm not crazy. Other people have the same problem when they try to tie the literal world to the biblical world. And and that was really that was really helpful. So, yeah, talking like I referenced that I was I was tired of this. So Manuel's point about authorities. Jordan was a authority in my life for a little bit. And then I met Jonathan and obviously Jonathan takes a different path. And I I started tracking him because I was raised as a Christian. And so that was familiar. Jordan was very into young, as you mentioned earlier, Mark and that. And I and I understand what he's talking about, but I can't get to Christ through young. You know what I mean? And so like when I was trying to get to when I was trying because I was raised with Christ. And so that was that was like a safe place for me. It was like, OK, I got to hold on to one thing in my life without without throwing everything out. I got to hold on to at least one anchor. And Jesus Christ was that I was like, no. And in every way, when you look back in history, he's the good guy. He's the guy you can trust. So when we die, whatever we see, I don't know what it was. Obviously, I don't know. And I don't think anybody really can tell you. But if you see Jesus, go towards that like he's a good guy. Go towards that. You know, it's like whatever whatever we encounter, I have experience. I think I told you this, Mark, I have experimented with or not experimented with. It was an it was an intentional thing with those I'm a mushroom. And I didn't know what I was going to see on that. I didn't know. But I didn't want to be like I said, if you're going to break it open, let's break it open. You know, let's go into mysticism. Let's let's try these things. Let's let's see. Let's push it a little bit. And, you know, marijuana was a part of that. Everything was, you know, there was other things that were part of that. But, yeah, when I when I was pushing these boundaries and just trying to figure out like orientate myself, I did hold on to Jesus as an anchor. And so with Jonathan, that was, you know, he embraced that same anchor that he's OK, this guy is a legit Christian. I didn't know much about orthodoxy. I had I think I had listened to a little bit of GK Chesterton's orthodoxy or yeah, I think it's just called orthodoxy. But I had listened to a little bit of that. I decided I was really going to like and I let I relisten to it and really like kind of push that or in my own head. And I was like, OK, it seems like the oldest for like I was also in a search to try to find the church that Jesus started. I was I was trying to find that church because I didn't I didn't know anymore. Like I found out about Protestantism, obviously, through Reformation theology. And then I was trying to trace it back, trace it back. I even got into Rasa fearingism at one point. You know, I mean, it sounds you know, it sounds laughable now. But I mean, you know, if you're going to be open, be open, you know, and and that. But Mark's giving me the eyeballs right there. If you're going to be open, be open. It's a dangerous path. But if you're going to if you're going to hike the mountain, you know, I found, you know, I mean, let's do it. And so that I was at a point in my life where I didn't have a wife. My my my child, my time with her was cut in half. Basically, I only had it for half a week. And so I decided, OK, I'm going to reboot. I'm really going to dive into this thing headlong and just see what comes out and chase the thread as far as it goes. I found Eastern Eastern orthodoxies. That was very attractive. But I agree with. Yeah, I think it was Scott Hahn that brought up this. Scott Hahn's on the Internet. He's another talking head. He converted from Protestantism to Catholicism. But along his way, would like me was very interested in Eastern orthodoxy. But it is so cultural that he was like, I'm not that Greek. So he was like, yeah, he's like, he's like, he's like, very Greek and Russian orthodoxy is very Russian. You know, yeah, yeah. So so in those cultures for a very long time. Yeah. And so I'm not I'm not either one of those cultures. I'm half Hopi Indian half we think Czechoslovakian and Eastern European on my dad's side. He hasn't done the ancestry DNA thing yet. But that's as far about as you know, just, you know, been a, you know, guy from a small town out in southwest Colorado called Cortez, you know, near the four corners of, you know, Colorado, Utah, New Mexico and Arizona. But, you know, it just yeah, I got to a certain point where I was like, I got to I got to expand. I got to, you know, do something. And I understand the idea of bodies and things like that. And so I decided to try to join a larger body in my community. And that was Catholicism, you know, the Catholic Church. I'd been walking my little town, local town, and I've never gone. I've never been in that church. I've been in all the other churches, all the Protestant churches, even the Anglican Church here at one point in time, you know, because I think she spoke at a at a youth group or something like that. And I think I, you know, went there one time or but but yeah, I'm recently in the process of joining the Catholic Church. That's where I'm at so far. Got a girlfriend. Didn't ever plan on getting married again. Didn't ever plan on joining a church. But as of 2022, those became the goal. So I was with my girlfriend. We're going to be shooting for marriage. We're joining the Catholic Church. Yeah. Thanks, Mark. I appreciate it, brother. And, you know, and yeah, we're just because I didn't want to be I heard Jordan Johnson's advice and your advice. You know, get out there, join a body, you know, like, like, don't just be on the Internet. And that's what I was doing, you know, just drinking from the fire hose of YouTube. Trying to get everything in, trying to get Paul's videos in, Jonathan's videos. You know, it's like you can go mad trying to do that. And, you know, so, yeah, I mean, I'm the token. I'm the token show. We're up guy. Just, you know, you know, showed up here and just trying to orientate myself. And I really appreciate your work, Paul. It's very similar to what I grew up with. So I got a heart for it. You know, me and Mark have been in a couple of streams together. And I think I talked to men well, actually, on Discord on my very first time ever talking to anybody. So, but yeah, it's just like I said, trying to orientate myself and a lifelong Christian. But there's something special about this little area that I find myself very attracted to guys, you know, like yourself and everything that are doing these things. And you're talking about things that my mind turns about, you know, in that. And so, yeah, yeah, that's where I guess where I'm at. All right. Well, thank you, Josh. And Michael, is that is that how to say your name? Oh, is he still there? There you are. I've got to turn this. I've got to turn this thing off because I got to get home and then I got my estuary meeting tonight. But I wanted to give you a chance to say anything you wanted to. So here it is. Hi. First of all, I want to say hi, Mark and Manuel. Yeah, it's Mikael. I was I was listening to what you guys had to say about the marriage. And it just I remember I work during lunchtime. We talked about, you know, there's a group of us and we talk about it. And I came to a point where I realized that I felt like I was the only happy guy who's married. You know, everybody else was sharing their stories. And one one of my friends, she's like twice divorce. Another one of my friends told me that she will never get married because she has such a bad experience with not her being married, but her her parents having divorced and a lot of things like that. And so I kind of felt like the odd odd one out. You know, I didn't want to say, hey, guys, well, try it. Try it again. So well, that's a blessing. That's a huge blessing. It is. It is. But like, I feel like, like in any marriage, like the first year is very hard. Yeah. In fact, I remember my my sister in law and my brother in law, they, you know, my sister being Hispanic and my brother in law being very, you know, American. They had a lot of cultural differences. The first couple of years they had to iron out with. Yeah. So and also it kind of doesn't have that. They're very they like to argue a lot. So yeah, yeah, yeah. But but yeah, I, you know, I think about also the sacraments and how marriage can be also a blessing in that regard. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Very true. Well, folks, I have to turn this stream off because I've got an estuary to run tonight, but I just wanted to drop in and and see who was around and pick your brains on things. And and none of you, I was not disappointed. Well, have a great estuary, Paul. And thank thanks for running the stream and and and at least letting me in bravely. I was really brave, Paul, like, I don't know if you can manage another hug. You guys are you guys are you guys are good faith. You guys are good faith actors. I know that. So all right. Have a good evening or morning, whatever it is for I know how late it is in Europe there, Manuel. I hope you can get some sleep bedtime for Manuel. Yes. All right. Take care. Bye.