https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=VZr8L7vP4IU

 that. Well Merry Christmas Julian. Yeah Merry Christmas to you. So how was your Christmas? Christmas was fun. I had all my kids back home and we played we usually play a lot of board games as a family over Christmas. It's a great way to just spend a lot of time together and have some fun. So we do it we do that we do that too. My mom really likes to get my brothers to have family time so when Christmas comes around she gives us a new board game that we play that for a couple of weeks and that gets old. So what did you get for Christmas? I haven't gotten anything. I give my kids stuff and we also when my kids were little we got into the habit of we usually spend we have 12 days of Christmas so we don't do necessarily all the presents at Christmas time. Also when I lived in Latin America we had King's Day which was when gifts are so we usually kind of have gifts throughout the holidays instead of all focused on one day and okay takes a little also takes a little relief off of you know making sure you had all gifts ready to go by Christmas Eve or Christmas Day so it's it's pretty relaxed when it comes to gifts in our family. Well it was kind of ridiculous for me this year because I just got an outrageous amount of stuff like they gave me a book Shaz. I got I ordered me a bunch of books actually some of your recommendations I got Robert Alters what's it called again? Art of Biblical Narrative? Yes I've been listening to who's that Robert no I didn't just hang on a bit what the heck is that guy's name? It doesn't come to mind but he recommended some books too so I got something from Peter Leithart have you heard of Peter Leithart? Oh yeah yeah yeah yeah he's a he's a very he's a fun thinker very original guy. The guy I'm talking about has been really influenced by Peter Leithart so maybe you know who he is. He does that daily question and answer on his YouTube biblical scholar he's done a lot of work on male and female gender roles. Oh Scott McKnight? No no it's I keep thinking his name is Robert. He does a daily question and answer on YouTube. Yeah he has a he has a blog called yeah of course I can't remember his blog now either. The tagline is close to my jet zone. I can't believe you haven't heard of him. Let me check. Whatever yeah and and my brother made me a little dumpster. It's a miracle that's right. Yeah Alistair Roberts is the guy's name. Yeah oh yeah no he's from England. He wrote some really good blogs on Peterson and yeah I like his stuff. He's and and he's a sharp sharp guy. Heck yeah yeah he sure is and he had this this podcast where he recommended like 10 of his most influential books and I looked over them and there was some overlap with what I've heard from from other people so I got some of those. Well he's a Calvinist too you know. Oh boy you guys are taking over the world. I swear everybody is a Calvinist. I think he's a Calvinist because he hangs out with the mere orthodoxy guys and so he's I'm pretty I haven't I haven't read a lot of his stuff but everything that I've read from him and heard from him has been really good so I have you looked into the mere orthodoxy guys at any depth. I've come across them recently they seem like fascinating thinkers. Yeah they're good they're good thinkers. They're they're very conservative. They're but they're they're deep thinkers and they're very articulate. They do good work. I don't know if I call them conservative because they sort of seem to be coming from a postmodern perspective and sort of sort of coming back and I guess Jonathan Pagio would call it an inversion coming from the postmodern perspective and kind of calling orthodox Christianity radical and then sort of using orthodox Christianity to critique the modern West. This is what seems to be happening. Yeah but they're conservative on I think Ryan Anderson he's one of those. They're conservative on on LGBT issues. They're for traditional marriage. I think they're not in favor of women in the a lot of them are Anglicans. I think they're not in favor of women in the priesthood. So on some of those on some of those items they're conservative and that's why I tagged them that way but they're they're hardly traditionalists in that they're just repeating traditional things. They are very much doing new work and doing fresh thinking and engaging in public theology. I guess the only one I've I've come across is John Milbank and he doesn't really seem to be much of a concern but I've also heard of I've also read some of Ryan T. Anderson. Yeah. He's part of the radical orthodox campaign. Yeah. Yeah. Jake Meader he's in there too. They have the blog Mere Orthodoxy and then the podcast is based on the blog but some they write you know they really do good work in that blog. They write a lot of good stuff. They're deep thinkers and they write well so they're good. Fascinating. But they are in terms of if you look at I mean with your tradition you're you know you all are kind of over to a side and in terms of the big the big battle going on in the church between progressives and traditionalists they're very much on the traditionalist side. There's the same thing going on in the Hutterite camp. Like I have some friends who were like we have these colonies like a different colonies and we sort of have these stereotypes about different colonies and you say oh this colony is super progressive and this colony is super conservative and like it we don't see a lot of like we don't exactly have theology scholars but we do have these little in colony squabbles going on all the time. But yeah. That's the way the CRC used to be till we all became Americans and Canadians. It's true it's an immigration process. You had progressive factions of the CRC to the degree that CRC folks could be progressive. Then you had conservative factions of the CRC and lots of different colors of them. No that's right they're all different colony areas different churches. Yeah the politics are just fascinating. Oh they are they're fierce you know nobody fights like siblings. That is betrayal. Oh yeah and then we have some sort of reform movements within the Hutterite tradition. We have the sort of group of educated people who have their who have sort of reforms they'd like to push through and then there's all the dialectic of returning to their roots and maintaining the tradition going on. But yeah I probably fall into the going back to their roots tense but yeah. So you all adapt to engage in this negotiation. And I was reading Peterson's 12 Roots for Life yesterday and he had this I'm a chapter four now and I don't know it's kind of it's kind of I'm gonna get a hard time getting through it for some reason. I think I've listened to way too much Peterson. If I hear him talk about hierarchies and the proper role of the left and right and they just suggest one more time I'm going to go crazy. I can't stand anymore. But so I'm at chapter four now and that's the best one I've read so far. And he talks about not comparing yourself to other people because you sort of have your own in terms of have your own own different things and your own your own nature essentially. And I was thinking about that in regards to my own tradition and how easy it is to look to other traditions and see how okay they have this right and look what we're missing out on and look what they have that we don't. And I was sort of thinking that maybe it's better if we if I compare myself to sort of my own tradition in the past and instead of always looking to looking for other traditions. So I think that's a wise tact. And again these groups like the Hutterites and the Christian Reformed Church. I mean these were immigrant. So what happened in the Christian Reformed Church in the 19th century, liberalism was just running the table in the Netherlands and these were mostly rural farmers who basically said we're not going to do it. And so they pulled away from the state church. They had their own little church off to the side and a great number of those were the immigrants who moved to the United States and then later to Canada. And so you have this you're exactly like you say. You've always kind of been an enclave because you hived off from the state church but then you're always kind of looking over the fence at other people comparing yourself especially when you're young comparing to others and wistfully doing. But what you don't recognize is all of the things that you're hiving off and that your high walls have afforded you as a subculture. And so what happened in the Christian Reformed Church after the Second World War is that slowly all the walls came down for most of the communities and the CRC critiqued its provincialism as legalism and have increasingly just become Americans and Canadians and lost its distinctiveness. I mean when I think of Calvinist like just from the stereotypes I have I would find it very difficult to distinguish them from evangelicals like what's essentially the difference. And I mean the Hutterites have traditionally been very sort of this closed off community and we sort of have this theology of I guess you could see it as sort of two kingdoms. We have this idea of the kingdom of earth as an actual entity as a physical entity separate from the secular world essentially from secular government. And so we've always had a theology against participating in secular government and sort of created our own subculture within the larger culture. And what's happened in the age of the internet and in the age of mass media and whatever is we've had all of these influences coming in and so we have we have Hutterites who are essentially Calvinists or Hutterites who are essentially Catholics or it's mostly Calvinists. It's mostly the Calvinists taking over the world really. But you have all of these outside influences coming in and so what we're always trying to do is to reassert our tradition and try to find out what what Hutterite theology actually is. Which is a super difficult thing because Anabaptists, I don't know if this goes for all Anabaptists, but definitely Hutterites. You don't really have much of a theological tradition. It's always been more about living out your faith, living in community, living with others, being pacifist. It's more of that embodying the kingdom type of tradition. So we don't really have the metaphysical theology of Thomas Aquinas or Thomas Aquinas or whatever. Are your clergy paid? No. See that's another key part of our tradition is we sort of have a common pots or theoretically we do. And we sort of really discourage people from having their own private money. If you go to the like if you look at this story in I think it's back to where everybody's putting their money into the common pot of the community and these two people leave some behind and try to store it away for a better time. And then Peter finds out and then they come and then they actually die. So we actually put that sort of a key text for us because we sort of believe in having this common pot. Yeah you can sort of see it as an act of faith where you sort of put your trust in the in the community who's indwelled by the spirit essentially. No and what happens you know part of the reason that the Dutch Reformed have such a rich theological tradition was that we had a pretty strong tradition of a priestly class in a sense. We wouldn't call them priests the pastors. And so the secessionists in our history people like Abraham Kuyper and Henry de Kock back in the Netherlands these were in a sense part of the Reformed reformational tradition of kind of scholar pastors as community leaders. And so what that then offers you is a tradition of professional theologians and that's that'll make a difference in the community. Definitely an asset because like I said before in the age of the internet and of mass media you really need to know what your tradition is about if you want to really keep it into a coherent system because you're getting all of these influences and you can't really maintain your your sense of theological wholeness without being trained in what it is that you actually believe. And having the community and having the community institutionalize that you know one of the things right right you know so we've had we've had traditionally a strong tradition of strong pastoral support you know pastors that pastors are in a sense paid to work on sermons and care for the flock but it's always so we've had high educational requirements for pastors but there's always a liberalizing aspect to that too in the tradition because it's often the pastors who are more progressive or more liberal than the laity because the pastors are doing all this reading so then you're you're reading broadly so you're also reading the and it's it's complicated you know you it's easy to look at the other system and say ah you know they don't have all the overhead of a of a priestly class that they're supporting blah blah blah but at the same time I mean on the other hand strengths have trade-offs. That's for sure but again with the advantage of this priestly class is that you don't just adopt things that are incompatible with your tradition or or whatever without serious consideration or yeah. Or maybe you do and you just have real highfalutin justification which is a lot of how reason and scholarship works because the as you know to look at Ian Ian McGillchrist the the the right brain is calling the shots and the left brain is just so there's a lot of that too. So you feel so so so I'm interested then in terms of you so you're a welder and you work for a dubster company and but you're obviously gifted and motivated and interested in scholarship and thinking and philosophy and theology so so what does that look like for you in your life? Well what one thing I do is while I weld I listen to a ton of podcasts so I listen to way too many podcasts because I've discovered that if you if you've taken too much information it's impossible to sort of categorize it and find the proper place in your your coherent worldview system for it. So you sort of need to to cut down a bit and spend more time thinking and writing and even reading it I think reading is different than listening to podcasts because the slow particular exercise whereas podcasts you just pump information into your brain and and you just there's just too much information and for some reason you don't seem to have that problem because you seem to be an information information machine of some kind but then I also try to do lots of reading and and writing and well writing not so much but I do try to try to find time during my day for when I'm not welding I guess but what was also interesting about our tradition is we like I was listening to you to a bit of your your Christmas sermon at the first just a bit of the first few seconds I think because I didn't have time to listen to the rest but you were saying that you're having your Christmas sermon on Sunday because Monday is the whatever during the week and you need to have your sermons on Sunday and I sort of laugh because the Hararets are too hardcore to let the day of the week stop them from having their their their holidays we've been having like these four consecutive Sundays. That's the way the CRC used to be. No that's right. Uh-huh. This kind of man be pamby business about not having services because people won't come and it's a lot of work and you miss out on family you know 40-50 years ago in the CRC that would not cut it you're in church on Christmas Eve you're in church then on Christmas morning you're in church on New Year's Eve you're in church on New Year's morning you're you're in church on the Sundays and you're going through the Heideberg catechism you're not doing an advent calendar you're not doing special that the special services fall on those days no you're exactly right this is this is immigration and and assimilation happening. So is that assimilation into what? Assimilation into the broader American culture and then picking up some of the some of the exchanges going on in that culture between religious communities for you know and 50 years ago for the Christian Reformed Church to be doing advent and Lent would have been considered Romanish you know you're you're that's papus you're bowing to the pope doing those seasons the Heideberg catechism is 52 Lord's Days in the morning you have a worship service in the evening you have your Heideberg catechism sermon this was standard in the Christian Reformed Church and still is in some of the more rural communities and some of the the colonies that are further out but the closer you are to an urban center the more educated usually educated outside of the denomination that the people are so these things have been changing in the Christian Reformed Church over the last 50-70 years. Yeah it sort of seems like it's that sort of um uh yeah I was I was thinking the other day about um how sort of you you need to create this hierarchy of priorities where um if you take seriously the idea that that Jesus is Lord shouldn't um shouldn't sort of your Christianity come before everything else and it sort of seems like you're this is sort of giving into consumerism or yeah we need to have our Christmas holidays with our family and we need to go to work every day yeah it sort of seems like the hierarchy is getting huge in um in the in America essentially where yeah I guess that's sort of also something Kierkegaard um was was keen about was sort of um fighting against sort of this this nationalism that puts the state over the church and and yeah so there's always the hierarchy. Well those those fights go all the way well they obviously predate so of course you know you have you have the early Christian period before Constantine when the church is you know the church is kind of below the radar then with Constantine obviously it comes out and and you have this you have this beginning collaboration with state power then you have the Roman the Roman Empire collapse and the churches in some ways the institution that preserves the Roman Empire I mean if you look at the papacy all of the language is is just brought in from the Roman Empire and in northern Europe you have the Holy Roman Empire which scholars will say was it was not Roman it was not holy and it was not an empire um but you know you have so you have this incredible history and so what happens then let's say in the Dutch experience you have the state church well the Dutch rebelled against the you know they gained their independence from Spain and the Holy Roman Empire and that whole you know mishmash which was Europe the the Dutch you know the Anabaptists really launched the Dutch Reformation so but then Calvinism was kind of a late comer but kind of ran the table and took a big took a big chunk of the population but so then you had so then in Europe you had these state churches so the the state and the church made a kind of a unified whole but then they come to America where there is no state church by constitution and so these little groups who are often dissenters like my ancestors so then they come to the U.S. and they for the most part they're able to kind of hide themselves off and it's tolerated but then what happened in the CRC is that World War II happens and all of the young people get drafted off into this bigger world and they begin to discover that well we've got our Dutch Sabbatarianism we've got all of these separate traditions but how much different are we from the Missouri Senate Lutherans and the the Mennonite Brethren and all of these other groups and and some of what develops then is this neo-evangelicalism which is kind of this Americanish amalgam of all of these churches that say our our distinctives are mostly ethnic and now you know especially in the light of the civil rights movement we've got real we've got real qualms about ethnicity and so we want to have a new Christendom and and evangelicalism in America becomes the new Christendom and that really starts seeping then into penetrating these subcultures and leeching the early adopters away from the subcultures which means that the subcultures get more and more hardened in some ways because the ones who stay are the ones who are really determined not to change so then you've got temperamental factors going so it's a it's a very interesting thing now Canada you're going to have a slightly different history because you've got so few people in so much land and I mean Canada has less population than the state of California yeah yeah and an economy about half the size so you're going to have then different situations in Canada and then Canada becomes kind of the new frontier so and so the Christian Reformed communities in Canada you have some of the most conservative Christian Reformed communities in Canada and some of the most progressive and it's it's a it's a it's a very fluid dynamic diverse context so I'm not surprised by anything you've said about you the experience of your community because it tracks but see once you begin to see oh wow our community situation tracks with these Christian Reform and other people what kind of abstractions can we learn from it and then suddenly you've relativized the sacred elements of your community in the Christian Reformed Church Sabbath Day observance which was Sunday that was a really big deal in the CRC you did not go shopping on Sunday a lot of people cooked their food on Saturday so the wife wouldn't have to work you had all of these all of these boundary markers that kept Christian Reformed people Christian Reformed you didn't marry someone outside of the Christian Reformed Church you stayed in your tribe we had schools only Christian Reformed people in the schools only Christian Reformed people in the churches business you were kind of out there in the world but so it's that was the wow that that really tracks to to the hot right experience because that's that's basically exactly how we're sort of set up like you have you marry within the hot right tradition you you have your hot right schools you have your etc and again the business world is probably the exception where you sort of reaching out to the reaching out to the secular world and whatever yeah secular world is sort of a real a weird word to use here because part of the problem of having these these little tribal Christian communities is that you sort of it sort of leads to thinking that this is Christianity and all that's outside is is the world or we use the word the word the world and it sort of makes you really really tribal and sort of really suspicious about other traditions so there's always that dialectic as well oh very much and that's very much CRC history and but it was it was not only the business that was out there for the CRC but again because you have this educated priestly scholarly class they were also out there and so they're reading broadly and so you'll have some of them that are reading broadly with an eye to critique and condemning but then you've got some who are higher in openness that are reading broadly and saying yeah maybe we should integrate some of these ideas maybe they're right about some of these things yeah it's the order and chaos thing going on there yeah i was maybe can bring in one of the things i wanted to talk about here into this conversation one of the things i've been thinking about is so i've been listening to a lot of Peugeot and and Peterson as well and one thing they've really made me think about is the whole idea of the protestant reformation and like their whole emphasis on the wisdom of these traditions that that go back all the way back to early christianity and what i've really been thinking about is sort of what the protestant reformation seems to be sort of it's almost thoughtless rejection of of all of these these traditions and sort of sowing the seeds of the modern world you can already see the seeds of the modern world in the reformation and i'm really finding myself attracted to um to peugeot's orthodoxy because of just because of what i can see um missing in the in the protestant churches and i'm wondering if you sort of um felt the same thing or struggled with a with the same um sense of missing something because of this um thinking of for example symbolism um there seems to be sort of an awkward relationship with symbolism in protestantism because um sort of the literal reading of the bible is sort of what's being pushed there and sort of that's where sort of the modern world gets um gets born out of because we see this the world in world of objects which we can manipulate and that's maybe that's how modern science starts to emerge and um there's also obviously the strain of individualism coming up there where you have the individual and his relationship to god and this disregarding of the community so i'm sort of thinking these things through and wondering about that i i've been thinking a lot i've been thinking a lot about the protest and reformation lately too and so one of the things that you know a couple of years ago when we had the in in 2017 when we had the 500th anniversary of luther's posting on the wittenberg door i was reading a fair amount of luther and luther biographies and reformational stuff lately i've picked up again uh calvin's institutes to to try to get a better sense of okay what was going on in their minds calvin's institutes are a generation later than luther you know calvin's institutes are in the 15 15 40s 50s and 60s instead of the 15 teens and 20s and what's helpful about calvin's institutes calvin's institutes is is they didn't have blogs yet but calvin's institutes was kind of a blog and it it was kind of the most popular blog of that time period and that's really how this reformed branch of the reformation really got going because it was i mean what happened with luther was you know this terrible fight that sometimes when you watch two people and and you just watch this conflict develop you know that there are huge forces that have been pent up and it all comes to play in this conflict and that's what happens in the in the initial reformation but luther is is the last medieval scholar in some ways calvin is already moving in starting to move into the modern world but calvin again if you read his institutes and the and the introduction which is a letter to the pope basically you can really see someone wrestling with the tradition and the church fathers because these these early reformers knew their church fathers a big part of our difficulty in assessing the protestant reformation is the 17th century because a lot of a lot of the the scholasticism in reformed scholasticism really happens in the 17th century not the 16th century and this is where you get this question is calvin a calvinist because what you find in the reformers is that they had all throughout the roman world at the time of the reformation everyone knew the church was in dire need of reform there was tremendous corruption in the church you know part of part of why the neo sacramentalism as i'm calling it is is needed and welcome today is the ossification of of protestantism in a way of of this strict literalism and that that's a partner with the that the literalism is a partner with the with the secularism those two things are joined those two things are joined and and that's that's too that's too rigid there's too much order there but sorry sorry you know i can interrupt it with regard to the literalism what i see is also tied up with it it's sort of as modernist anthropology where you sort of see the human being that is rational purely rational animal and his passions his desires and his imaginations need to be sort of sort of brought under the control of the rational mind and completely ignored so what i see happening with the with the iconoclasm and with the rejection of artwork and with the rejection of symbolism and this purely literal reading of the bible is sort of what what they're essentially saying is what this human rational animal needs is doctrine and propositions and truthful truth claim statements but he doesn't and sort of disregarding the um how do i say this sort of disregarding the the symbolic and disregarding the connection to the to the emotions and um if you look at the the medieval definition of rationality it wasn't sort of the same definition we have today where it's sort of the dispassionate objective um monarchical division human being is sort of actually a being it's sort of a integrated life that takes um the emotions the imaginations the um the lived existence together with with rational thinking into one coherent whole so somebody who's is not living in accordance with his principles is sort of living in irrational life one who hasn't integrated his emotions um in a sufficient way is irrational so it's sort of an anthropology that takes the fully human being and what i sort of find very attractive about about about this this roman catholicism or this orthodoxy is sort of it seems to have this fuller right fuller fuller conception of the human being um and it's sort of engaging all aspects of it in its in its liturgy and it's doctrine and practice um so so when you're talking about literalism i also see that in the rejection of in the iconoclasm and and and whatnot so it's important though to remember that the that literalism which again in the 16th century it wasn't really there as much but that was a reaction to what was perceived as there were issues with the two-speed system of the traditional churches where you had a priestly class where you had monks who were praying for the church and and so part of the vision let's say in calvin's calvin's geneva and and luther and others what the protestant reformation was they wanted the they wanted a the whole church to be holy not just special holy people you know nature grace all these dichotomies were also in the the old system and so they were really and and then you also had and and what that also afforded with the symbolism was you know you had you had relics all over europe i mean wittenberg where luther's reformation happened um luther's you know luther's patron the luther's patron was this huge collector of relics he had one of the biggest relic collections in europe at the time so actually when he backed luther he was really going against his his his economic interests because those relics were a big money maker and so the the reformation really addressed a lot of the corruption and and so what's interesting about the reformation is that it only happens in certain areas and other areas like like italy france spain it doesn't happen it's repressed in some ways but it also it doesn't take on sufficient sufficient popular support and and so there's real questions terms okay why is that but then it's important to remember that the council of trent the the protestant reformation forces the catholic church to reform itself in some critical ways and and without the reformation there had been many attempts at addressing the corruption before but what basically the protestant reformation really did was force the catholic church to get very serious about its corruption and so it it eventually became a blessing to that but you know there's so many layers to this thing that that it's very easy now as we get kind of to the height of secularism to understand where oh we we want symbolism again because again you've got the order chaos you know peterson's order chaos fright yeah yeah going on so i you know it's interesting because well here's the thing just like the the modernists and the fundamentalists that modern day fundamentalists think we're not modernist at all we're pushing against them well yeah yeah you've got people going you've got folks regular folks now moving going from sam harris into an orthodox church don't think for a minute they're not taking stuff isn't getting smuggled in there with them because they will not be like the russian immigrant peasant who came over and is and you and i both know that because on one hand we know what it's like to see an immigrant group hive off and take their religion with them it always changes in the new world and you might feel really happy to have these oh wow these people are really validating and affirming our religion yeah but change it too yes that that's something that's something for sure and so part of what happened in the christian form church and my father's ministry was a big part of that so in the american civil rights movement the the dutch with their very dutch very white very if yeah if you're not dutch or not much well suddenly you know we begin to realize gosh we're also kind of racist so we don't want to be racist so how can we not be racist well well what what if black people start coming to our church oh well that would that that would show we're not racist and and that wasn't the that wasn't the thing that was on top and then there's discovery and see i grew up into that so that wasn't my experience i to me that was just normal life i thought the world was mostly black people because that's what i saw around me what did i know i was a kid but but you can see this thing happening but then of course that is going to well we've got to give them influence and we've got to give them power and all of that is right and good but that's going to change your mix and there's there's no there's no place outside of all this change even if you put up your high walls if you if you double down and decide not to change well that move has made you change because the last generation where it was naive and implicit and just simply a part of the context that's different than having the high walls yeah yeah um yeah we're probably moving towards the the sort of change um change dynamic right now but yeah that's i think the previous generations more the high walls kind of kind of deal but um you can't help it you're listening to podcasts from reform people and gordon peterson and orthodox people and you're listening to jonathan peugeot and say yeah that makes a lot of sense i gotta think about that ah you know you're the camel's nose there julian you're gonna let all these foreign ideas into the hot right yeah yeah that's like the whole idea even of even of icons i mean i can understand why i can understand icons and like growing up people would say stuff like um over the roman catholics worship idols and yeah i mean they're sort of a if you grow up protestant you sort of have to sort of get all of these implicit anti-roman catholic um biases that aren't actually true and you sort of have to rethink them as you as you continue to grow but um yeah i was in a conservative protestant church in southern california not crc but more conservative than the crc i won't i won't i won't i won't dox them but i was listening to the preacher preach about well he wasn't preaching he was telling me how the vietnamese all become roman catholic because both the buddhists and the catholic worship idols and and though it's like okay but you know so okay so on one hand i'm not there with you that the statuary is necessarily worshiping idols as in bail but on the other hand it's statue this element of critique that the that the protestant reformers had about the statuary had validity because they were watching people sacralize certain things often at the expense of what should have been what they would talk and yes that's another thing to keep in mind is when you and i look back at at the history or when we listen to someone like jonathan bejoe but we were actually hearing it sort of this this abstract presentation of the ideal of what the um what the doctrine of say um what are they called again say the icons are supposed to be but what these people were doing back in the reformation were actually looking at the actual experience at the actual live um how people were actually living with these um with these icons and predicting that so we're sort of looking at the abstract ideal and they're looking at the um at the actual um physical manifestation um and maybe another example of what you were just saying about about this conservative church would be when um mcArthur was talking to shakira when he said that um when where there's a where there's an overabundance of symbolism there's a there's there's a lack of engagement with reality or something along those lines and he was talking about how great it was that the the protestant ushered in the modern world and what i was sort of thinking there was um is that such a good thing because i definitely have my critiques of the modern world and yeah this unless you have something else to see i can well we have our critiques of the modern world but we sure are happy to step on an airplane or see a modern doctor you know it's you know you gotta give steven pinker it's due um but that see what what i've had this paradox i've been thinking about for over a year now um i was taking this course on western civilization and one question that came to mind was um as a christian um should what should my perspective on the west slash modernity be should i be sort of grateful of all of the benefits benefits it supported me or should i be critical of of what it's of all its horrible accesses and all its horrible all of its horrible side effects and the concrete ways that it affects how i think and how i act and all of the bad things it brings with it and i sort of always that i always think back to to early christianity and their experience and the early christians experience in rome um it must have been great to live in probably the most prosperous city in in all of the in all of the ancient world they probably had plumbing and they had their gladiatorial games and they had their their exported food and their perfume and and all of the luxuries of modern life but at the same time we look back and we see your own method of the paradigm of of immorality so what where should you ultimately stand should you stand for a position of gratitude or a position of critique and sort of the the tentative conclusion i've come to is that it's really helpful to think in terms of a two kingdom theology here because ultimately as a christian i stand in a in a separate kingdom and from this vantage point i don't actually exist in this kingdom in this secular kingdom so i can sort of critique it from my vantage point here and ultimately have is my ultimate allegiance with jesus christ so that's that's sort of how i've approached this and i i really wonder about peterson's whole thing about being being grateful to to moderna yes so that's what i'm wrestling with yeah yeah well you want to live in la you know la is rome or washington dc or new york city i mean we don't have just one rome we have many and the all of those tensions are there and so part of what again in our tradition you had elements of our tradition that emphasized the antithesis and what we mean meant by the antithesis was you know two kingdoms two kingdoms opposed well that's right um but then there's also the there's also then the the place where paul is to the to the jews he's a jew to the greeks he's a greek and and you have and so then you you know in many ways you have to integrate the unintegratable because you both need an antithetical you both need to be able to appreciate the antithetical nature of reality and the the integrated nature of reality um and you know often people another conceptual framework i haven't talked about this a lot in my videos but i've worked with it a lot in the past a lot of times people set aside as opposed the center set a center set versus a bounded set group of you know conceptualization so center set is more is more analog because there's nuances and and people are following the center bounded set has rigid boundary markers but the truth is that the bounded set and the center set are always working in conjunction with each other because in many ways the boundary markers are are moving and you'll notice this in your own tradition that very much has bounded set well so so and so daughter of the hutterite community marries a meninite girl and it's like oh talk about scandalous yes but but people like oh wait a minute if she had married a christian reformed guy well that would just be way out and roman catholic yeah but meninite they're they're they're still in a baptist you know but there are but there are you know but this is this these are the way these things get played out and and and then okay so then your cousin marries outside the community and well so do we go over we go over for christmas well they're still our cousin but and then you go over there and you realize well yeah they haven't shown up for all the services but they're still having devotions or whatever boundary mark you have and and so how hard a line you're going to draw my wife's school did fiddler on the roof for their eighth grade production and i was it was fun watching that because fiddler on the roof that's going through all of those same issues the guy has three daughters the first daughter marries a guy within the community but they break he has to break his promise to the butcher the second daughter marries a young jewish radical who's from the city and they both go out to the the siberia and live in the gulag and the third one marries a russian and tevye has to figure out how far will he go and so the third one he you're dead to us you're dead to us but then they're going they're leaving town and he's like god be with you has to say that at least because it's his daughter and so all these issues are always with us yeah um with regards to the this idea of sort of taking the parts of the modern world you appreciate and maybe critiquing the rest i'm wondering why so you've read a lot of neil postman but i don't see a lot of that coming through in in your thoughts um i haven't read a lot of him i'm using ourselves to death but you're right i i haven't finished um his book on technology there are outliers like postman you see one of the things that really caught my eye early about peterson when he was talking about the car and what is a car and he was and he was i don't remember if it was maps of meaning or personality i think it was maps of meaning he's going into the question what is a car and i heard that i thought oh that is so right because you can't you can say and in this sense the another one of your cousins the amish um the amish have a point see there there's definitely a side of me that um that sometimes wants to live a wendell barry type existence or sometimes i even fantasize about joining the amish but then i think about what what their existence is actually like and i sort of reconsider it no more podcast by welding if you're an amish yeah but but on the other hand i could i could become a better reader and i could slow down and wouldn't have an overflow of information and i could work with my hands and so there's always there's always that um that sort of uh over what's the word sort of looking towards the past and seeing it probably better as better than it actually was but uh there's definitely a side of me that that would like to live a wendell barry type existence well that's just it wendell barry so he's kind of protestant amish but okay so we're going to have 11 kids and four of them are going to die before the age of five how's that trade-off i so when i was a missionary in the dominican republic working with haitians i remember i was giving a class or something i just asked the class how many i was talking these are all the adults from the churches how many of you have lost a child before the age of five every single couple in the room had lost a child before the age of five now if that happens in a in a in a modern family now in in contemporary america everybody's like well we've got to get them on we've got to they've got to get into therapy for trauma and how's that going to impact the other children and i mean it's a full-court press in in the world not very long ago that was normal life and so if you read someone like uh vessel vanderkopf who writes a lot about trauma you know one of the observations he made is that northern europe just for generations self-medicated with alcohol i mean why did the irish drink so much it was we read angela's ashes sometimes and it's like gosh of course the russians drank that's all they could do to survive is drink and and so well why of course were were some of our ancestors such hardcore religious people well there's drinking and there's religion and that's the that's the that i think that's from niches and it um sort of made this um pointed out that sort of alcoholic sort of the uh what we do if we don't have religion right mark marron who's you can look up his podcast he's a comedian who podcast who interviews a lot of comedians and other people i haven't been able to find this episode yet but i once heard him say he was saying so he was he was he was sober and he's into sobriety now and everything now but he said you know christianity is what alcoholics turn to if they just can't get sober any other way it is it's like the strongest medicine and i heard that i thought yeah that's right that's right because if you can't if you can't stay sober any other way and you're drinking yourself to death well gosh become a christian because what you got to do it seems like comedians are often the people who've um sort of had a topless which is sort of this this weird contradiction where you have this this horrible um existential struggle on one hand and in this career of comedy and the other i think they sort of go hand in hand um yeah yeah i always noticed that growing up that the people with the best sense of humor had the hardest lives yeah i think it's true so yeah and then there's a sort of group of people in or at least these individuals in the hotarite tradition who are always fantasizing about the 16th century moravia where hotarites are sort of fully self-sufficient where we have our little blacksmith in the community this brewery here this this tanner here and we sort of um and that's even attractive to me because and that's even attractive to me because um then you're sort of you have your you're sort of not participating in the in the broader capitalist system and sort of have your own own um your own economic system within your own community so sort of find that attractive yeah but but you never ask why did it end you know the crc when they came to north america they had similar things go to su center iowa go to you know bellflower artesia california go to you know in some of the when they went to some places that were far enough outside of urban areas you know they su said northwest iowa is still today kind of crc colony space where they they've set up their own colony and they're self-sufficient and they're prosperous and but that prosperity always opens doors and what neil postman would say is every technological breakthrough has its has its downsides so um you have a problem here and you're going to address it with more technology industry more problems and it's always you always have to wonder if if you're getting the if the trade-off you're making now is worth it yeah um but but part of the part of the challenge is the imagination of the of the cocoon in that the let's say the dutch calvinists in in early 20th century america that that was that was deeply tied to that was deeply tied to the rest of the world in ways that weren't intrusive but were still there you know why why was there all this rich farmland in northwest iowa available for for hardly any money well that's because of this whole long line of history that made it available and it's columbus and it's you know it's it's american politics and it's dutch politics and why this tiny group of secessionists became such a disproportionate amount of the settlers in north america they were five percent of the dutch church and they became 75 percent of the immigrants well they were probably also dirt poor which is why they became the immigrants and then they came because they didn't have to worry about the state church but then the rca came and you know and it's there's there are golden ages but they're never as pure as as as we imagine they were in history yeah it's like i said it's like we pointed out before with the roman catholic thing again you're you're looking at abstract ideals and not considering the lived existence so i'm wondering what you what did you think of the benjamin voice astro riley conversation super interesting hasn't it oh esther's gonna watch this of course and i keep calling her an evangelical and i don't think she quite likes that you know but you know and it's that's we can cut this part out so or we cannot just not post the whole thing but it's it's i'll say it this way everyone wants to hear or not everyone a group of people want to hear say jordan people beterson really get it into really get into it with william lane craig i don't think that conversation would go well i think that was the same thing happening in this conversation it was sort of two people coming at it from completely different perspectives um yeah and that was that was that was super interesting there's a cultural element in evangelicalism that looks for the boy esther's gonna hate me for this but that that looks for the quick win you know there's a there's a market tribalism and evangelicalism that says you know the goal of my you know let's say i think well hutterites well they love jesus but you know they've got all their ethnocentric traditions and blah blah blah so what what really we should do is get julian into a church with a smoke machine and an electric guitar that's my goal for julian's life and so i'm gonna try and so i want to get julian to stop welding and i want to get him into calvin college and you know and then maybe after calvin college you'll get to go to the don't send people to the free university of amsterdam and calvin college like we used to now maybe he'll go to harvard or yale or wheaton and you know you can engage the culture so there's there's just this element in evangelicalism that sometimes these conversations and i get this you know i get this if you read the comment section which i know you do you know you'll have some in the comment section they'll listen to me and i remember one of my favorite comments in all of my videos is comment on a video is jordan peterson a christian and and and the answer real quick comment from one person was no and probably you're not either you know and the other day i was there was so many the comment section of this really long interesting comment and he was talking about your analogy about Tolkien and how that sort of connects to the real world and this guy that i i made that i commented it in this there was this i don't know maybe it was an average ellic or something but then he i said something about um does this analogy show that we don't have free will because it's sort of god as tolkien who's writing the story of all the characters and this guy was saying oh paul is using this analogy because the calvinists and the calvinists are determinists and which isn't a very biblical position but but yeah to get back to the point um but you know here's the thing you and i are both conservative orthodox christians we both believe in the resurrection we both have a high view of scripture but here's the thing both of our traditions are older than neo-evangelicalism and and that's part of the reason why we don't quite fit into the evangelical tradition as well and and part of it too is that the evangelical position is in this free market america that has its own that has its own epistemology of tribes and conversions and our traditions are quite a bit less conversionistic not in that we don't believe in rigorous christian conversion we just don't really think you can i'm gonna get i'm gonna sit down with julian and have him say the sinner's prayer now now esther is going to complain about what i just said and say paul i'm not that simplistic and and she's right she isn't that simplistic but to many people in the world that's how it looks and feels and to speak to that and also evangelicalism i i guess we're both using the term sort of broadly and um there probably isn't an and it's evangelical who exists to fit fit our stereotypical view of what evangelicalism is oh i know a few here we go it's not esther but i know a few well it sort of strikes me that there are sort of these two two two tents they're sort of the intellectual evangelicas and they're sort of the um be saved by jesus type of evangelicals and the be saved by jesus type evangelicals have these five propositions that you have to um these five steps or these five propositions that if you ascend to these propositions or if you agree with these propositions and if you complete this five step program then you're saved by jesus and you're a christian and the sort of other evangelical tribe the intellectual tribe thinks that um you can approach this individual and then give him this reason argument and then he'll become a christian and it sort of again goes back to this um human anthropology that sees the human being as this rational animal who wants to assert to these propositions or who wants to uh who's going to be convinced by this rational argument and that's sort of what what struck me about this or Riley um voice conversation was um i i was it really struck me as sort of um really reminded me of kirkigard concluding on scientific posters so sort of the question he wants to answer in his post script is um how do i become a christian and if you ask if you ask the question that way it's so radically different than the question sort of the intellectual evangelicas are asking what they're asking is is christianity true but kirkigard is sort of radically reframing it by saying okay i'm an individual i want to become a christian how do i do it and i think once you ask the question that way it just it just changes how you approach christianity in in a really radical way um well kirkigard is the father of of a lot of american expressive individualism in an ironic way i hope not in an ironic way i sort of see the i sort of see um i don't know if this is if you can make the connection but it almost seems like kirkigard is um the father of evangelicalism in a weird sort of way because he's all about this personal relationship with with jesus yeah that's true too i don't know if you could trace it back because he's so many things that that the typical evangelist wouldn't like right well and that's that's where all this downstream language so kirkigard and his and existentialism there's so much existentialism in american expressive individualism yeah but also just as you said so these incredibly important thinkers like kirkigard incredibly seminal i mean they seed so many often contradictory tribal elements that you'll find kirkigard in both sides and yeah but i think you're i think you're i think your take on evangelicalism is is really helpful see part of what so my problem if i can my problem is i i tend to have these lower resolutions that snapshots of of different different things and it's really not very helpful if you're dealing with with individuals um and but you can't you can't live without them you need them because the world is just too complex yeah yeah and so as long as you hold them loosely and recognize you know how well do i know esther i've had a couple of conversations with her we go back and forth on twitter in the comment section i know esther a little bit but i fill in a lot of esther fairly or unfairly with stereotypes that i have i know her real name i know where she's from i know a little bit of her background and so i fill in now i may be that may be totally unfair to her same with benjamin i know far less about benjamin but you take a few clues and you fill it in and again this is now we get into pragmatism it's usually good enough until as peterson mentions with his roger scrutin conversation until you get something wrong and then you say oh okay well now i have to up the definition and correct my my my little hash of who these people are but the rider can always sort of integrate that contradiction and make it fit anyway um and one thing i admire about you is you're somehow able to approach these people and sort of still you won't you don't take it too seriously like if i'm looking at the different ideologies that i see these people as manifesting like i'll say oh the silicon valley ideology is pernicious or the fundamentalist are pernicious or the evangelicals are pernicious or the um the modernists are pernicious like i i don't like this world you'd have some things i want to oppose and so every time i come across in modernist in the in the comments actually in real life or or an evangelical or some other um hated tribe then i get i i sort of want to argue with them and um and you seem to be able to approach them and you just laugh at them and i just i just appreciate that well i i you know maybe that's hubris maybe it's elitism i i we're just all people yeah we have ideas and people people change and you know again and i think in terms of christianity i think what jesus hierarchy says is first of all they're people okay so let's let's put that high they might be evangelical they might be a modernist they might be an atheist they might be a roman catholic they might be an icon carver you know oh my goodness but they're people and so and and this i think we see this is part of what's so attractive about jesus is that on one hand we think okay he's going to prioritize people so he's just going to be zen but jesus isn't just zen with people jesus also can can can be very jesus in the way he handles people look at the woman at the well you know on one hand he's that john four he's so nuanced and and then you know oh yeah you don't have one husband you've had five and but he just says that with just the right touch and and i think when it comes to well what's the goal what's the goal of being a christian well it's it's being jesus now in the 21st century with the past and tradition that i've had well how can i integrate jesus into me and then treat people as jesus would have me treat them so that's the goal and that's why and and you know part of it is temperament part of it is i remember one person i remember one person a friend of mine who knew my father because he was my father's pastor for a while made the comment he said you know your father could have gotten along with hitler and that's probably true and people be horrified at that was my father soft on racism well no one who would imagine that but you know my father had a capacity to to love lots of different kinds of people and i think that's a very godly trait yes i i agree but how do you sort of square that with you can you anybody can be friends with anybody but um doesn't friendship sort of also entail critiquing what you see as false views they have or engaging them in in a critical way and um sort of having love for them and um and not just sort of accepting wholesale the the horrible person they are as peterson would say i'm having friends who want the best for you so is that something you're you or your father would be able to integrate but it's funny because to some people i'm too critical and to other people i'm too i'm too easygoing so yeah but that no that's exactly right and but always to figure out how to do that in a productive way is very very difficult and so you figure out you try to figure out when to speak when to shut up and again part of part of the beauty of age so i'm 55 now is you make a lot of mistakes i remember when i was i was going to move to the dominican republic i had to learn spanish even though it had high school spanish i didn't really learn anything or even college spanish and i remember one of our coaches said if you want to learn a language you have to make a million mistakes you might as well start now and so when we moved to the country my wife who had a good she was a spanish major so she actually had a pretty good handle on spanish she'd listen to me talk and she was just horrified she's just saying you're you're just butchering the language i said yeah but i'm i'm working on my million mistakes and so you do this and you get stuff wrong but you're exactly right on one hand this is you know and again we don't we can't we don't have the great conceptual language about this but if you want to really engage productively with someone they're going to have to know that you love them but you're all right okay i just just jumped off for a bit had to get my internet back on we have this 90 minute counter but you were saying you were butchering the language well i was butchering the language because i was making my million mistakes why why be slow about it so with confidently talking to everybody usual verbose self so so then when it comes to people you know figure out how to love them you know that's the goal at the top of our hierarchy in terms of how to treat people is love but as you just said quite correctly love means not simply mirroring them so but so then what you figure out is how to how to listen well and peterson does this i mean to the the real the real reason to get a vip ticket when peterson comes to town is to watch him meet effectively with 160 people and give them his full undivided attention for 60 seconds do you think peterson does this well with the postmodern neo-marxist though peterson is but then again i'm it's really hard for me to critique how fears and engages with these people because if i were in this situation i i don't think i'd handle it as well as ida so something you have to keep in mind as well it's so hard even to evaluate success in this score because on one hand yeah all of the moves that he's made has elevated to his him of a to a position where he's actually noticed and hated and so well that's something you know that's that's actually an accomplishment because someone would say paul vanderkley and everyone would say who someone says jordan peterson and say oh he's all right well he isn't all right but actually he's on the radar and so he's actually doing something so it's it's in some ways always a little wrong for us to critique him because what have we done so but at the same time sometimes he makes sometimes he makes moves and takes steps and i think yeah i don't know if that's a right move but then again also we have the problem of time in this moment it doesn't look like the right move maybe five months or five years from now it'll look like genius we can't tell yeah yeah yeah and he can't either i'm sure no no he's making it up as he goes along and more power to him it's it's been a blessing to me and with your point on on treating people as as image bearers essentially one thing i've been thinking about this christmas season is on on the whole whole significance of the incarnation and the whole idea that um jesus is is both fully god and fully man he's a cult god would say he's the god man and he's not he's not um sort of a universal archetypal man he's a particular man right he's a first century jew who hangs out with with martha and with lazareth and who um who eats fish from the lake of gallilee and who runs around in the in the water getting his feet wet and he picks up a particular person from that particular time child and holds it on his lap and he goes to the jewish temple and who speaks with jewish individuals and it's just all those particularities and i think i think that that's that's such a um paradoxical and beautiful thing at the same time because it's like um this this is the god of the universe as a particular human being and it shows that he loves each particular human being as a particular human being and each particular human being has to approach um the god man um as a particular human being and yeah that's that's something i i've really picked up from curtain guard he he he's really big on the on the incarnation and the the absolute paradoxical nature of it that that god became this particular man and you just can't wrap your head around it yeah yeah and that's exactly right because we we don't even know we we can't even we're having all this trouble conceptualizing just what does the word god mean and then you connect it to a human being just like you said i think you articulated it wonderfully we you know we just can't get our head around it well well how what is the best and this i think is where your tradition has some strength well what is the best way to actually bear witness to this and represent this is it through theological books well that's that's right right no it's because when we incarnate when we incarnate it in our lives that's in a way the highest representation we can have and do and that's actually the that that's exactly how we will be evaluated that's what the bible says we're evaluated on what we do on how we live on how we navigate this incredible matrix and you know now you've got that in our protestantism well what we're saved by grace yeah that's true and they're both true well how can they be both true well we don't know mr evangelical we don't know we're just doing it that's and and see um that's another that's another thing if we go if i go back to the question kirkigaard asked about how do i become a christian and how that just radically reframes your entire approach to christianity it's no longer um in an abstract objective sort of way is christianity true do i i mean once i i actually think this question through um i don't have to go looking all day for new for a new argument for god's existence or a new reason why the resurrection happened or a new reason why the bible is brought forward ultimately what you need to do is make a commitment and take a leap of faith and kirkigaard has this wonderful wonderful it's wonderful quotation where he speaks of floating above 70 000 fathoms of water where only god can reach you and it's sort of i i may not i may not have all the answers i may there may be some paradoxes there may be some things i can't wrap my head around but ultimately i sort of have to put my trust in this in this god man and it's he also says kirkigaard says this this this little line where it says god isn't an object to be reason to be the subject to the experience and it's like you know if god is a person if god became jesus christ and more three he's available for me and he's yeah he's three persons if he's available like there's three of them if he's available for me to to connect you this objective approach of rationality and objective approach isn't just the wrong approach it's actually an approach that distracts me from my ultimate goal as a christian which is to become more united fully with god and the more time i spend looking at arbitrary objective proofs of christianity the last time i'm spending developing myself as a christian and this is really something that sort of made me rethink my whole approach is i i'm more interested now in sort of looking at growing as a christian and what is the meaning of meaning of the bible what can it tell me about how to to grow as a person as a christian instead of spending spending my time oh is this a historical fact oh did this actually happen i'm sort of more engaged in trying to to grow as a christian and to take this back to the the conversation with seems to me that that's that's what i disagree with about sort of after the objective approach is it's it's fundamentally a distraction from it from what it actually means to be a christian i i think that's right i i think in her in defense i'll defend the neo-evangelicals now you and i had the blessing of being raised by deeply christian parents deeply embedded within the christian community and world view it is very easy for you and i to believe in the resurrection to believe in god's love that that for you and i is very very easy and there are many many people who were raised in a secular place for which all of these working out rational arguments and reasons now esther was also raised in a deeply christian household i'm not going to say that but there there are many many people for whom working through these things is vital for them to fully integrate and appropriate what you and i in a sense received by inheritance yeah in some ways they have to be self-made and you and i were born to wealth and yeah and um um i i'm not exactly sure how i would respond to that um with regards to how um how non-christians would um think what non-christians would think about kirkigard's approach of of sort of ensuing ensuing the objective approach and and sort of putting your trust radically in in the in this it was ultimately a paradox it was ultimately beyond reason um but i i definitely think that as a as a christian there's sort of this this danger of getting swept away in these objective arguments and sort of being like this spinning wheel that doesn't get anywhere and um it's it's it's almost like a form of of idolatry because you're sort of putting your trust in in this fancy fancy argument for god's existence and not waiting out over 70 000 fathoms where only god can reach you um which which i i don't claim to do myself because it's it's really hard to dispense with with all your with all that lies between you and god but um it's well life may send you out into those fathoms you you know and and those fathoms find us in ways that we're never quite prepared for that's the definition of them the you know i i think there is i think there is a i think there is room for a lot of diversity in god's ecosystem and so i i've known i've known people that they they simply that you know i i agree i agree with your critique um but it's i at the same time there's a reason christians have done all that work and in my experience people do that work for reasons of their own and some of them you know i i've often found it when i you know i live in a highly secular context here in northern california it's extremely diverse and but the secularism can be a bit much at times and it'll it'll it's often those times that i'll say okay i need to read through some more c.s lewis and because lewis as a guide will kind of help me look at some things and say okay that was that was kind of pressing upon me but this okay i i can understand that better for for what it is and understand that animal as it is and why it's functioning that way and lewis helped me see some of those things so i i think that the kingdom and the church is richer for thomas equinas and josh mcdowell if i dare put those two in a sentence together so you know i people i mean part of the the outrageous scandal of christianity is is both the glory and the humiliation of people and and i think this is part of the reason and calvin i think does this quite well you know if you again if you start reading in calvin's institutes on one hand he says to know god you have to know man and to know man you have to know god the two are the two are connected now now calvinism as a tradition has been a gateway drug to secularism and all kinds of things young's father was a rather unhappy swiss calvinist calvinism is deeply tied to evangelicalism if you look at some of the principles of neo-evangelicalism i mean some of them like some of them are are presbyterian they're southern presbyterians and there's there's a lot that goes on in these connections so and it's but but you know the earlier conversation we had about assimilation this in the christian reform church the two assimilation factors are the main line said mainline presbyterianism or or liberal reformed camp or the evangelicalism and so that's the tension kind of pulling apart the christian reform church now and and i think your your critique is i think your critique is right on evangelicalism but at the same time you again this this pot that we have people and you'd never look at philip yancey and say he's overly rationalist he's got that in him but he's also a little bit of a romanticist in terms of philip yancey so and nobody's got better better evangelical credentials than a guy like philip yancey i don't know if you've read any of his books but no i have no idea who philip yancey yeah he was popular more in the 80s and 90s and very popular evangelical writer but he'd be much more along the camp of people well not quite have you ever been to a family bookstore family bookstore maybe but i don't think have you ever watched veggie tales yeah not a reason to know when i was a kid so the evangelicals are a weird tribe so on one hand you've got rationalist warriors like esther on the other hand you've got you know phil vischer who's making vegetables come to jesus and you've got you've got thomas kade making sentimental thomas kincade and precious moments figurines here we're our iconoclast but boy we love our precious moments figurine do you know what a precious moments figurine is don't want to know oh you should google do an image search of precious moments figurine you'll love it so evangelicalism has all of these different aspects in it and so and and i think what evangelicalism actually is is and and north american market-based free market ecclesiology that's what it is and and so it's highly diverse and you know you look into the black church and the black church has its own segment in evangelicalism and you know they've been making movies and and you know and so it's this vast ecosystem and ironically you know even the orthodox you know when whenever churches come to north america north america changes them and so in some ways the the orthodox church in north america has been in a sense reborn from the you know look at say the connection between you know what's been the interesting things going on in the serbian orthodox church or the russian orthodox church you know vladimir putin is now the the guardian of russian orthodoxy in a certain sense and so the orthodox church in the old places was different from the orthodox church in north america and so in a strange way the orthodox church in north america begins to get impacted by the borg-like evangelicals and you know i don't know how that's going to play with jonathan peugeot but you know but jonathan peugeot is a former evangelical and so his brand of orthodoxy is always boy i'm making all kinds of issues so but but that's you know and so when you when i listen to jonathan i think he's the part of the reason he can do such cool stuff now with symbolism translating it is because he was raised evangelical and he knows enough of that community but he's so so that's in jonathan and it'll never be gone from him and it's both part of the gift that he brings to the conversation but he will never be purely orthodox like some factory worker in serbia or kiev or moscow so just like you and i are i'm my dutch calvinism is filled with things and so is your heart right yeah and and probably all all of the four people you listed aspera riley and jonathan peugeot you me with we'd probably all have be sort of outliers in our own tradition in many ways because yeah i mean the whole intellectual tradition the whole intellectual side of of evangelicalism probably doesn't probably has its critics in mainstream evangelicalism for sure and i guess the reason i'm sort of so attracted to kirkagard and this sort of connects with what you said about jonathan bejo is that i've been really influenced by william lane craig in the past so i sort of um yeah i've listened oh the confessions come out the one is listening to william lane craig he's he's you know i he's definitely um julian's not married esther's not married will the hatterite marry the evangelical liberal warrior we can we can do some matchmaking here and now oh boy you're cutting this part out too this is all going in baby it's just like paul show one take no editing see and this is part of it we are given this gift of life why not have some fun oh esther's gonna oh the car oh she's gonna kill us trouble with esther and your mother's gonna say julian why don't you stop listening to the podcast don't listen to that vander clay you know he's crazy oh well we should wrap this up at some point i could read you a passage or you got the day off let me ask sunday today this is my sunday shirt so oh and these are my sunday suspenders so oh this is you know this is some of what the crc has lost because there was there were aspects to our subculture that were were they binding yes were they endearing yes did they give identity yes were they smothering sometimes yes i mean all that was true but it made it made for a rich and full life for generations and and part of you know maybe and another thing i'm attracted to jordan peterson about is that i think the crc just kind of cast this off rather mindlessly and yeah yeah and we didn't we didn't honor our father and our mother as as we should have in in casting these things aside but at the same time they can also smother and and all of those dynamics are in life it's never really a simple dualism is it no no no it isn't it isn't so any last things you wanted to get in before we before we call this a show i'm gonna post this julian i'm gonna post this this is gold this is gold already gold this is gold esther is gonna be freaking out i could well and we also have our um our internet pastor to proceed over our marriage show yeah well that's um one thing we could close with um i'd like to look at um comparing kirklinghardt and peterson um one interesting thing um i got this from craig evans he's uh i think i'm not sure what yeah evan is he an evangelical too yeah he is everybody's in heaven but yeah he's a he's a kirklinghardt scholar and um i emailed him some questions and it was nice enough to get me some responses and one interesting thing he pointed out was um kirklinghardt and peterson on myth they have some there's an interesting interplay there um kirklinghardt i find it pretty fascinating was actually opposed to using the category of myth to describe the biblical narratives because um he saw myth as coming from the bottom up but not but not connecting from the top so it's sort of um human beings are developing their wisdom over time but it never there's never this divine connection top down um and your um your sort of christian synthesis of peterson is sort of that the bottom and the top touch and peterson has really never said that maybe yeah yeah i've got enough antithesis antithesis in my calvinism to say maybe yeah yeah yeah and it's it's interesting that that kirklinghardt he wanted to top down wanted it to come top down but um but peterson sort of sees it as developing from the human side and could also bring c.s lewis in here who wasn't opposed to myth and he he said that christianity is the true myth so maybe you could say something about um c.s lewis since you know lewis lewis is so helpful and so articulate and so erudite it is so easy to fall in love with lewis but lewis was just a dude and you know i i just i read a really interesting biography on on joy joy davidman which really shed a lot of interesting light on lewis because recently a bunch of her papers came about and you know lewis lewis in some lewis was a he was a human being and that in some ways just this out amazing saint but you know the way he went about this business with joy davidman there's a lot of fast and loose going on there he basically deceived a priest to get himself married in the anglican church and it's like what's that about and you know he's a human being so i think i i don't know that we can answer these questions finally but there is very because all of all of our systems are you know one of the things i've learned through this all of our systems are our representations our attempt to to see and to describe and to paint pictures of what we probably are incapable of fully representing it is always beyond us so this is where my again my calvinism comes through we are always limited and in that sense we are always dependent upon grace and and so that would be we can never fully build ourselves up to god we we are inveterate babel tower builders but we will never be able to do it and i think that's i think that's central to the story where god has to send his son because we couldn't make it without him and i think that's key to christianity and and i think it's a it's a it's at exactly that point that peterson has and this is where esther and i would agree let's say that that peterson peterson is in a sense building his tower but he'll it's not gonna make it up not gonna make it up and i can i can read you something from kirkgaard here yeah go ahead speaks to that so um he was talking about this um idea that you can look at the life of christ and then look at the impact that christ had all throughout the ages and he called since he was he was he was living in the 1800s he calls this the argument from 1800 years so the argument sort of is since christ has made such a big impact over 1800 years and he's still around he's still influencing our society therefore he's god and that's essentially what peterson is doing with his whole mythological structure um of course he's not adding the therefore he's god but he's sort of saying look at the impact that christianity has had through the ages there must be um well he's not not going that far but what kirkgaard is essentially saying is that you can't go from these 1800 years of impact to the conclusion that christ was god so it's sort of yeah i can read it's pretty but to return to the proofs of history is it not 18 000 years since christ lived is not his name proclaimed and believed on throughout the whole world has not his doctrine christianity changed the face of the world triumphantly permeated all relationships and in this way has not history abundantly and more than abundantly established who he was namely that he was god no history has not established this neither abundantly or more than abundantly that is something which history in all eternity cannot establish so far however as the first assertion is concerned it is sure enough that his name is proclaimed in all the world whether it is believed whether it is believed on i will not decide it is sure enough that christianity has changed the face of the world triumphantly permeated all relationships so triumphantly that all now say that they are christians but what does this prove at the most it might prove that jesus christ is a great man perhaps the greatest of all but that he was god nate stop there the conclusion shall by god's help never be drawn so that's kirkengard critiquing peterson i think i think you're right i think you're right and and so this is where so i've done a lot of thinking too in terms of okay where is this where exactly is this line between belief and unbelief we we have a you know we have a hash of it in a sense but to me the line continues to be and again this this is expressed as my calvinism it continues to be the place where we finally say we finally open our hands and say you must fill them i can't grasp it it's the place where we finally give ourselves give ourselves to him and surrender to him and lewis says this you know we're not you know we we're we're rebels who have to lay down our arms well why are we why did we take up arms in the first place we took up arms in the first place in order to make the world according to what we believed it needed to be and and and so you know this there's something deep there's something deep within us that has to surrender and you can only surrender to a living god a god who is anti-entropy a god who you know has his way finally and and we don't that's why he's the husband and we're the wife that's why he's the husband and the church is his bride that's why all of these archetypes set up as they do and we can't build our way to and this is the this is this is the the line of modernity the line of atheism that says we're at the top of the hierarchy we are the writers of even if we is in capital w and it has to be the great project of humanity and at some point no it's it's it's something that's come down to us we don't create the patterns to put it in the joey in terms and this takes me back to um the whole idea of the monarchical vision where did you get that idea actually i just thought up when i was making the video since you were sure wow i was just talking about that's how i i make videos because i get ideas when i make them and then i've got a record of it because i've just put it on video that's why i do this stuff i bet you never listen to them again i know sometimes i have to go back if i forget what i've said but i never listen to them again yeah i i can't stand listening to myself so it doesn't it actually doesn't help to send me the video to preview it because i can't stand listening to myself no this one's going up this one's going up today my friend the trouble is coming this week for both of us i'm going to take a youtube sabbatical for the rest of the holidays but but in any case in any case um i think this idea of monarchical division really connects to what we just said because i sort of see the the idea of the monarchic division tracing through the entire biblical narrative starting in um sort of with the story of adam and eve where um sort of as i as i interpret it you have this command by god not to sort of god has this this will or this this divine plan for humanity and then adam and eve acting as individuals decide to violate this and sort of create their own path and create their own vision of what what life is supposed to be like their own um they try to create their own cosmic pattern as maybe a cejure would say it and so that's that's phase one of the fall of humanity and then we get into the tower of babel and what i see there is sort of a communal fall because you have people banding together and by consensus trying to build a tower of a tower up to the heavens to take the monarchical vision in the place of god so they're trying to to through consensus establish their own their own path deciding what's good what's true what's beautiful on their own um so you have sort of the fall of the individual and the fall of the community and i i'm not sure what to make of the old testament narrative because they're they're too complicated i can't really fit them into this what i'm developing here but if i go to the new testament um i can i connected with what paul says about neither slaves nor jew greek nor all are one in christ so it's these people are sort of in the tower of babel they're they're collectively forming their own consensus but in paul you have this idea that if everyone sort of submits to christ as lord we have this monarchical vision in the community developing centered around christ so we are united as before the fall through union with christ and then i connected to um this also connects to what we said about us bringing the bright room of bright room of christ um not the bride of christ so jesus says um there are two commandments love god as all your heart soul and mind and love your neighbor as yourself and the way i see it is um in our current state in the in the in the age of decay as you would say we sort of can't connect to god with our bodies because we're not resurrected we're not fully perfected so the first part is um love god at all your heart soul in mind so sort of connect to god and connect your will with with jesus and make him the ruler of your entire life then the second part is love your neighbor as yourself and i think this is where i connect this to my own tradition where we are sort of living communally and if you love your neighbor as yourself we take this all the way and say hey what do i do myself i um you know i make my you need i whatever we live communally we we do all aspects of our lives together so so the idea i see developed there is um the body we connect through to christ bodily through the body of the community so it's sort of as a church by loving my neighbor as herself i'm loving christ as my body and we and i think you have the full unity there and to be completed in the in the age to come so that's really beautiful that was wonderful you should make your own videos so i i've been wanting to to write a post about this forever but i'm i'm too lazy to get it started it's a problem so you don't strike me as lazy but it's really hard and i i you know i've done a lot of blogging in my life it's really hard i think it's harder than doing videos actually it is it's much harder oh these videos are easy right it's much harder i've gotten lazy since i've been making these videos probably a problem you can yeah you if you can get 10 000 subscribers just then what's the word for just them uh just vomiting under the screen that's what i call it yeah viewing out your consciousness on the screen that's exactly what i'm doing well and i blogged for i blogged for 10 years and nobody ever read what i wrote not nobody but not a lot of people and then you do this thing on youtube and you get all these people watching it's like how weird is this to me there is something about video and representation and and peterson is also right that it's a lot easier for a lot of people to listen and to read yeah the people the people who listen to you are just also lazier because they don't have to go read your blog i mean reading listening to podcasts is always easier than sitting down to read a blog and read a book so well and most of the people that listen to it are i mean so you're welding so you you need to do something with your brain a lot of the people who listen to me work in computers and they need to do something with their brain now my my second son is is an engineer and he's a low level engineer right now he's just getting started and so he spends a lot of time doing menial tasks that the higher paid engineers don't want to do because they're boring so he spends a lot of his day listening to things i listen to things when i am washing the dishes driving the car when basically i can't read because you know i need my hands and my eyes to do things but i'm an auditory learner so i listen to a ton of stuff that way i don't listen to stuff when i'm at work because i'm reading oh yeah yeah so you still use the books behind you um do i still use the books behind me yes but all of your sermons seem to be centered around this this youtube video you watched last week yeah it's well here's the thing nobody in my congregation is going to read and truth be told commentaries commentaries are also products of their contexts and so the scholars are addressing often the scholarly issues with the text and often those don't have a lot of those don't have a lot of connection to regular people's lives that isn't to say that these issues aren't important but most people in the pew if they would open up a commentary and read the kinds of issues that commentaries spend most of their time talking about i don't care i have only got an assortment i've got 20 to 30 minutes and i got to do a lot so it's like it's not like youtube where i can go on for two hours and i go on for five minutes all the well with regards to your half hour in that and the hotter rides are probably like iconoclastic orthodox because our sunday sermons are like an hour and a half or more so yeah hardcore iconoclast yeah that's it but that's another way that the crc changed 80 90 years ago crc sermons were an hour plus you can go on to youtube and you can go on to youtube and you can go on to youtube and you can crc sermons were an hour plus you can go on to youtube and you can find reformed preachers that go on for over an hour wow but those sermons are very different and if i if i there was once here at living stones i went for an hour and i nearly faced an uprising um i have masters too from the from the car from the people in the pews oh yeah yeah that hour stuff no no no no no that's that's my matters mainliners and roman catholics so okay you know you talk about other traditions roman catholic homilies they might be 10 to 15 minutes they don't have often have preaching as a major part of the service jonathan peugeot made a very interesting comment in one of his recent videos he said part of the reason i went to the orthodox is it doesn't matter if my priest is an idiot because we have the liturgy what happened in the reformation was now suddenly our people to know things and so there's this huge value on education in the medieval church a lot of the reformers looked at that and said these people drag their sorry butts in they do what the church tells them to do and they drag their sorry butts out and they're not changed and so reformers wanted to change people's lives and give them thoughts and ideas and but this is all part of the what was happening in northern european cities and in the holy roman empire and then you know and in england and i mean it's that was all connected to a world well isn't that the whole the old stereotype about you want to change the world more education like anytime there's this sort of this sort of problem that needs to be addressed the solution oh we need education right so education is the problem it's like um neil postman says um sort of this this assumption that every problem can be solved with more data which is essentially rational animals who need to correct ideas that's right no you're exactly right you're exactly right and so the west is the child of the protestant reformation like it or not for worse and for better and for worse probably you've talked too much my throat is dry and i've got i've got people in the hospital to visit and calls to make and all that kind of stuff i'm a real life pastor i don't just play one on youtube oh yeah yeah okay well thank you so much julian i'll post this a little bit later today when i go i got a better connection at home so i can upload things easier there this is a long one but i thought i i don't know if i'm gonna have time to make any videos this week so this will be good well i hope the people aren't offended by our little um arranged marriage thing we had there or they're gonna love it they're gonna maybe someone will even make a meme this is gonna be fun do you get any memes as a little youtuber i got a meme on there's a little secret jordan peterson facebook group called the advanced um study group it only has about 80 people in it and so there's a there's a big study group that has lots of people and someone carved out a little study group with just not very many people in it esther's in that group someone made a meme of me which was hilarious but um oh email it to me okay i'll i'll have to i'll have to save it it wasn't a it wasn't a humorous meme but i was thought oh they made a meme of me so yeah except for rationality rules who made kind of a meme of me in one of his videos too which i thought was hysterical okay thanks for the conversation all right julian you take care we'll see in the comments yeah you too i should cut that i should cut back in my commenting no i don't they're fun take care yeah you too bye bye christmas merry christmas