https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Jt09yHAaPgA

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. Last week we reached the apparent public climax of Jesus' moment in the first century in Holy Week. You had the triumphal entry into Jerusalem and you had the crucifixion. Now you also had Easter and we'll talk about that in a moment. What most imagined was Jesus safely dead. They could resume their normal efforts, which was either the Roman way of life, which was the ascendant way of living in the world as demonstrated by Roman superiority and Roman might and Roman will all throughout the world, or the menu of options that the politically insignificant Jewish liberation movements were working in their little corner of the which would of course bubble over and boil over some 30 or so years later. But now remember in Jesus' triumphal entry how he rained on his own parade. As he approached Jerusalem and saw the city he wept over it and said, If you, even you, had only known this day, what would bring you peace? But now it is hidden from your eyes. The days will come upon you when your enemies will build an embankment against you and encircle you and hem you in on every side. They will dash you to the ground, you and the children within your walls. They will not leave one stone on another and that will come. Because you did not recognize the time of God's coming to you. Now Easter was last week and again Jesus didn't leave the tomb and say, I'm headed to Herod's house or I'm going to show up in Pilate's living room and say, how do you like me now Pontius? He starts popping in on randos and last week we saw him pop in on a conversation on the road to Emmaus and he sort of, don't you guys know anything? When they're looking at him and saying, don't you know anything? Jesus was a prophet and he was killed by our horrible rulers. Jesus doesn't seem to be interested in making a political splash. He won't show up at the pinnacle of the temple or inherit or Pilate's house. He begins to work through the minds and lives of those he began working with during his ministry. Now skeptics usually demand a public demonstration and well okay but public today is not quite the same as public then. What we sort of want is what we today would imagine to be a scientific political approach because well if you have a hammer everything looks like a nail. This is the predominant way that we see our world changing and want to change our world. This is the way we think things work and in fact embedded in that is the way we think we work which is, well once someone proves something to me then I proceed rationally along those lines. Just like the last time you went to the doctor and the doctor told you to eat right, stop smoking, lose weight and get more exercise, you immediately quit smoking, have eaten a perfect diet ever since then and religiously go to the gym right? And you're in absolutely perfect health and you are defying the age of decay in your body right? Is that how human beings work? If so I have met very few who actually work that way. Most of the time we have levels of deceit, of deception within ourselves about what we're actually doing. Look I ate cookies instead of cake, I'm eating healthy. So I'm skeptical personally that more information or public knowledge would really impact the world the way we demand and even desire. Now movie theaters today are in many ways our temples and TV sets are our home shrines. Take a look at the size of certain movie franchises. Now I realize if you're over age, oh I don't know, 30, 40, 50, 60, maybe all of this means nothing to you because you don't go to the movies and you don't watch this kind of thing on television but it is a very big deal and it is molding increasing generations. The highest grossing movie franchises, Marvel Cinematic Universe, $22 billion which far Star Wars which is second at $10 billion, Harry Potter at $9 billion, James Bond at $7 billion and both Spider-Man and X-Men both at $6 billion are also part of Marvel so add their $12 billion from Spider-Man and X-Men to Marvel Cinematic Universe and you're at $34 billion over three times even Star Wars. These are gods in our world and they fight our wars, they attack terrorists and in many ways we through these stories try to handle all sorts of difficult issues in our world. They rescue the world from all of the fears that we have. Now this arose in the 1930s and the first Superman comic book came on the scene in June of 1938 and anyone who knows any world history knows that well war is looming in Europe and the Pacific. Japan is trying to eat China and wanting more and more raw materials from the United States and the Roosevelt administration is increasingly resisting them and tensions are rising. Hitler has now taken control of Germany and he's slowly as he can peacefully eating up more and more of Central Europe until the point that he takes Poland with Russia in 1939 and the Western allies will finally say okay no more, Superman comes on the scene and many have noted that Superman is sort of Jesus in spandex. Well actually not a lot of similarity between Jesus and Superman. We don't find Jesus lifting rocks and in fact a lot of people would prefer to have Jesus act like Superman but the fact that Superman is moral perfection and super strong and can do everything one wonders why for the most part he starts out fighting street crime. Superman, why don't you just run over there to Nazi Germany and beat up Adolf Hitler and we can all be done with that but comic books hadn't evolved at that point to there and so soon enough we will see Superman fighting super villains, the Joker and you know some of these guys who you might remember but usually once Superman wins the battle life reverts to normal. Now Superman became very popular and of course how the capitalist marketplace works there are a lot of copycats including one Captain Marvel who looks quite a bit like Superman and seems to have all the same powers as Superman and well but these stories continue to evolve. The superhero sweeps in and saves the girl or saves the day or maybe saves the world from a super villain but as Mr. Incredible who quite nicely sums up a lot of comic book genres in that Pixar movie from not too long ago is made regular appearances in my sermons wonders at the beginning of the movie why can't the world just stay saved he just cleaned up this mess and here we make another one. Well at some point in the evolution of the Captain Marvel figure the authors began to ask deeper questions if these superheroes have the power to save the world from super villains why can't they use that power to I don't know make the world better if Superman doesn't get tired why can't we put him on a super treadmill and have him solve global warming by maybe turning Superman into renewable energy. It seems reasonable doesn't it it's why if they can why at the end of their great victory the world just goes back to Lois Lane working at the Daily Planet. Now I've made this made similar comments about Jesus miracles for a while now because on one hand his miracles certainly were miraculous and they impressed the crowd to the point of enthusiasm where they want to make him king and hoping that well maybe Jesus will level up from multiplying loaves and fishes so that his adoring audience doesn't go hungry or stilling a storm because his his disciples are afraid in the boat and raising a son because the mother is grief stricken and she's a widow. Why doesn't he do something useful like make the Romans go away he multiplies loaves and fishes he turns water to wine he stills a storm but he doesn't hand out the technology to let's say produce antibiotics and he doesn't do sanitation classes to make sure that they clean they only drink clean water and sewage is taken care of. Certainly the son of God and son of man could treat them well how to address more basic things. I noticed as a foreign missionary that people would come down and they would do sanitation classes wash your hands they would teach the locals because that keeps that keeps these invisible germs away and the locals look at them with skepticism. What are these invisible germs that can make me sick? He doesn't create a storm and sink the Roman navy and he doesn't create a storm or simply pronounce death on Roman legions that would threaten the Holy Land. Now skeptics often don't believe in the miracle stories especially not the resurrection story. They say such great claims should have dramatic evidence for them. Now it's strange because basically any real miracle would destroy the worldview they sort of create around their world but part of the point that they make often and I think it's a point that carries a lot of weight is well if Jesus resurrection was so big why don't we at least still notice the echoes of it. Well there are two stories today we're going to tell and I'm going to tell them in reverse order. Now Thomas also known as Didymus one of the twelve was not with the disciples when Jesus came so the other disciples told him we have seen the Lord but he said to them unless I see the nail marks in his hands and put my finger where his nails were and put my hand into his side I will not believe. Thomas is a good skeptic and you're going to have to offer more proof than you know just your word even though I've been living with all of you for the last three years I'm still skeptical. You know it's not the case that ancient people were gullible and believed any old story that came all along they understood what dead meant dead people stayed dead which is why you kill someone to get rid of them and if Jesus rose from the grave why didn't he hold a press conference why does Jesus seem to pick and choose who he shows himself to. You should think about that you know we don't expect granular personal treatment yet at the same time we demand it isn't that funny Jesus you should have held a press conference but you know if you hold a press conference I'm going to want VIP one on one personal access to you Jesus sort of cuts out the middle man entirely and says I'm going to show myself to whomever I will and that's my plan. Now Thomas missed the first meeting so a week later his disciples were in the house again and Thomas was with them though the doors were locked Jesus came and stood among them and said peace be with you that's the standard greeting. Then he said to Thomas as if Jesus knew exactly what the other conversation was about and didn't swoop right in anxiously as sort of a quivering mass of availability and insecurity oh no Thomas doesn't believe Jesus comes a week later and says Thomas you had a conversation so you asked here I am put your finger here see my hands reach out your hand and put it into my side stop doubting and believe. Jesus pays personal attention to Thomas and one might skeptically say Jesus hasn't swooped into my room so why should I believe okay don't. I don't recommend it but that's the position you're taking. This annoys us if it isn't me we want to be religious consumers we would like Jesus to hold a press conference and then we'll make up our own mind thank you or we need a personal visitation we want to judge the evidence we want to decide whether or not we will believe. The funny thing is belief doesn't really work that way we don't really choose our beliefs our beliefs in some ways choose us and we can't help but believe things about ourselves that perhaps we wouldn't like to believe and we're not always successful in pushing off beliefs we don't want to have. We do have something of a choice usually in the formation of the circumstances that might either bring about or prohibit a belief but it's not that straightforward. So Thomas says my Lord and my God then Jesus told him because you have seen me you have believed blessed are those who have not seen and yet not believed. Now anyone who can beat death would be imagined to be a God in the ancient pagan world but these are Jews we're talking about and their definition of God is not like Superman and so Jesus was supposedly already his master but now for a Jew to call him God well that's a big deal. Jesus clearly lays Jesus clearly has plans for more to follow Thomas in belief even without finger point poking and around finger pointing finger poking around his resurrected scars. Thomas's confession is spontaneous but Jesus is making a point and again he is doing it it's his is doing it his own way it's his script it's his plan. Well what is Jesus plan now we go back to the first story in the evening of that first day of the week when the disciples were together with the doors locked for fear of the Jewish leaders Jesus came and stood among them and said peace be with you. After he said this he showed them his hands and his side because it's sort of hard to believe and the disciples were overjoyed when they saw the Lord he's known by his scars and again Jesus said peace be with you as the father has sent me I am sending you. Here is his strategy his strategy is to multiply himself it's not a press conference because truth be told if we look at the record of miracles people see a miracle they see the storm stilled they see the dead man raised and they're like wow that was something and then they go on about their life and it doesn't seem to really change them again we're not as direct as we think we are. This time it's Jesus going to be multiplied all around the world in a personal one on one way sort of like Jesus did with Thomas as the father has sent me I am sending you. Now this will bother some of us because even though that if you even though you know if you take a copy of a copy the copies get progressively worse Jesus even if I have a lot of confidence in myself which I may not have maybe you need a better plan wouldn't it be better if you just keep showing up to people but you don't understand it's not just in making more people interested in being like Jesus it's the process of the people who want to be like Jesus growing in that likeness of him and so with this he breathed on them and you might think well that's a strange thing is that sort of rude I mean did they want to smell his breath but the word there is very peculiar because of course the Old Testament that the early church used was a translation from Hebrew into Greek that was done around the first century before Jesus of 70 Jewish scholars in Alexandria and the word used there in the Gospel of John is a word that is used two other times in the Old Testament one is in the Genesis story where God makes a man out of clay and breathes into him and that man becomes a living nephesh he becomes a living being and humanity starts and so Jesus breathing on them is the beginning of creation 2.0 in the flesh of creation 1.0 in the lives of his disciples this is in some ways the Gospel of John's version of the day of Pentecost this word also shows up in the book of Ezekiel where there's this valley of dry bones and God brings Ezekiel out there and the Lord asks Ezekiel can these bones live and Ezekiel says well only you know Lord and breath comes upon them and the bones start coming together and they grow flesh and they become an army what is Jesus doing by breathing on them how does this work and then he says receive the Holy Spirit the Spirit of God will replicate the pattern of Jesus in application to personality and context Jesus isn't going to make you into a first century carpenter or a first century rabbi Jesus is going to make you into his likeness in the time and the place that you are at and we need to receive this Spirit why well how well sort of like Mary the angel shows up and says to Mary blessed are you because God you are to receive this blessing which will present in the person of Jesus Jesus is Mary is in that sense receiving for transformation we like Mary receiving her pregnancy are invited to welcome this gift which will transform in a costly manner now of course there's some Christians debate about this but one of the things that I think happens is slowly patiently God's timing we change bit by bit we receive him he takes over he works and we become like him and verse 23 basically says he comes with authority if you forgive anyone's sins their sins are forgiven if you do not forgive them they are not forgiven in a sense what he's saying here is not only this gift of Jesus likeness you should receive but also the authority that comes with it now this plan seems to have been the same plan all along if you look at the Lord's prayer and you understand this plan you see it right there our Father in heaven hallowed be your name your kingdom come your will be done on earth as it is in heaven in a sense with the gift of the Holy Spirit in me as it is in Jesus give us today our daily bread and forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors notice how forgiveness comes into this and lead us not into temptation but deliver us from the evil one for if you forgive other people when they sin against you your heavenly father will also forgive you but if you do not forgive their others their sins your heavenly father will not forgive your sins now you've got to kind of put these two verses together and think about how they fit together slow time sometimes fitful transformation personal contextual small often imperceptible difficult to predict and it requires merry like welcoming sacrificial welcoming into our lives this has been in the plan all along Jesus has been working this plan with his disciples from the beginning and this is the next stage now we still live in a world where shalom keeps breaking often by our own hands the age of decay still ravages but a new beginning by a spirit has taken root patient slowly it begins to dawn on us who he is and what he's doing it's still rather mysterious we can't quite get our minds around it we're not quite sure how it works but as a community over long periods of time it starts to come together he duplicates himself by his spirit increasingly moving into our lives through our lips through our limbs into the world thy kingdom come thy will be done on earth in us as it is in heaven not unlike what happens at the road of Emmaus not unlike what happens with thomas not unlike what happens when he breathes on them and says slowly bit by bit you the valley of dry bones you the clay man are going to be filled with the spirit of god and are going to change the world individually and together like children we babble but we grow into him as we watch as we imitate as we fail as we learn as we grow together and upwards amen