https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=WeFZ23ObC80

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I go through the current version of my Sunday sermon. We have a song that we like to sing around here. Looks like it comes from Vineyard Publishing, which makes sense. The vineyard is a very deep metaphor for the community of God. You can find it in Isaiah 5 and it's prominent in John 15. And I just see these words and the song just goes off in my head. You are the vine, we are the branches, keep us abiding in you. And the next stanza, and we go in your love and we go in your name, that the world will surely know that you have the power to heal and to save. Certain kinds of churches will sing a song like this and it's such a lovely song. It's a nice song. Northern California, over the last 20 years, it seems like they can't find any square inch of farmland that they don't want to put a vineyard up in. But then you look at the text. I am the true vine and my father is the gardener. He cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit. While every branch that does bear fruit, he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful. Now if you think about this just for a moment, you see that they all get the pruning shear. They all get the pruning hook. He cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit. While every branch that does bear fruit, he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful. A number of years ago when there's a lot of fruit trees in Northern California, we had a fruit tree in our backyard and a member of the church came over and he was gonna prune it so that it would do better. And I was new to Northern California and thought, well he just snip off a little here and there. He gets in there and he's cutting whole parts of the tree off and it's like, what? And then I once looked up online at how far back they they prune the grapes way, way down. And it's like, well that's most of the plant. And of course, Jesus' original audience would have that in mind when he said this. Now we should look at some context and as I mentioned last week, the Gospel of John has these long sections and this one really starts in John 13 where Jesus washes his disciples feet and then he says that one of you will betray me and he tells them that he's going away and the Holy Spirit will come and they're quite sure what that will mean and that they should love one another. And so everything that happens with, well there's a traitor amongst us and he's pointed out and he leaves and Jesus washes their feet and they find that disturbing and then he says, I mean the whole thing is just traumatic for them and so then they ask him four questions and these don't even necessarily go that well. Simon Peter asked, Lord, where are you going? Jesus says, where I'm going you can't follow. Well why can't I follow you? I'll lay down my life for you, Peter says, and Jesus says, well to tell you the truth before the rooster crows you'll disown me three times. And then Thomas has a question, Lord we don't know where you're going so so how can we know the way to go? And Jesus says, I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. If you really know me you will know my Father as well. From now on you do know him and you have seen him. And his disciples are just thoroughly confused. Then Philip says, Lord show us the Father and that will be enough for us. And Jesus says, don't you know Philip? Even after I have been among you for such a long time anyone who has seen me has seen the Father. And just so confusing. And then Judas, not Judas Iscariot says, but Lord why did you intend to show yourself to us and not to the world? Why didn't you become popular? And why didn't you start a movement? And why didn't you, you know, why didn't you use all these other tools that everyone would expect the Messiah to use? Anyone who loves me will obey my teaching. My Father will love them and we will come to them and make our home with them. Anyone who does not love me will not obey my teaching. Jesus is not easy. You heard me say I'm going away and I'm coming back to you. If you have loved me you will be glad that I'm going to the Father for the Father is greater than I. I have told you now before it happens so that when it does happen you will believe. I will not say much more to you for the Prince of the world is coming. He has no hold over me but he comes so that the world may learn that I love the Father and do exactly what my Father has commanded me. And then Jesus says come let us leave but you don't have the story of them getting up and going someplace. That's where we get the text we look at today. I am the true vine and my Father is the gardener. He cuts off every branch in me that bears no fruit. So these branches are already in him. While every branch that does bear fruit he prunes so that it will be even more fruitful. So there's no way to escape the knife here. Don't bear fruit cut off. Bear fruit pruned. You are already clean and that actually gets picked up in chapter 13 when Peter says I'll wash all of me. No I'll wash your feet enough because you're clean. You are already clean because of the word I have spoken to you. Well that's mysterious. Remain in me. Well that's what we get in the song. As I also remain in you. Older translations will have abide and well what does he mean by that? Now back to the branches. No branch can bear fruit by itself. It must remain in the vine. Well that makes sense to anyone who's seen a plant. Neither can you bear fruit unless you remain in me. Okay but but what is this remaining? I am the vine you are the branches. If you remain in me and I in you you will bear much fruit. Yeah with that pruning. Apart from me you can do nothing. If you do not remain in me you are like a branch that is thrown away and withers. Such branches are picked up and thrown into the fire and burned. If you remain in me and my words remain in you hmm ask whatever you wish and it will be done for you. Wow that sounds a little extreme. This is to my father's glory that you bear much fruit showing yourselves to be my disciples. Now there are two issues when we read this and so we have this little video that I had last week and this week on Twitter someone posted this lovely video of the British royal family. Beautiful children, beautiful wife, rich father and it's just idyllic and they're all so happy and isn't this what we all want? Well isn't this the way life is supposed to be? But then you look at the sheep and you realize oh that's kind of the way it goes. I mean the sheep didn't get stuck in that trench because you know it wanted a bad thing. We have two issues with this. You know what do we want and need and how to get it? Gotta make sure those are muted. Much fruit. Weep for yourselves because you didn't recognize God's coming to you and you don't know what brings you peace. That's what Jesus says when he's coming into Jerusalem because yeah you have kind of have an idea of what the good life is but you're not gonna get it. But at the same time Jesus says in the Good Shepherd passage you know that they may have life and life in abundance and so if you've been following my rough drafts you have the renewal of all creation and you have better than what we can dream of and but we have the question can this world, can the age of decay host that vision? Is this the fruit, the kind of fruit that we will bear? Is this what Jesus is talking about? And then all the pruning and throwing into the fire. Jesus loves his disciples. Jesus is hard on his disciples. The father is more serious about his mission than we are and he's willing to take risks and he's going to do things to achieve his goal and so Jesus is saying I'm leaving and you can't follow but be of good cheer I'm gonna send you my Holy Spirit. Okay and and and that's connected with this remaining in him because I think part of what we look at as as very direct modernist people is we want three steps of remaining or or certain assurances of remaining and well both the the dead wood and the fruitful branches get the pruning. What does this look like in this world? So I mentioned this book on my channel a few times and the author is a was a retired professor of English at Dort University in Iowa and after he wrote it he wrote me and asked if I would write a blurb and so he sent me a PDF of the book and I read through it and I should probably read the blurb maybe I'll put the blurb up on the see that's why I do a rough draft. So here's the blurb the high voltage the high spiritual voltage of a saint is supposed to inspire but it can simultaneously expose our own insecurities and deficiencies. People look at Mother Teresa and hear about her and most know almost nothing about her like oh well Mother Teresa Mother Teresa I hear it all the time and if I would pause them and say ask them a question or two well she was over in Calcutta and she helped poor people that's that's all true any any higher resolution beyond that no not really just you know she showed up with Reagan and got the Freedom Award and Nobel Prize and but what exactly did she do well well helped poor people okay through Mother Teresa's secret darkness huh scandal James Scalp invites us in this lovely book to look at our faith doubts and marriage to Jesus probably should have wrote marriage to Christ how do shining Saints cast shadows and common saints bear light that really is the question because Mother Teresa had a shadow now you might think well this is a Ravi Zachariah thing no no there's none of that she was controversial you can go to her Wikipedia page and and they write about that people know her name they have a low resolution idea of what she did and most but not all respect it but what James Scalp writes about in the book is that she never felt the love of Jesus in her heart she expressed it by her life but she felt abandoned by God but yet she had this driving passion for obedience that their calling is described in the Wikipedia page lifted from a biography of hers I was to leave the continent and help the poor while living among them it was in order to fail would have been to break the faith and so she did she lived most of her life with little interior joy believing God had abandoned her and lately I've been reading a lot of reformational texts and reading about the counter-reformation and a lot of the reform of many monastic orders that had become corrupt and in many ways her story is the same she left the convent and she tried to subsist herself by begging in the street which have been a rather strange thing she's she's from Eastern Europe herself and then she's in India and she's kind of competing for the the the money that would be given to the people she's trying to help and of course it starts a whole movement and money would come in and on and on and on you can read all about it but again you would look at her and imagine well it must work that that God so thrills us on the inside that it overflows in generosity to others and yeah sometimes but sometimes like this too she was pruned and God pruned and pruned and pruned and and this I think for many people would make them ask well why serve a God that prunes well what is the fruit for is it for you or is it for the world for God so loved the world that he and he pruned him and the saint was made by pruning and almost every saint I know and now again I know that all believers are saints but sometimes you see some and you say wow that light is really shining and then you see that there are shadows and darkness and and God is pruning and making them fruitful and others he is cutting off and sometimes it's hard to tell the difference now I know to remain in me or abide in me and well maybe there's some maybe there's some magic puzzle some some mysterious thing but but but look at the metaphor it's it's pruning abiding and fruitfulness and and you know we would rather have well here's a prayer regiment that if you do you'll have fantastic spiritual life like you'd have a fantastic sex life or a very fulfilling job or an amazing family I mean that's those are always the kinds of things we're looking for and Jesus says none of that he says I'm going to one of you is going to betray me I'm going away but the Holy Spirit is coming and that's actually for your good and they're like what and love one another that's key and well where are you going I'm going to the Father well why can't we come well he actually you're gonna betray me and well well show us the way you've been with me haven't you seen it and and again we're looking for some miracle juice or secret sauce or or something of that nature and and so it's sort of a mystical magical puzzle but it's everything Jesus has been saying 1314 and those chapters and really all throughout everything he's been saying in his ministry everything he's been doing he's been doing it the whole time but here again we see the disciples they can't see that we don't understand we look but can't comprehend you see the father looking through the son and and Jesus says well if you love me you'll do what I say and so mother Teresa loved him so she did what he said even if he seemed to be a distant and neglectful husband when she had signed up to be his bride she didn't feel the love and but she lived in his way and you know people are always looking for some new some new tip or some new extreme thing or some new easy thing or something but it's you know you read through history and it's always the same it's worship pray obey and love one another not making it complicated start there that'll be enough and then the pruning comes and it comes and and you don't know as in her case was she being pruned or was she cut off so here we are you know dreaming of you know fantasies of you know my best life now and the idyllic family and you know and you know their their royalty they're at the top of the hierarchy they're supposed to represent the ideal isn't this what life is about and I certainly want idyllic scenes like that for anyone who wishes it it looks lovely but then I look at the sheep and I think yeah that's more often sort of the way it is and he is the good shepherd and he lays down his life for the sheep and he is the vine and we remain in him by living like him by obeying him by following him through worship and prayer and loving each other there it is there it is now back to verse chapter 13 Jesus knew that the hour had come for him to leave this world and to go to the father having loved his own who were in the world he loved them to the end he starts out by washing their feet he ends up on a cross and then out of a tomb and eating a fish we're on our way to Ascension Day for the prince of this world is coming he has no hold over me he will come so that the world may learn that I love the father and do exactly what my father has commanded me and the prince of the world will take him and will brutalize him and you might say how that doesn't look like has no hold on him that looks like he's got a good hold on him enough to put him on that cross and nail him to it yeah but Easter Easter his body broken for you his blood shed for you go and do likewise