https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=95Pvsg3QWWo

 Hi, this is Paul. Yesterday I did a Think Club debate. I was unprepared for how much of a debate it was going to be, but I think in the end we had a good conversation and it's always fun talking to Adam. And one of the things that Adam struggles with is why I am resistant to naturalism, or as Adam says, materialism. Now I think Adam should probably sit down and do a lot of watching of John Verveckis' awakening from the meaning crisis because I think part of what John Verveckis' series affords us is a really nice walkthrough lesson in the issues that are at hand and the science that is underway. Now again, me being a Christian minister recommending this series will sound strange to some people. Some Christians will say you shouldn't do that because Verveckis is not a Christian. Other people will say, well, you shouldn't do that because I can't sit through this many hours of video. Well, I'd ask you how many hours of video are you sitting through now in John's channel? If you walk through it, you can learn something. Agree or disagree, he lays a lot of the issues out on the table. Now Adam thought that I straw manned Brett Weinstein in my response, my commentary video on the unbelievable conversation between Brett Weinstein and Alistair McGrath. And I don't think I straw manned Brett Weinstein at all. I think there are some serious difficulties with his position philosophically and I want to highlight them. Now next week Adam and I are going to sit down and watch that video together, virtually together, via the computer. We'll see how long that takes. Adam is prone to do very long streams with PSA sitch sometimes, but I told him I can't go six hours. But Adam and I are going to do that next week and we'll see what that happens. Adam and I have arrived at certain impasses with respect to our understanding of some things and that's natural and that's okay. My hope is that the impasse doesn't just sit there and produce frustration, but perhaps we can proceed forward with the spirit of finesse and learn something together. But I wanted to highlight some things, what I think are some issues with Brett's project and let's take it from there. Now one of the things that I noted with my conversation with Jeff Quackenbush, with my continued study of John Vervecky's project, and with what Alistair McGrath didn't really get Brett to concede, which is that in every case there's this sense that we need a new religion that's not a religion. And one of the issues about religion that many of these people have is that religion appeals to quote unquote supernatural causes, let's say. Now Alistair McGrath in the in the Unbelievable conversation, being the good scholar that he is, noted that we didn't really have the term supernatural until the 11th century. And that's important to think about. And one of the overarching projects on my channel that I've been doing is I think we need to deconstruct this idea of the supernatural. I think John Vervecky is offering a lot of helpful terminology and language and science to give us some higher definition perspective on this term. And that isn't necessarily a big win for Christian tribe or the atheist tribe, but I think John is just improving the conversation if we can recognize again how he is upping the resolution on all of this. Now if you're following John's work, I think you should really take a look at Mary Cohen. She has started a channel, she only has 118 subscribers now. Mary has been on my channel a few times and she's, I remember the first time I did a conversation with her, Julian jumped into the the comments and said, oh that's the smart lady from the comments section. Well Mary is a treasure and she is, she's got a project of laying out Pope Benedict's book on an introduction to Christianity. Now I'm not a Roman Catholic, many people have recommended that book to me. I haven't read it, so I'm really looking forward to Mary walking it through. But Mary is also, I think she did a video on John Vervecki's project, which I thought was one of the most honest and mature commentaries I've seen on John from a Christian perspective. And so I very much welcome Mary's voice to this. And again, I think John's work is a must watch in this because his concept of relevance realization, especially how it intersects with Darwin, I think is very important for people who are especially coming at this, using Darwin as some way to prove a lack of intentionality or design in this world that we live in. That's a critical nexus point. And what I think John Vervecki does together with The Metaphysical Club, a book that Jordan Peterson has recommended, it helps clean up some assumptions about what Darwin did and didn't assert. Now in my conversation with Jeff Quackenbush, which got a lot of reaction, which I knew it would, the most surprising thing that he said in that conversation was he said we needed a spiritual solution. And this surprised me coming from an atheist because spiritual is a deeply problematic word in the secular frame that we can't live without. And it gets into a lot of the Barfieldian questions of spirit and wind because when atheists talk about a spiritual solution, what they're talking about is a communal motivational something that will flow through society and sort of align all kinds of discordant factors towards achieving a particular goal. And the difficulty that we have is many of the challenges we face currently are not immediate threats to us. And we tend to respond quickly and well in an organized fashion to what the community sees as an immediate threat. But when the threats are further away we lose our focus and our relevance realization machinery kicks in and we're relevant to the things that are most immediate. I think Brett Weinstein would agree with me that this is a big part of the problem that we face today. Now you can see some of it, this I usually over the weekend watch the Sunday morning. The only network TV I continue to watch is some of the commentary on the Sunday morning news shows. And I'm often disappointed, that's probably the best word, by the fact that you know one week okay we've had some shootings and well is this going to be the thing? We have to keep our focus on this and the next week their focus is not on it. If their focus is on anything it's on the upcoming presidential elections and there are good reasons for market-based news to focus on something like that. There's a hierarchy after all and the president sits at the top of the national hierarchy and in some ways the world hierarchies and everything is focused on the president or the presidency. And so there's a reason that these things take the shape that they do. But also when watching a presidential campaign you can notice the movement of the zeitgeist go through. Now the capacity of the news organs to get this right is we should be highly skeptical of that especially given what we saw in the 2016 presidential elections. They all pretty much got it wrong and that has to be kept in mind when we watch them today. If we imagine that they are accurate prognosticators about the future. But what this doesn't displace is this idea which is still present in our culture that what we lack is a spiritual solution and I think this is part of the reason why even among the atheists or the non-theists that we're looking for a religion because religion is in fact the type of thing that guides us as a community towards I made the comparison and I'm going to keep making it. I've thought a lot you know what is the relationship between politics and religion. I deal with this often as a pastor because I have to walk this line and it was in my adult Sunday school class a few weeks ago that that really dawned on me that politics is about the now and religion is about the always. And so in terms of facing the kinds of threats we face as a society which are in fact significant but might not be immediate and the challenge to martial a society towards the problems of the of the not near term but far term we quite reasonably look to religion to get there. But this gets us into the definition of what a religion is. I guess I put this later in my slideshow. Where is that slide? Oh okay well and some of this comes into play with my conversation with Adam because Adam loves Jonathan Haidt. And so often when I'm talking to atheists when they use the word religion they're using this really lousy definition that religion has to that religion involves supernatural beings or agents that that's in the definition of religion. And I think okay well many historical religions have that just because this natural supernatural distinction hasn't been around for the foundation of most religions in the world today. And in fact I think the natural supernatural distinction is in fact problematic for a number of in a number of ways. It's a useful terminology because it highlights something but I think we need to continue to deconstruct it because I don't think we are sharp on what exactly that distinction means. But if you look at Emile Durkheim you can you can very easily see what Jonathan Haidt how Jonathan Haidt defines religion and in fact how Adam defines religion. Religion is a is a unified system of beliefs and practices related to sacred things. Now I think you know we're adding some elements there that Breveke will talk about sacredness and and in some future videos I want to get into the intersectionality between some of the woke religion dynamics we see in our culture right now and this question of sacredness. And I think this actually has everything to do with the frame problem because you have to you need something to look through even to look about. And as C.S. Lewis noticed noted he believes in Christianity not because of what necessarily he sees in it but because he sees everything through it. And I think that's a very early articulation of the frame problem and C.S. Lewis sees the frame problem in the middle of the 20th century and and that's I think why he's so helpful to many of us today. Now I know Adam every time he hears me mention C.S. Lewis he checks out because he read C.S. Lewis and he wasn't impressed. Fine but I'm going to still mention it because I think actually C.S. Lewis continues to have a lot to contribute today. So Durkheim and his definition of religion basically okay so religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things that is to say things set apart and forbidden beliefs and practices that unite a single community called a church or maybe called something else besides a church but a community and all those who adhere to them. The believer who has another definition in this slide a religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things. And again I think sacredness has everything to do with the frame problem. That is to say things set apart and surrounded by prohibitions. Now I think part of what we see in the power of religion is in fact because over the last 50-70 years a number of people have raised issues with some of the prohibitions within traditional religions of really all sorts. Judaism Christianity and Islam get pointed to in our society partly because those are the those are the religions often with the highest the most that we know about. Buddhism and Hinduism are often sort of embraced casually but I think partly because a certain form of Buddhism usually stripped of a lot of its prohibitions or at least a lot of its moral prohibitions has become fashionable as Jonathan Peugeot says sort of California Buddhism in our culture. So I'm comfortable in terms of beginning with Durkheim's definition of religion in this conversation. Okay let's go back to where we were. But now all of this all of these projects have been doing a fair amount of thinking about this partly because of my engagement with John Ravachy's work and his his desire for us to find a religion that isn't to find a new religion. And again hearing this from Jeff and hearing this from Brett Weinstein even if he won't necessarily admit it. I think this is going to be a very challenging thing to make up on the spot and as Brett Weinstein noted well many of our challenges although not feeling immediate are coming closer and closer to us and the speed at which we develop religions I understand Brett Weinstein's skepticism that we can develop one fast enough to actually deal with the challenges that we face because I think religions have a number of key aspects to them as opposed to ideologies which Jordan Peterson calls crippled religions. One of these aspects I call thread durability. Now people will look at Christianity and say oh it's so divided there are so many churches there are all these problems with it. Yes that's true but part of that is a feature and not a bug because what you need within religion is the ability to have differences while not lose the thread and in fact part of the reason why I think heresy and orthodoxy sort of develop together is that's sort of how we keep the thread and how we define the thread and find articulations such as propositional articulations that are helpful over long periods of time in order to maintain the narrative thread of the religion. If you listen to my conversation with Adam you'll note that he tried to define religion as a series of laws and I disagreed with him because I think religion is more a narrative within which a person can live and it's that way that religions have now this scalability piece across the four P's of knowing that John Vervecke talks about. Participatory knowing, procedural knowing, perspectival knowing, and propositional knowing and all those four ways of knowing need to be present in a religion and a lot of the difficulty that people are expressing with respect to the relationship between Christianity and propositional knowing a lot of those criticisms are well founded because I think a truly mature Christian knows their religion and knows their master and knows their narrative in all four ways. Procedural knowing in the New Testament, all judgment texts in the New Testament are according to what people have done. Doing is about procedure, perspectival knowing, and participatory knowing. This very much has to do with trust and motivation. One of my definitions about what a Christian is, I didn't know any of the Vervecke stuff when I made this up but it fits in very well because one of my definitions is a Christian is someone who trusts Jesus more than they trust themselves. That's perspectival and it's participatory and it also then gets into the procedure and then of course the propositional and I'm not, I'm a confessional Christian so I'm not willing to discard the propositional but the propositional has to be within the context of the other three P's. Now so Christianity has to be thread durable in order to, a religion has to be thread durable and part of why I think Brett Weinstein began to sound totalitarian as many others do in this space is because they don't understand the dynamics of thread durability. What that means is there needs to be disagreement but that disagreement needs to be bounded by behaviors. Now a lot of this has developed in the West with respect to post-Protestant reformational learnings that we don't kill each other or burn each other at the stake over theology. That is a, that is, that was an important thing for the West to learn when it came to the relationship between religion and power. Now remember politics is about the now and religion is about the always. Religions need to be scalable. They need to be scalable across IQs. Before I got here there was a Down syndrome man who made profession of faith in our church and that means that he joined the church formally and for years after, now what, how that happens in our denomination is someone comes before the church board or the church council and gives and gives a verbal profession of their faith and then the council decides whether or not to include that person in formal official membership of the church. Now years after this Down syndrome man professed his faith I heard council members talking about that and they were so moved and impressed at this Down syndrome man who's obviously his capacity for propositional articulation was limited but the council was so impressed at the sincerity of this Down syndrome man's faith. Now religions have a capacity to scale across IQs which means that it should be something that is satisfying for the likes of C.S. Lewis and satisfying for the likes of someone with Down syndrome. Part of the difficulty that I find with a lot of the admonitions for a new religion today is that that's going to be difficult but traditional religions have in fact managed to do this in many ways and I think Christianity in some obviously I'm biased but in some ways the best. C.S. Lewis actually points this out in his conversations with Van Auken which are recorded in A Severe Mercy which is a book that Job and the discord server the pastor of the discord server is now reading because one of the things C.S. Lewis as after he became a theist he wanted to know sort of in what branch of theism he should practice and the last two candidates as C.S. Lewis was working it through was Hinduism or Christianity and he eventually decided on Christianity because he saw the most commonality across the scale in terms of what the the brilliant man think of someone like C.S. Lewis or Pope Benedict or Thomas Aquinas any of these brilliant brilliant people and the simple faith of a person with a very low IQ and perhaps some kind of obvious mental impairment but I've seen that as a pastor again and again and again it is often the case that I see very simple people sometimes very disturbed disrupted people even homeless people sometimes exhibit faith that shames the brightest and the most successful in people of status in the community religions need to scale in this way unless you're going to jump into some sort of eugenicist system by which we're going to cull all the low IQ people out of the world they also needs to they also needs to spread across cultures it needs to different people from different cultural groups need to need to be able to settle in and make the religion their own and again I think Christianity has been very successful on this score over many years and many cultures all around the world Northrop Frye notes in his lectures that you can find on the University of Toronto website his lectures on the Old Testament that Christianity is unlike Islam unlike Judaism unlike Hinduism is a religion that begins in translation that the New Testament church reads the Hebrew scriptures in Greek so you know there are issues with that but already the religion shows a capacity to jump to jump cultural lines and in fact the center of mass of the religion you can find maps of this on the on the internet have moved around the world and that's part of the reason Christianity has been so successful in human culture Christianity also has to cut across the classes we saw this in the early Roman Empire where it was not just the slaves who adopted Christianity but it was the wealthy elites we see this in Chinese culture now that Christianity is not only infiltrating the masses of nameless people in the in the huge populations of China but the elites and the educated are also embracing Christianity in China crazy Asian wedding I think that was the movie that I saw a couple of years ago if you note in the beginning of the movie the wealthy mother of the of the young man who's going to marry the the American the Chinese American girl of low status she's having a Bible study with her friends now again a religion needs to do this and Brett and Brett Weinstein's fear matrix there's not enough time for that to happen religions need to be mythological and they need to they need to operate thoroughly and well in the symbolic world now I think part of the reason that Jonathan Peugeot's channel is so valuable is because it's likely true that the symbolic world or these archetypes that that Jung and others and Jordan Peterson have been so adept at noticing and naming and propagating this is closer to our machine code it is a language beneath the articulated language that we have and so any spiritual solution to the problems that we face today must be turned in mythological language and it's Jordan Peterson's capacity to handle a lot of these issues mythologically that I think are part of the reason for his success and popularity it also needs to be historical it needs to tie past and future together it needs to transcend politics it needs to be politically nimble and I personally get frustrated when I hear Christians saying well this is the Christian political perspective and I think well politics is about the now religion is about the always those two different speeds certainly politics is always downstream from religion but the complexity of the now especially when you get into legal systems and frameworks should give us a little bit of humility and a little bit of generosity when it comes to how different Christians apply politics differently and I think this has been skewed partly by the media representation of the relationship between politics and religion in America whereas it's true that Karl Rove employed a certain demographic of white evangelicals to really launch the George W. Bush campaign we should also remember that the most Christian demographic ethnic racial demographic in America today are African Americans who are solid democratic voters and many people who who have listened to me have noted that well in many ways I grew up in the middle of the African American community and so my politics have been shaped by that community remember politics is about the now and religion is about the always and if you keep that in mind that should help modulate the relationship between these two things religions also must take institutional form because nothing changes without individuals but nothing lasts without institutions and so the practices the the the the types of the dogmas all of these things must begin embodied in institutions if religions are going to be able to create the kind of spiritual solutions to problems that are not simply imminent I gotta grab my water bottle now this is a meme so if you're if you're listening on the audio you probably have to check on to the YouTube for this but this is a meme that that job posted in the the bridges of memeing in our discord server where it was it's the scooby-doo meme with unveiling the the the ghost at the end of the the the the the the the the the ghost at the end of the the the the the the ghost at the end of the at the end of the show and and with the ghost mask on over it it says Brett's respect for life and I forget the I forget the blonde dude's name he pulls off the the ghost mask and underneath it says religion and this is I think you know where Alistair McGrath sort of backed Brett down into at the edge of the video that Brett you're really trying to advocating to found a new religion that's what you're doing and and Brett kind of hemmed and hawed he he didn't want to get tagged with that religious thing because he's probably uncomfortable with the term Now Sam's Garden in the YouTube section on the commentary of that video called Sam's said Sam had flippant teleology and I think that's that's I told him I'm gonna steal that idea and I didn't tell him I'm gonna put it in a video too flippant teleology by Sam's Garden in the YouTube section Well why well why is it flippant it's it's best it's basically teleological smuggling there's there's a telos here that's that's operating in Brett's system now it's a good telos and I think it's fundamentally a Christian telos or if I dare use that label that Jeff hates so much a Judeo Christian telos to recognize Brett's Judaism and his relationship with with that community and that tradition and that telos is a respect for human life and seeing the image of God in that now I did a conversation yesterday with with Christopher Mastro Pietro and he had some really interesting ideas that that I think he said it so well and it was just it was just so beautifully put if you haven't watched that video you should watch it Christopher is I can see why he and John work so well together because Christopher really has a gift with language and he can put things together so that that that young man could be a preacher you watch out for him in the future um it's it's he's he's really very gifted with language but you know in a certain degree humanity you know human beings are the symbol of God he studied semiotic now this this gets into the book of Colossians in the first chapter where where the Greek says that Jesus is the icon of the invisible God and and so they're you know this is all stuff that's clearly downstream from Christianity but but one of the things that I think Brett has to own is that he simply smuggles his religion under the cover of atheism he smuggles the the the values he smuggles the telos and says well these things are self-evident yeah they're self-evident in American society in the 21st century but that hardly makes them the products of of evolution now I already talked about the definition of religion so I want to run through some models of creation and maybe creation isn't the right word there but some definitions here now now naturalism I understand to be that the universe has unfolded through a series of closed cause and effect relations we should name Alvin Plantinga because Alvin Plantinga has done a lot of good work in this and I haven't used a lot of Alvin Plantinga in my videos and maybe I should Alvin Plantinga is is a son of the Christian Reformed Church he was a philosopher at Calvin College went on to Notre Dame written a number of important books on and delves into into the matters of whether Darwinism as a belief system is is inconsistent so naturalism says that the universe has unfolded through a series of closed cause and effect relations yielding the minds and matter we are and live within and live within completely apart from any intentionality planned any intentionality or planned outcomes this is the blindness that Darwinianism says we live within now again as C.S. Lewis begins his book miracles I think this is I think this is a part of naturalism that in fact the cause and effect relationships are closed and in fact science is built on the assertion that these relationships are closed and even though we might not know it all that is the reliability that is built into these laws of physics that we talk about as being the basis for everything and the foundation for a disbelief in so-called supernaturalism supernaturalism is probably that the laws of physics cannot be broken by an event that is basically what I hear from most who are who are saying that I can't go along with religion because I can't go along with supernaturalism these laws are set they're fixed and the re the system of cause and effect is closed X cause no matter how complicated will yield Y result every time because the system is closed and if it yields a different result it's because there were some other cause that we weren't aware of but we can become aware of it theoretically at some point in time this is the vision of naturalism the only true agency is the big bang okay and this sort of goes along with Jordan Peterson's you know give me one miracle and I'll explain the rest after the big bang everything was set into motion and here we are today this is the system behind Sam Harris's skepticism in free will now we might have the experience of free will we might have the illusion of free will and that even might be considered a feature and not a bug because it gives us meaning meaning itself then is a feature and not a bug but it's always only an illusory experience of meaning something that is an adaptive advantage to keep us alive and so this kind of naturalism I think is Sam Harris's naturalism now there are other features that we can do we can take psychedelics we can meditate we can do all of that to to encourage ourselves and give us meaning to keep us alive but fundamentally we are locked within a closed cause and effect system all launched at the big bang package including the laws of nature that is what I understand as naturalism now the downside of that is obviously that it is a closed system that our belief that our ideas of will free will true agency are actually illusory and we're really just working out this enormously complicated script and even our admonitions back and forth are to encourage each other cultures that have meaning do better cultures that don't do worse so even now a in an atheistic way Jordan Peterson's admonition Adam always says I lose him when I when I start talking supernatural to him that I just it just turns him off and so if if if Adam and I were to be on tinder he'd say turn ons Jonathan height turn offs supernatural talk talk supernatural to me baby but true agency was the big bang but this is all the whole show as C.S. Lewis says now preceding naturalism was a theistic stage that Charles Taylor talks about called providential deism and if you haven't read Charles Taylor's Charles Taylor's a secular age well you're not alone because it's a really big book and it's not much easier to read than maps of meaning but it's a good book to read well before that was providential deism and and this is in a sense what what Darwin defeated and asserted what was wrong and again Jordan Peterson's recommendation of of the metaphysical club I agree with it's a great book part providential deism says the universe has unfolded through a series of closed cause and effect reactions yielding the minds and matter we are and live within according to a plan built into its launch and progresses according to its predetermined outcome now this is the this is the Christianity that Adam asserts is compatible with naturalism and in many ways when Adam gets frustrated with me it's because I'm not a deist because what Adam is looking for is allies theistic allies because he thinks Christianity actually got a lot right even though there is no supernatural god so Adam is an atheist and not an anti-theist and so Adam wants Christians to fall in line and stop stop um stop complaining about the naturalist and just come in alignment with them certain forms of Calvinism might be compatible with this providential deism that that we're we're in a closed system everything is predetermined and from the beginning of time it's all been set in motion and if you look at the relationship between some articulations of Calvinism and the rise of deism uh the timing looks not coincidental and for this reason I'm comfortable being a compatibilist theologically when it comes to the Bible because I'll say human beings have real agency and God has ordained the future and I think Tim Keller articulates that really well and I've played that some Tim Keller clips in past videos on this score so to that degree theologically I'm a compatibilist because I don't really see John Calvin or the Bible as doing anything to undercut our agency or responsibility okay and now some of you will say I'm not a real Calvinist well you can read Richard Mueller's paper um was Calvin a Calvinist if you want to dive into that if you just google Richard Mueller was Calvin a Calvinist if I remember maybe I'll put the link in the notes and if I don't put a comment in the comment section and then I'll drop the link in to get into that little intramural question of Calvinism which probably most of you don't care about but providential deism says well there was planning and intentionality at the beginning and that has unfolded through time okay now I do believe that there was planning and intentionality at the beginning but I believe that God also through time is an agent involved in a living way within human history that's part of my religious package now this third thing I'm going to call creation with consciousness and JP has been working his panpsychism to to get it in there and Karen has been wondering about a consciousness field and we don't know quite how consciousness works but this is in many ways compatible with theism universe began with an intention with intention to yield conscious beings whose agency mirrors in small part the agency of their creator timelines can branch according to the actions of these conscious agents and the future is open sort of now I'm not advocating open theism okay because I'm enough of a Calvinist to not advocate for open theism and I'm enough of a Christian to believe that there will be a historical consummation at some point in time now again I'm the way I'm talking now rubbing at him the wrong way but sorry Adam I just gotta be me but this this this second point that timelines can branch according to the actions of these conscious agents is the free will that Brett Weinstein wants to continue to assert against Sam Harris okay and this is the free will that most people well we all act as if we have it and when I get into listing the problems with naturalism that I think are are really part of what Brett Weinstein is doing well this is one of the issues so part of the question here is whether the universe is opened or closed whether history is opened or closed in a closed universe determinism we have determinism with an illusion of agency that's Sam Harris's now Brett clearly if you advocate for a new religion you probably believe in an open universe where conscious agents determine outcomes can make consequential choices and pursue outcomes with reason this is part of the inconsistency with Sam Harris's admonitions about reason because he's admonishing people to be reasonable but only within an open universe does reason make sense and the admonitions about reason making sense because if you ask someone to be reasonable what you're asking for them is to focus their consciousness to rein in their actions to control themselves to be able to intentionally achieve certain outcomes this is exactly the aspect that people refer to with Darwin by saying well nothing the whole process that has yielded the animal and material and the animal world that we live within today was a closed system in that well it was well see Darwin says there's no agency and there's no there's no employing reason to achieve those outcomes now as I continue to ponder John Verveckis relevance realization we're probably going to have to figure out where does at least this form of reason fit into it is this is reason a higher form of relevance realization I think for vacu's relevance realization is a really interesting and fascinating idea to throw into this mix especially with respect to questions about well what was Darwin talking about and whether Darwinism is true or neo-Darwinism and how this all unfolds today but basically in an open system conscious creatures can employ the spirit of geometry to build bridges where that engineers can tell you how long they should last now this got into my group a and group b thesis as well because requirements of an open system I think assert that there are two sorts of things in the world okay now we've got JP and his pan pan psychism I'm not going to get into this here but there are two elements that go into making this open system there's group a elements in the universe that are subject to agency such as my famous cell phone holder the material was pulled out of the ground and and molded and framed with intentionality to achieve the shape of a cell phone stand the universe is in that sense full of dumb matter with no agency of its own if panpsychism is wrong it's something that we colonize something that we employ to achieve desirable outcomes through reason now JP's pan psychism particles have limited aid and agency which can be colonized by higher and greater agencies and I think that's I think that's an interesting idea and the the idea of agencies being nested is clearly true any human being who rides a horse is colonizing the agency of that horse and the human being who has greater agency is taking advantage of his greater age his or her greater agency over the lesser agency of the horse all right now but then there's group b and these are again the question is whether group a and group b are on a continuum or if they're two separate classes you have group b who are agents and they are the deciders who can employ rationality these are all the listeners that sam harris is admonishing towards being reasonable the ability to predictably employ the elements of group a to achieve those desired outcome everyone lives as if they are part of group b because if you don't live as if you're part of group b you're going to have a meaning crisis and you might become suicidal and nihilistic and this is a big element of the meaning crisis that bit by bit by bit we are beginning to assume that or beginning to suspect that well if sam harris is right I really don't have agency and all of his admonitions for my rationality they're really pretty pointless now this is sort of where brett comes in and I really like brett's work somebody early on pointed me out to brett's appearance on a podcast armchair expert shepard and a number of my listeners listened to his podcast dack shepard I think his name is and and brett was on that podcast and that was just a fun show to listen to and brett is bright and but his schtick is that he employs evolutionary evolutionary psychology and and what this does is he tells us well you think you're acting out of free will but actually it's the decisions and the darwinian effects from from millions of years ago that are acting within you and you're only acting you only imagine you're having free will over these aspects of your life but it's actually your programming that is making you do it and so I think there would be some value in to working with brett weinstein and having him articulate more carefully the relationship between this free will which he says that we have you can hear that in the question and answer section in the second unbelievable thing where he says yes I believe in free will and where he just tagged sam harris in a tweet saying you know I'm gonna have to perhaps we are do another public chat then sam harris I propose we discuss the status of new atheism I'd like to explore your thesis on free will and my belief that it is in conflict with the implications of darwinism well I think that's a good conversation to have because I'm not clear about what brett believes I'm not clear where brett says the line is between all of this stuff that as a as as a biologist he says these are the reasons these are the closed cause and effect reasons why we're doing these things now maybe he says that there's that we're actually free to choose as individuals well I'd like to hear him say that but I'd also like to hear him account for it and I would imagine sam harris is going to ask him to account for it because sam harris again is in the illusory side of this do human beings really have agency or is agency an illusion do we not have agency in group when it comes to statistics but as individuals we have agency that's kind of a curious thing when we talk about let's say the random the random behavior of nuclear particles well what exactly are we and and in fact if as a group we just simply show a bell curve then maybe again sam harris is right and our individual agency is illusory so do human beings really have agency or is agency an illusion we know that we have some group anus within us we have we are like group a and that's so I very much enjoy listening to brett weinstein talk about well why do people usually in general not me I believe myself an agent but all those other people out there they're less agents than I am surely all those people are doing things for evolutionary reasons and I listen to his arguments I think oh that's interesting gadd side I like listening to some of his arguments too he's a little bit more dismissive though I prefer listening to brett but you know I so I enjoy hearing those things and I learn from those things and and I'm not I've got some skepticism but I'm not terribly skeptical about those things I find those assertions interesting and I think even productive in terms of helping me understand myself and helping me understand the patterns I see in other human beings so I'm not discrediting his science but I don't really know if he's actually thought these issues through so we know that we have some group anus within us but it is our agency completely illusory and where's the line do we know if there is any group bness at all and again in the second episode of the the big conversation where he talks to alistair mcgrath a woman in the audience asked him do you believe in free will I do believe in free will I should talk to sam harris about this I would listen to that conversation but now getting to the point of this video there are three difficulties with naturalism that I want to highlight and I think are highlighted in brett's conversation with alistair mcgrath the first one how do we account for true agency in a closed naturalist system if the system is not closed where is it not closed how is not how is consciousness if consciousness is simply an emergent property from the bottom subject to this long chain of cause and effects and mental again brett's whole point is that ideas this the second tier of code ideas are themselves products of evolutionary adaptive forces through time adam says that too with this is what religion is it's a evolved aspect okay how then is that system not closed just like everything else is closed within the chain of cause and effect because if you actually think this this this thing through error itself is a fascinating dynamic because really there can be no error because error is a judgment that presumes teleology error is a judgment that presumes a better or a worse outcome there can be no error in darwinianism all right and so how do we account for true agency in a closed naturalist system if verveckis machinery for relevance realization compatibilism this is as people are getting further and further in his conversation this is where we're getting to because compatibilism basically says we have a closed system over here and we're asserting true agency and that's why in some ways my calvinism is compatibilist because i can't account i can't square election and agency and i admit i can't square it so i'm a fudgy compatibilist but does anybody want to admit to their fudge in this see part of the part of the glory of being a fudgy theist is that i can just punt and say my brain is too small god knows and if i can learn it i'll try but maybe i can't but i can trust perspectival participatory knowing in a god i can trust in his character that's a feature of theism that affords not only humility but comfort within not knowing and comfort within distress and disaster agency is an emergent property with consciousness but if the universe is a closed system of cause and effect of unbreakable natural laws our mental decisions are a subset of these things which is of course what brett keeps teaching us because of all what the little animals did back when that got inherited into our brains and therefore since our mind is the emanation of our brains this is the programming this is also part of brett's of the huge problem i have with brett saying we just transcend our programming oh tell me of this trance self transcendence again if you want to look at a physicalist working very hard on these problems watch vervecky he is looking to afford self transcendence well i don't see brett doing that hard work so brett how do you afford self transcendence when the rest of your schtick is telling us how well the reason i'm doing these things is because my animal ancestors did them in the past and again i'm not allergic to that line of argumentation but you're going to have to account for agency at some point especially if your religion is based on this flippant teleology and really flippant self-transcendence where well everything for the last few million years have coded me to do this but gosh we're in trouble i'm just going to transcend my programming i don't think so i've been listening to the the hardcore history podcast on the first world war and there's a great quote in there where churchill basically notes that the war got away from us what was that there was so much killing on each side we had to punish the other person we're programmed to do it and brett himself has some really awesome lectures out there that notes that when times are good and food is plentiful and nobody's scaring us and we don't feel threatened well we can be very generous towards the out group but if there's anything that we've learned in the last few years that all you have to you don't even have people don't have to be rationally threatened in any real way just make them feel threatened through propagandas of fear and you can push them to do mean and cruel and bloody things and if there's anything that's clear not only about uh clear in terms of the even recent history of human beings this is how we are and self-transcendence is not just gonna happen because well you say christians in their prayer are doing wishful thinking boy there's a lot of wishful thinking when i listen to brett with his flippant self-transcendence second point value apart from instrumentality as group b agents now um civilla king has her own youtube channel called a quality experience and she did a really terrific conversation with john vervecky on this because she was looking into zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance into the question of can we have the good where does value come from the good where does value come from now x is good for blank but how do we know x is good in itself that's quality brett and adam want to say that we can choose being members of group b the good but how do we know it apart from instrumentality good for something this again is where the teleology and its naturalisms inability to account for teleology is a huge weakness good for survival good for happiness well this isn't so easy there's this famous there's this famous moment in the matrix where cipher wants to be put back into the matrix he's seen base reality or what they think is base reality they're not sure because in the matrix it keeps going down but he's seen base reality and wants back into 1999 to enjoy that stake and he says you know i know this is just coding but i loves it self-evident well-being thriving read brave new world watch the matrix well if you plug everyone into a computer and we're all having happy experiences why would we look at that and say this is wrong the whole the whole project of morpheus and nebuchadnezzar and neo to free human beings from the matrix this is exactly what that movie is about that is well-being our well-being and thriving really that self-evident the third problem is human now brett says well what we need to do is we need to somehow have fewer people on the planet i'm not sure how he's going to get to that have fewer people on the planet a stable population and maximize well-being as much as we can for those people on the planet okay what's a people biologically darwinianly now a people biblically isn't too hard to come by because the bible is only 3 000 2000 years old so we kind of know what people are by the bible but darwin can't tell you what a human being is because of the problem of category human just like finchness is a variable and again if you're not familiar with this in episodes 0 through 25 and emerging from the meaning crisis john verbecky goes through the the philosophy episode 26 through 34 he goes through the cognitive science so adam doesn't like philosophy so you might skip one through 25 start at 26 and learn some cognitive science and understand what darwinianism says understand darwin's insight human is a variable in a darwinian system not a fixed point brett treats it like a fixed point in fact the whole the whole history of humanity could be understood through the question about what a human being is because naturally anthropologically pretty much every tribe begins by saying me and my family group are people anyone outside my family group look at well look at navajo what's the word for people in navajo it's basically us look at almost any ancient group what's a person us you have greeks and you have barbarians you have romans and you have barbarians you have jews and you have gentiles and almost every people group in the history of the world it has started this way chimps have started this way you lose you leave the chimp tribe there's no coming back in marriage is an amazing human is marriage is an amazing thing in humanity because it's how you make a family member from a non-family member that's an astounding thing especially if you're in a darwinian so human is a variable a mere variety of life and there is no inherent goodness in it in darwinianism not a destination according to darwin that's the whole point that darwin makes we stumble because of the problem of category and again if you don't understand the category problem watch vervecky's stuff he will explain the category problem to you category requires a subjective observer a definer the only reason we have frankly this idea of human exceptionalism that brett is banking on in this video is because he recognizes human beings but what he doesn't recognize is human being is not a scientific category because of the problem of categories it's not a darwinian category because of darwin's observation back to the metaphysical club darwin regretted the word selection darwin regretted that the word selection suggested an intention remember it's blind natural selection is a blind process because the conditions to which the organism must adapt in order to survive are never the same in periods of drought when seeds are hard to find finches that happen to have a long narrow beak good for foraging will be favored over finches with broad powerful beaks more of their offspring will survive and reproduce in periods of abundance when seeds are large and their shells are hard the broad beaked finches will hold the adaptive advantage finchness is a variable not a constant human is a variable not a constant darwin thought that variations do not arise because organisms need them which is essentially what lamarck had argued he thought that variations occur by chance remember the whole point of this is that it's blind there's no intention there's no telos there's no outcome it's blind and the whole basis for i reject supernatural it's blind that's the basis here folks if you want it this way you gotta own it in all seasons it happens that some finches are born with marginally lower or narrower beaks than others just as children of the same parents are not all exactly the same height in certain environmental conditions a narrower beak may have possible may have positive or negative survival value and that will also depend on the context realization relevance realization is about context it's the whole thing together and i'm using i'm using verveckian hand terminology just as children of the same parents are not exactly the same height in certain environmental conditions a narrower beak may have positive or negative survival value but in other conditions for example when seeds are plentiful and finches are few it may make no difference the selection in quotation marks of favorable characteristics is therefore neither designed nor progressive okay this is the point that darwinians keep making it's not defined it's not it's not designed and they said forget the second one neither is it progressive there's no value difference between the variations and there can't be value difference between the variations because there's no intentionality at work within them there's no engineer looking at the cell phone stand and deciding which one is better than the other because we're talking variables without intention and therefore no value so you can't just sneak in value at the end and say we need to create a world in which humans are happy and stable where are you getting the value from i don't see it in your system now if you want to just say i'm a human being and i'm a species so i'm going to assert it well then at least you've just asserted it but you still have the problem of saying on what basis is your agency well maybe i've just evolved to assert it but now we're back in sam sam harris's camp of there being no free will and therefore no need to exhort people to be rational because they can't anyway to the degree that they haven't shown any rationality to begin with making all of this religion stuff an admonition for religion again also moot the selection of favorable characteristics is therefore neither designed nor progressive no intelligence divine or otherwise determined in advance the relative value of individual variations there's no value difference between neanderthal and what we call homo sapien there's no value difference between europeans and africans between africans and asians between short people and tall people between pygmy people and and the um the people in the african the uh gods must be crazy people can't think of their names the people group there's no value differentiation between them so don't sneak it in in terms of your new religion if you can't account for it buy your new religion no intelligence divine or otherwise determined in advance the relative value of individual variations and there is no ideal type of finch or essence of finchness towards which adaptive changes are leading now maybe in our meme world we like human beings but that's just as arbitrary and there's no value that can be had in that system either but we're not going to be able to either so to repeat three difficulties with naturalism especially with brett's how do we account for true agency in a closed naturalist system two flippant teleology teleology smuggling what is the source and knowledge of value three what what um what we need to do to survive or thrive can we know what we is without the category problem that's what i see and i'm sticking with it