https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=f3nECwJKgHY

 Yep, yep, I'm late. I get it. I get it Do a lot of questions this week well, I'll have to be disciplined Yeah tardy that says right Bryson. I do owe you a conversation. I know Oh gosh, where's my line from last week Not last week last month, uh probably no, I'll be on vacation the first Friday of August so I don't think there'll be a Discord no more for today. Okay All right Good. We're here. I Have to set up another screen to make sure I can manage comments if I need to Sorry about the delay I Just setting up stuff. I'm here all by myself. That's Rick is Rick has a job. He helps with a lot. He's got a job. Oh Tom Holland has a New video out on unheard Studio Live content live You on YouTube Mute that thing. All right We are in business. Our patience has been rewarded. Thank you Aaron. This is your very kind words Hi Andrew LDS that's a very it's a very sweet comment. All right Out of the questions. I'm gonna turn my fan on because it's it's not gonna be real hot today We've only had one real hot spell in Sacramento. That's very unusual for Sacramento. Usually it's blazing by this time of year Okay First question indie defense First question indie defense. Let me share this screen now Share screen Tartar screen. That's the one bang. Here we are Indie defense, how can I have another conversation with you? We spoke two years ago and I've changed and learned a lot since then I bookmarked your Calendly page of human So yeah, Sam commented the other week that Calendly is in some ways broken It's not broken because there's anything wrong with Calendly it's broken because of me and I Always warned you about this. This is part of the reason I never wanted the channel to grow very big it's because I There's a right now that the there continues to be What what hat what all of you watched for like those two that weird week of watching the Christian reform sinned The conversations continue and still people are complaining about calling the question and not hearing everyone And and and my favorite Protestant. Well, thank you The truth is That there's only So many hours in a day and only so many days in a week and a lot of this a lot of my time is taken up with eating and sleeping and doing the work of the church and Having to use this channel to think about the things I need to think about that comes out in the monologues and the commentaries and and and and then Part part of what is so Uncomfortable for me about my internet life is that there are so many of you and just limited amounts of me and Every time I meet a new one of you I Only get to scratch the surface. I only see you know an hour of you or two hours of you and And then you don't go away and then I meet another one of you and another one of you And and you know relationships sort of go like that and I've got to maintain my relationships with my wife With my children with the people at my church my elders and deacons that I'm responsible to my colleagues my neighbors on and on and on and on and on so you guys just keep coming and I I want to keep an open door and The truth is the longer I do is the longer I do is the longer I do is the longer I do is the longer I do is the longer I do this and the more of Delegate. Yeah, it's not a matter of delegating Stuff See it's it's weird because the the things that allow me to do this are also some of the reasons It's getting increasingly difficult to delegate the more the church dies Certain things sort of land on my plate You know generally in the Christian firm church our elders and deacons rotate in three-year terms And we don't have any elder and deacon rotation and what that means that in some ways the church is getting towards non viable and so that then raises questions that are also time-consuming should we revert to unorganized status and and and Come under one of our daughter churches that we helped to plant, you know 15 20 years ago, which is kind of a good thing But that adds complexity and it all changes by time. So in other words I'm and also all the synod videos that I did Here's a funny thing So when I started making regular videos for you guys It was hard to find me you had to too hard figure out my email address You could find me on Twitter. You could get to me one way or another but the Christian reform videos that I've done a Lot of Christian reform people found that and then found me and they're like, oh I want to talk to this man well, if you're a youtuber and meaning you watch YouTube and There's a new YouTube channel you're watching and you think oh, I'd like to talk to this person I probably can't talk to this person because they're out there in YouTube land and I would need a special relationship or a special connect or something to get to that person because YouTube by design puts up sort of a wall a screen between us Well when a bunch of people in the Christian reform Church Found my videos they don't watch a lot of YouTube And they just see another Christian for a minister talking to them Like I want to talk to Paul So what do you do if you're a member of the Christian from church and you decide you want to talk to Paul? Oh I'll just pull out the directory of Christian reformed ministers. There's Paul. Here's his number I'm gonna give him a call So I've been on the phone And I've gotten emails and and I'm really grateful for it but the the numbers the channel has grown because of the Christian reform stuff and And but that's totally different because all of you people who are like YouTube junkies You sort of have your own rituals and traditions about how these relationships work And I've always tried as grim gris says to break the fourth wall To the degree that I can and the randos conversations have been a part of that and that's been a whole Thing that has grown and it's a thing. I love and it's a thing. I'm committed to keep doing but The way this works I've said this before and I'll keep saying it I'm just preaching on 1st Corinthians 16 when the Apostle Paul says, you know at the beginning of the week set aside your Earnings or your profits your excess so that when I come I can make the collection Well Yeah, Phil Phil Nickerson Phil Nickerson is the true Randos fan because he went through all the randos videos and he left comments on them So he knew that I was going through them But anyway that he I knew so that I knew he was going through them. So anyway Where was I going with this? Oh, it's so bad. My ADHD is so bad. So what happens is oh Yeah, the beginning of the week the collection At the beginning of the week I look at my calendar and I've got I don't have any slots set aside for Paralandra commentary for Jordan Peterson commentary for a grail country for I don't have any sets I don't have any slots set aside for doing Commentary or therapy videos my monologues are of my therapy videos. I don't have any commentary for that then no time away for that. I Knew I had to do more CRC videos because CRC is my people. They're my church. They're my home. I want to help I want to be a I want to help the conversation I want to help the CRC have conversation so I've been trying to do more of those and Now because I'm involved the conversation has different levels and so there's one level and so of of other people on the internet of other people who are How to describe this other people who have a certain degree of status in the conversation and Because I have a degree of status in the conversations. It's important that I talk to them So my conversation with Richard Beck my conversations with Jonathan Peugeot and John Verbeke my conversation with Richard Rowling This week I have scheduled a conversation with Someone else who you'll recognize I won't give the name yet This week I was going to do a warm-up conversation for the the Washington event and because of scheduling that fell through But it fell through the morning of and so I couldn't just open up Calendly slots and have those things filled And I've still got some promised conversations to the Lowry boys and to a bunch of Chino people that I haven't forgotten so some randos conversations are in some ways already promised so It's tough getting those slots right now also because as I said before summers are different because my wife is Off work and available and through the rest of the school year. She works five days a week Fixed because she's got a rigid school schedule. I work Sundays because I'm a working minister Saturday is our only joint day off together. So I protect Saturdays Very fiercely because Saturday is really the only day that my wife and I get to do anything So a lot of people like I want to talk. Can we talk on a Saturday? No Can't talk on a Saturday when I do conferences that eats up on my Saturdays So I'm very Zealous about my Saturdays, which means that unfortunately Rando's has taken a hit on Saturdays Unfortunately Rando's has taken a hit lately and I want to get back to it. So the way randos works are Sunday or Monday, I look at my calendar for the next week and I see What can I do How many randos slots can I have? And if I look and I say I can open it up I open it up and they go almost right away And that's the way it works And some weeks I can't open it up and summers are especially bad and After you're not going to hear I don't know what you're going to hear from me between july 17 and august 17. Yeah, that's a whole month And now i've just added In my own insanity this whole membership thing which i'm kind of having fun with because I can drop stuff in the membership slots that I don't quite dare dropping into the other slots And there's about 30 or 40 members and there's three tiers there's the There's the in the door tier, which is like 2.99 a month. Um, yeah, that's like no money and i'm gonna put um I'm gonna do a question and answer for all of the members that's gonna be in there you get special stuff Like you don't get a lot for your three dollars a month because it's three dollars a month But there will be a few things And then for the 6.99 slot I I entitled that something like no wait, no ads because Like with the bishop baron video this morning I I made that video yesterday and that was a mess. That was a I I really want to talk about I really want to talk about this crazy show mrs. Davis But bishop baron I think led us a little astray even though everything he said was right Expectations he raised were interesting And that shows all about the grail which has led me down a grail rabbit trail lately and um Trying to get up to speed on grail stuff We have a whole channel called grail country in this little corner. So trying to get up to speed on grail stuff and because um mrs. Davis is weird It's disturbing I don't know if it's important or not um Do a couple randall's conversations that will clear out the new crc raffle Um and so Yeah, the rest is history grail was good. It was and it's very different of course from peugeot and rolling I just listened to grim grizz's rolling conversation Oh, it was so good. It was so good and I I I want to clip that sucker up and I want to Maybe i'll ask if I can edit it and repost it on my channel. It was so good And i'm still i'm behind in a lot of important videos Anyway, so there's a lot I want to do and a lot I want to keep doing and I want to keep doing the randos and Someone at the conference said you should go back and talk to your old randos Just like you're talking indie defense and I think he's right. So, um, don't give up Don't give up on me, baby. Don't give up. There's this 1970s song about that don't give up I I want to get back to the randos because One of the cool things that's happening. Justin wells was at was in living stones. Um Um Jonathan uh, justin wells was at living stones justin wells's conversation with um with karen on the meaning code channel another outstanding conversation Deserved its own video from me. I just haven't had time to do it So that the the 699 member level like I posted the bishop baron video there yesterday People could chew on it and I released it this morning I'm continuing to play with all of this, you know when sam said well that the cowley thing is kind of broken He's right and i'm just trying to deal with i'm just trying to deal with um Well, just basically volume so i'm I'm working i'm working on this so yeah because in in for me the randos conversations they're They're a real joy the randos conversations are the open frontier of this channel where It's kind of the mouth of the estuary Where I turn on that camera? And I have no idea who or what i'm going to be talking to or about and again Not all of them are Not all of them come through countily and not all of them are recorded and not all of them are shared And often the best randos conversations will never be shared and many of them have never been recorded because they're pastoral conversations and they're real people's lives and Those are holy moments so I I Yeah, I I have no idea what I right from the start this channel was Making stuff up as I go along and in many ways, that's still the case um That's right phil when we've been there 10 000 years We'll no less days to have randos conversations than when we first begun. In fact, we'll have way more And and I believe that I believe that so Yep, I open slots on sunday monday or tuesday usually for wednesday. I'm thinking of Altering countly to have a little bit more flexibility of when I can do randos conversations Because right now it's sort of wednesday morning that's hard for dealing with people in asia like australia and other things like that The other far east that that time zone is tough for me to do. I also I also do most of this during sort of business hours on the west coast and the reason for that again is I I try to keep evenings I try to hold as many evenings for my wife as I can because again We don't get long weekends Most people they'll get like a long weekend friday saturday sunday get to go away We can't do any of that because of our two jobs. So Yeah, it's a mess Would you take therapy from a peterson gpt? Would you transcend your dunbar number by recommending randos to have conversations with pvk gpt? That's such an interesting question john Um, I definitely wouldn't take therapy Number one this is going to happen Um, if you look at the replica I talked about that early on that was like one of my first ai videos that I made I haven't made many but For some reason I don't sit on this chair like I used to I have to figure that out Um, see I am an embodied individual. Yeah a little bit manic this morning, but that's because I ran here into church I Just remembered donald trump's comment about a remarkably stable genius crazy world we live in okay, um The replica the ai replica app was intended to be a quasi therapeutic Resource for people That's been an interesting thing um we're just beginning to think about and experience and explore the complexity of these machines we're creating That process is going to be a while and there are going to be many happy and sad surprises on on twitter this week kyle kyle had a really kyle had a conversation with karen and Luke and nate about this hideous strength, which is another project that i'm still working on That hideous strength that see the third the third in the lewis space trilogy And then kyle was talking about Basically artificial wombs and growing human beings In bags instead of inhuman wombs As we I I look at ai and Like The transhumanist stuff. This is all connected No artificial wombs. Thank you eric. I'm against it, too um because All of this technological Part of the reason technology has all of these unintended consequences is because of exactly the reasons we talk about in this little corner with respect to the Acknowledgement that the world is more complex than we can fathom And that certainly goes for the human psyche in terms of ai therapy or pastoring and it certainly goes in terms of The knitting together of a human being in its mother's womb I can't get the camera right I can very much imagine probably in china This attempt to grow artificial human beings And we will discover just like we're discovering with ai and with how many others of our technologies That there are unintended benefits and consequences that delight us and horrify us That's going to continue You know when peugeot keeps talking about how world the world is how weird the world is going to get he's right How weird the world is going to get he's right it's things are going to keep getting weird and weirder Part of the real challenge that we've been dealing with since the scientific and then industrial revolution is Can we as an extended body say no to ourselves, but hasn't that always been A deep part of the human religious challenge Why is it that the entire conversation with respect to desire or epithumia Is the shape it is? Not just in the christian tradition, but in many traditions The advent of nuclear weapons Had a sobering effect on our technological hubris The concern about environmental degradation and catastrophe Is having a sobering effect on our technological avarice This is going to be one of the big issues of humanity going forward and so Yeah, there will be a peterson gpt. There will be a pvk gpt Even if i'm against it and don't like it if this channel would grow larger one of you out there would Take all of my videos and everything that i've done on the internet And add some there would be a tlc gpt We already have a g uh tlc search engine That's the next step And you can have it you can you'll be able to talk to it And it'll it'll have peugeot and pvk and vervecky and peterson and um richard roland and Nate and it'll have all of us in it and it'll sound like us And it will be A lot like us it's coming and it's coming soon Soon within years not even decades there will be a tlc gpt It's coming Now how that pans out will that help with my randos conversations? probably because people have the sense that they're Talking to me and a lot of what already when it comes to our conversations our conversations are all Are already a mixture of High challenge ai to model luke you're not that hard to model. You're not that hard to model. I'm sorry We've we've we've all been mapping you since the day you exploded on our screens luke We love you, but it's that way um If if um If there can be a luke whisperer then you can be modeled That now your second thing your your point right here Is true oops That's true and that's um Wait a minute. Um And that's exactly where I was going with this on one hand You can get a pvk randos experience You can get a pvk randos experience from gpt probably within the next five to six years but It won't be the same as talking to me because what happens is I will That dynamic has already happened Because I have already When I have a randos conversation, there's some mixture of Me and projection of me. This is built into us psychologically So when you're having a conversation with pvk gbt It'll be the same thing. There'll already be projection in other words whether you're talking to the gpt or whether you're talking to me A good bit of your conversation with me will be projection and the less you actually know me the more of that is projection And so those formulas will be constant between pvk and pvk gpt But pvk will already to some degree have done some mapping of pvk gpt And so the real pvk will always be a little bit different than pvk gpt And so that's going to be an arms race But we're going to acclimate to that arms race. There will be a peugeot gpt and and peugeot might you know Well, peugeot's a pretty he's actually a pretty Amicable guy but um, you know a A j. Dyer gpt. Let's say someone who's a little bit less agreeable than jonathan peugeot Um, someone will make it he might say I hate I hate that you've made it Doesn't matter somebody's going to make it and somebody's going to if there's a market for it. Somebody's going to deploy it And I don't even mean a financial market because so much of what we're doing on the internet has no financial Um Consideration people just do it for fun so that's all coming but those who Exclusivity can will continue to have status and People be like I can talk to pvk gpt all I want and and Others will say ah, but I talked with the real paul vanderclay I talked with the real jonathan pichot. I was there when jordan peterson talked about C16 I watched the biblical series so Those dynamics also aren't going away I said I was going to be more efficient and i'm not doing it Okay, michigan man sam is there a strong biblical case for post millennial eschatology If by post millennial eschatology you mean See the word how so Public service announcement pre-mill post-mill all-mill all relies on this Perceived millennium this thousand-year reign that you can find in the book of revelation And how you regard that One way of characterizing pre-mill all-mill and post-mill is pre-mill say Everything is going to get worse and worse and worse and worse and then you have like some For some pre-mills, then you have this rapture and a tribulation and then jesus comes yada yada yada So post mills have their own eschology eschatological formula where uh in some ways things get better and better and better And um, and then you have you kind of run up to this thousand-year reign our mills basically say That thousand years isn't what you think it is It's it's sort of already upon us and we're sort of already in it but all mills basically say I don't know I they're they're not looking for a literal Or a physical or a temporal thousand years in terms of a chronological timeline and I actually think that This pre-mill post-mill and all-mill as constructed as I just described it Is in some ways a function of modernity. So as modernity recedes these categories are going to get increasingly fishy And part of the difficulty with this is So politicians do like right tack wrong track polling the nation is on the right track the nation is on the wrong track There is no track There is no track We naturally again my rule about Consciousness consciousness or attention or awareness is sort of sort of monofocal If something is monofocal dualisms Naturally develop it's a b testing this not this this not this And we take the enormous complexity of the world and we turn it into good and bad right and wrong black and white So all that antithetical stuff. It's a function of the monofocality of attention Because if if you can really only pay attention to one thing there's this and not this Which makes three sort of the mystical number because once you're doing abc You're no your your task switching has just sort of exploded because it can be ac or ab ac or ab And it's sort of like math the way I imagine this working so So that's why threes are important And anything beyond three is just using The existing machinery to try to manage more complexity Is the world getting better or worse With respect to what in some ways that entire question invokes the frame problem You need a frame to figure out Your ab testing better or worse so The world is going to continue Until it doesn't and until Christ one way or another Changes the story in a in a dramatic way now again Part of the post mill question is how dramatic is it going to be and this gets into the whole question of Catastrophism let's say You know there there was science sort of imagined kind of a steady state thing for a while and you know, well the The dinosaurs just kind of died off. It's just kind of this slow Thing and then of course, oh wait a minute. There's this crater in the yukatan Do you think it's possible that an asteroid hit the world and suddenly the future changed dramatically? Uh, yes Well apply that fractally Um car accident changes your life a betrayal changes your life A war changes your life A heart attack changes your life Big things happen to small creatures Itchy back changes my life That didn't work so well Um These theological constructs Are inevitable necessary and also more complex than we think they are So is there a strong biblical case for post millennial eschatology? Yeah Is there a biblical case for pre-millennial eschatology less so I think Amel is The most humble and probably best approach. I mean I continue to be a millennial Doug Wilson being post millennial just fascinates me, but there are There are certain um conservative reformed People Who work that post-mill thing in some really unusual and interesting ways? it's almost dispensational the way some of that has done but Dispensationalism is a product of modern ways of thinking If you look at some of these more symbolic ways of thinking, you know If you're a symbolist amel Is really your only option because that millennium is a symbol of christ strain and then how does that work so It's a good question It was answering a question pastor, uh Gregor, jacob suggested praying for one's wife to die so as to climb the ladder of religious hierarchy If you mean jacob meaning our jacob The answer to your question is jacob Just listen to enough of what jacob says wait for the jacob gpt. That'll be a fun one to play with trust me um This is this is these are the kinds of things jacob says Do you ever hear me recommending that to people? No, have I thought it? Sure Uh, is it a good thing? No Um, I have a little bit more of a filter than jacob Jacob is jacob. I'm me. I have less of a filter than other people It's just personality. What's your advice on this matter? I I can't listen to the whole thing. Um Yeah, it's kind of a cruel joke praying for someone else's death And um The aisle as a pastor i'll tell you people pray for even worse things so Jacob is jacob. I mean if you if you watch enough jacob you should kind of have it figured out because He is who he is and people complain and it's like And it's like You can complain us who is who he is and doesn't mean you have to watch his channel doesn't mean you have to like him but Jacob is jacob as we all are So, how do you find access? I have links, um to the cowdly and all of my show notes my standard thing That's down there. Um Charlie is talking about it. Querido Pablo Querido Pablo Given the obvious interest in sex and religion. Maybe you could host a regular youtube meeting to discuss just that It could be a weekly or monthly meeting so people of different faiths can have time to prepare and decide If they want to chime in and just suggest just to it's a great suggestion. Anna. It's a great suggestion um I don't know if I could sustain that Given my current schedule And I don't feel myself to necessarily have expertise in that Just to saying something like that. I think requires You know preston sprinkle has basically devoted the last five of his years of his life To this issue and has kind of done that i'm gonna scratch my back on the door frame. Hang on Okay Much better Sex is so complex religion even more so The these are these are endemic conversations that are not ending Um, I can do all these fun things too. Okay next question because I know you've got another good question coming up anna Pastor paul consider that there are multiple sources of evidence ask and you shall receive that but Greg you're asking a lot of interesting questions this week That both fellatio that ends in swallowing and cunnilingus that ends in orgasm is proven to increase rates of fertility Between that man with that woman Does this affect your thoughts on oral sex not being procreative? um Everybody's Uh number one It does not affect my thoughts on oral sex not being procreative uh Oral sex isn't procreative now given what you've just said and if it's true does a couple who has Sex with each other doing these things mean that um Uh, this increases their fertility apparently so i'm not gonna I I don't know if that's true or not true I've never been on record saying that a husband and wife Cannot do these things. It's not my position I think a husband and wife can do those things. I don't think it's immoral You know, I the I think a husband and wife can enjoy this that's my position so You're gonna have to take it up with someone who says they shouldn't Hey, pastor paul I hope you're doing well. What do you think of the monarchical trinity? Could this concept bring back the unitarians? I I remember hearing pageau make a comment about you know, trying to avoid trinitarian conversations And i'm kind of with him on that Not because I don't think the trinity is important not because I don't think the trinity is true but because Trinitarian conversations are super complex. They're complex historically They're complex philosophically And they're enormously complex pastorally So Yeah, um I guess that's my answer to that. What do you like best sundays or sundaes? The word spell differently, um, I like ice cream I like it more than I should um I love sundaes. I love I love coming to church. I love meeting my peeps. I love teaching. I love worship. I love Uh talking with people I love them both. Sometimes I have ice cream at church. That's like the best of both worlds What do you think why do you think jordan peterson has paid Why do you think jordan peterson has paid virtually no attention in his speaking or writing as far as I can tell to the pauline corpus And everything between the gospels and revelation Especially given the fact that paul is perhaps the single greatest Psychological thinker in history can't wait to hear jacob's response to that. Um So jacob See jacob is jacob. I mean that that's How to deal with people number one People are who they are and you have very limited capacity to change that That's rule number one rule number two It doesn't mean you can't try rule number three If you do try um have a little bit of humility and humor and um Um understanding about your endeavor see three rules and definitely apply them to dealing with jacob or hank or anybody else that will show up in a in a in a live chat like this because You know if they're if they're if they're chatting with randos on the internet. They're interesting characters to begin with um I think jordan peterson has paid no attention to paul because Uh, let me say it this way If you look at my sermons over the last few years you might say wow pvk's pamela spent a lot of Time thinking and talking about paul and that's true If you look at my preaching and teaching before the last three to four years you would say paul vanderclay has spent almost no time directly dealing with the epistles Now someone might say well, that's really weird because in reformed and reformed protestant circles Um, they almost tend to really focus a lot more on paul than any other portion of the bible Because that's kind of what happened in a lot of reformational theology luther read paul in a certain way And that kind of became standard talking points for protestant Christians I Just tended to find the old testament and the gospels more interesting than paul partly because of the reformational Distribution of reformational theology, which was not doubted on my part, but fairly mapped in a particular way The longer I studied the old testament and the gospels the more I realized just how complex The pauline epistles are There's a weird duality with the pauline epistles that on one hand we know more about the author Of the pauline epistles Then we know about just about anybody else in the entire bible Historically and when I say that I mean that in terms of modern history In terms of modern history that feeds into the minimal facts argument that gary hobermas has made Paul Even people who are skeptical About the historicity of jesus of nazareth are not skeptical about the historicity of paul of tarsus The more you know about something The more you know you don't know And so i've been like over the last few months going through first corinthians First corinthians is one of these books in the new testament that nobody Nobody with any sense at all is skeptical about the authorship of paul of tarsus of that book There are passages in that book that quite frankly That quite frankly we have no idea what to do with that that whole women head covering long hair business um That in in first corinthians 15 you have that verse about baptism of the dead Which mormons have sort of run with But we have no idea what to do with that verse And part of the reason we have no idea what to do with so much of this is because we know so much about it And we know what it can't mean I think part of the reason if you look at how jordan has managed the bible he's mostly He's mostly addressed Symbolic narrative and if you're looking for symbolic narrative Look at genesis exodus and parables That's what jordan peterson's interested in he's interested in symbolism He's a youngian. So that's why jordan mostly looks at biblical narrative and biblical symbolism you also don't see him dealing much with the bulk of The old testament which is which is the prophecy literature Isaiah jeremiah the minor prophets He doesn't deal with that. He'll deal with daniel before he deals with those again because of the symbolism So That's why jordan's view of the bible is that's probably why jordan's view of the bible is the way it is and also because Part of what happened in the protestant reformation I don't really have language for this but Paul was sort of mapped hard And so when a lot of people read the epistles I Remember how I said having a talk with me is a good bit projection and and some pvk Peeking through that same thing is true about reading anything including reading the bible We project isojesis, you know, we're projecting the interpretation on the text we're reading one of the things when you first start If you're a careful reader one of the things that you begin to learn is you are your own worst enemy in reading a text And one of the hardest things is to get beyond Reading into a text what you think should be there. I mean genesis genesis one is a great example of that And in some ways you might say ah symbolism in some ways symbolism is even worse Of course That dynamic is always with us by virtue of our psychology we The only way we can sort of encounter the world is with if we work with our maps archetypes stereotypes biases And and when it comes to jordan peterson That is what he keeps talking about when he keeps talking about the fact of how hard science is to do Kavanaugh just said something recently on on twitter again that says something like you know about what how jordan peterson views science and Jordan is right Science is really hard And texts are really hard Learning anything real in this world is really hard analogy and symbolism are necessary because analogy and symbolism is the way that we Do this synthesis and appropriation This little section of richard roland talking about synthesis with grim yesterday Wow So good and so true That's how we digest the world And And the same is true of texts and so peterson these are the texts that are of interest to him because of his project For jordan to really get a handle on the pauline corpus of the new testament He So chris cavanaugh is right in some things in that We all have our own specialties and when we venture outside of our specialties there's danger chris cavanaugh is completely wrong in the fact that We all do it all the time and we all have to all the time Just have to you have to synthesize the world in order to live in it You might say well you have no expertise in in making up decisions about vaccines or viruses and it's like yeah But you have absolute necessity in making it and you're going to figure this stuff out depending on the Information coming at you. It's called sense making we all have to do it so Jordan some of jordan's strengths are obviously in psychology And to a degree philosophy, which is quite close to psychology in some ways In other ways jordan's weakness a lot of jordan's weaknesses in his education are in history And he said that on a number of occasions that he doesn't know anywhere near as much history as he should and that's true and The the areas of certainly paul of tarsus impacted Psychology but the domains of knowledge to know The domains of croissant The domains of knowledge needed Jordan's probably not going to delve into paul hardly at all Verveky's done more but verveky's got much more of a historical philosophical Pedigree than jordan Look at awakening from the meaning crisis. It's basically a full philosophical endeavor and Jordan is more of a psychologist and john verveky is more of a of a philosopher and a cognitive scientist. It's that's different so You'll sooner see and see verveky wrestle with paul of tarsus than jordan You'll sooner see and see verveky wrestle with paul of tarsus than jordan It's the best answer I can give right now Well, so some of these are answering questions that are hurting the comments Pastor paul, would you like to try and get a conversation between you and professor edward dotton arranged or at least some form of that connection? I left some relevant information in my potential in the self-promo professor. Dutton has been interviewed by benjamin voice I'd have to look at that. I don't know who professor dutton is Ulysses jm, do these questions eventually appear in a video at some point never never gonna happen Doesn't happen at all I make so Part of the reason I make so many videos is that you can hide if you make so many videos if there were Four or five videos that I made out there are one video in the internet of me. I would be exposed I put out a video a day. I can hide amidst the chaos Yeah, I answer these questions all the time every single one I at least read and take on and they appear on screen Okay Joe schmoe, yosef. Oh, he's answering the questions. I'll try to find those on his channel then They're usually entitled something like bridges of meaning q a that's that's where these questions appear Pastor paul, do you randomize the reward of being heard for the greatest impact on behavior thus randos united? No, I don't really randomize it it's If I hear something that Strikes a chord and resonance with me. I'll tend to amplify it. So it's not random. It's we're You know grim grizz I mean You people have to understand grim grizz is a genius he really is But like many geniuses he He's hard to understand I mean what when richard roland was trying to talk to him richard figured that out very quickly. Oh gosh But grim grizz's domain is particular and peculiar And um And so what grim grizz has this corner nailed he does And he's he's doing stuff that are way. Oh my gosh. He's gonna clip this. That's gonna go in his reaper section he's doing stuff that is way above the head of Of what most of us are appreciating which is why Hardly anybody watches his channel another reason hardly anybody watches his channel is because it's It's just so unusual, but that's Genius is unusual. So um, i'm not surprised by what we're seeing But when he decides to play it straight like with some of these fringe encounters I mean just look at the kind look at look at how he knows verveckis work Look at how he gets what's going on So he talks about third lobe now um the James the in in the in our local meetup here In our local meetup here who's a um another brain guy Uh kind of corrected some of the nomenclature, but no we are thinking together and so I'm not really randomizing the randos It's when we meet that things really It's when we meet that things really Get going and so Yeah, it's not random We're thinking together we're doing sense making We're doing synthesis between each other and what motivates me is When I hear something or see something that it clicks well, why does it click well it clicks for reasons I don't understand it clicks for areas of my mind that are pre-conscious and i'm unconscious of Doesn't mean it's right It just mean it clicks Peter p Peter p asks hard questions What's the relation or what is the function of historical knowledge in a world? Which has realized that it is better guided by myths and stories Isn't it danger of becoming obsolete or the carrier of political agendas? Is Naseem talib's lindy effect. Naseem talib is a brilliant man wrapped in a um A rather disagreeable personality and often some of the best sources out there are disagreeable because they're resisting Trying dumbed downed popular lazy answers But the lindy effect basically says that things that have endured I have my own way of saying it which is ontology has its own justification Things that have endured for a long time Have endured for reasons It might not even be easy to know what those reasons are But there are reasons out there for them and You know again listening to richard roll and talk about how he's educating his children I was listening to that thought I should clip this and send it to my wife She probably won't watch it anyway, but he's basically describing something similar to a waldof education A waldof education If you look at how waldof educates students They always start with myths and stories Some christians and jews love it because one of the years they do a lot of things out of the old testament and here in northern california that freaks some of the They freak some people out you're having the children learn bible stories It's a waldof education it's sort of new agey which is what they thought and then they learned they're learning bible stories Learning um, they're learning norse myths and they're learning Stories from all over the world they're doing all of this in a waldof education. They're doing all of this universal history And richard roland nails it in his conversation with grim grizz about education And about how children grow I've so my wife started homeschooling when we um My son actually started in the waldof school, but at that point my wife, um didn't like Sort of the new agey aspects of it And so she pulled him out so we homeschooled my son and then we continued to homeschool my children and in many ways when my wife actually eventually Started teaching at the school that she pulled her son out of because she didn't like the style of education Her opinions about education even though they weren't formed by the waldof or rudolph steiner Were very similar in that they were similar to what richard roland is talking about and that they were similar to a lot of where Christian homeschooling has gone which is often unintentionally along this path of something like mythology and universal history And you know cs lewis who under the great knock became an ardent early new atheist Threw it all away because he began to understand the wisdom and truth of myth So yeah myth isn't going away and You know the new the new atheists that on one hand say all these Things about an iron age document. Yod. Yod. Yod. Yod. And then look at star wars and say oh, isn't that cool? You you just suckers suckers I thought anything that said christian i'm just gonna throw away but oh look lord of the rings You're a sucker. You've been suckered and you don't know it You've been taken in because you're a human being and this is how we are and we've been this way for a very long time and Just because you gotta be in your bonnet because some religious people started Making comments about Sexual morality and you get upset You think you're gonna just dispel your human nature? Good luck with that. It ain't happening and you can be an idiot on the internet and think that you just deal with facts and logic, but sorry You are who you are And you've been set up to be this for a very long time and that little chirping rider on the big elephant Really can't do what it thinks it can Uh, sorry about the rant. I know some of you are here for the rants. Um, yeah Now at the same time listen to the Parallel video I made about weston's discovery of spirituality This is way more complex than and and you know, I know Among some of the christians, you know, john vervecki is a frustration John vervecki is really smart john vervecki is really honest and again go back to my rule about dealing with human beings that they are who they are and um You know God's gonna sort us out And I mean that in many senses of the word sort out. In fact god does Work on sorting us out in this world and he will on judgment day and into the next and what god decides to do With people is what god is going to do I'm a calvinist god gets what he wants. That's the rule And if you want to fight with god, good luck to you. I don't Think it's going to end the way you want it to We wrestle with god but Good fathers wrestle with their children Not because they want to hurt their children but because they want to make their children stronger and more mature And more like him the good father wrestles with his children That's what we do so Yeah You know all of the modernity was going to end because it over it was an overreach And some people are like, oh I can't wait till modernity is over well modernity rose for its own reasons, too and there'll be overreach in the attempted Putting away of modernity and you know, we're seeing a lot of that being sorted out now with you know Discussions about math well, you know, i'm not going to believe in math because it's a Because it was the those those those those those those those those those those those those those those Greek europeans that did so much work in it. Oh Well, good luck with that design a bridge without any math and see how well it holds up Ontology has its own justification Did you have happy father's day It's been most of father's day on the road that was the weekend that my son graduated and I had church that morning. So I had to leave I had to leave santa cruz early and drive to sacramento and do church and then drive back to santa cruz, but I I listened to a lot of parolandra and some really cool things online and I was I was able to hang out in santa cruz with my Children and celebrate my son's graduation. So the whole weekend was great the day The day was different, but the weekend was great. I'll take a father's happy father's weekend You That's an answer to a question and again pastor pablo How do you personally treat lgbtq plus same-sex attracted people in your life if you have any if I have any They're all over Some of them are some of them are out and some of them are not As a pastor You get to hear secrets I'm not saying that's always a happy thing But often days that's part of the reason why I always take a deep breath before I have a randos conversation because I know A lot of people who pick up their randos conversations don't have anybody to tell their secrets to and For them I'm one of the few people they can really safely tell their secrets to because i'm not anywhere Near in their own life sort of like a therapist And so every time I start a really randos randos conversation I sort of brace myself because it's like what kind of secrets am I going to hear? People's sex lives are very very messy And I don't just mean what they do with their bodies And I don't just mean what they do with their bodies there are people who have never done Anything sexually with another human being but when you hear The role that sex plays in their thinking and their mind and other behaviors, which are not overtly sexual I think peterson is right that freud Overplayed his hand by basically making sex the frame through which everything else can be seen now peterson's right sex Isn't it young is right? That sex is a biggie Same-sex attraction Part of what Part of what politics does in the zeitgeist of a massive body politic that's a spiritual entity Is create binaries Even same-sex attracted Within the scope of a human life that is not anything close to the binary we might imagine it to be Now as i'm knocking on the door of 60 years this month Paul stop projecting your sexual desires onto hey, oh see I gotta tell you she is kind of hot She is kind of hot Yeah, you know the cake is baked i'll say it that way for better and for worse The general rule with LGBTQ plus people what on earth does that string of letters mean especially since we keep adding to it every three or four years Here's the rule in dealing with people It's called the golden rule treat others the way Basically treat others the way you you would like to be treated So I treat them with kindness and respect and I don't manipulate I don't um overextend So that's true, but that rule doesn't make others the masters of you That deals with how to treat people face to face now when it comes to Policy or politics or these other collective beings it gets way more complicated Because I have always tried to treat my children the way I would like to be treated But there are other roles involved I as a parent Dealing with a two-year-old child did not give my two-year-old children everything that they said they wanted at the age of two Does that mean i'm being paternal towards LGBTQ people no not at all When they ask me what I think I tell them what I think but they're you know, someone who Someone who comes to me with whatever assortment Of things that are part of their sexuality and this one binary about same-sex attraction Is one piece of an enormous puzzle There are other issues that are far more common That I deal with all the time What what what people do really when they're reliably attracted to members of the other sex It's like yeah if I can avoid being attracted to members of the the odd the same sex then everything will be easy No, no not true I Try to treat people the way they would want to be treated so I give them respect I give them love I don't want to be treated the way they want to be treated I give them love I don't try to manipulate them or control them And I expect the same from them to me I don't always get that If I am not seeing the world or Embracing the politics or theology or positions or whatever that they don't have if they just try to lean into me to Coerce or manipulate or shame or guilt or do all those tricks on me Well for the most part I see yeah, you're trying to use these tricks to change my mind because uh, you want the world to be as To think the way you think well every human being wants the world to think the way they think we are all Little masters of the universe gosh is it 1120? Oh, man I'm so bad at this Oh, man, look at all those questions No more questions until I do another q and a in september I don't know why you guys I am such a bad i'm so bad at this So yeah, there are plenty of there are plenty of people who have same-sex attraction in my life I might even be one of them dumb dumb dumb How would you know Is there a part of me When you really again as a pastor you will have people who will sit in your office or now randos online Or now randos online And they will open their mouths and they will tell you how the world looks through their eyes and sexuality is It's not everything. I I agree with peterson. It's not the frame but It's a big deal Especially for the young as people get older People tend to Makes a degree of peace with the decisions that they've made and what they've done and And they just and they often older people move on not always But often and other things are more important to them I take individuals as they come to me And if they ask me my opinion, I give it And if they don't ask me my opinion, I don't give it. Evan asked me for my opinion So why give it But I listen and I try to love and I try to support in ways that I think are Um moral and right and um I continue to try to be their friends It's it's like I do with everyone here, it's what I try to do i'm just whether you're I remember one guy coming in and telling to me about his sex life with his dog Unfortunately, I didn't hear that every day Um Yeah There's this old joke about you know Oh don't tell the minister because ministers don't know real life eugene peterson settled that dress No ministers often hear way more real life than you have any idea Because people come in and they are broken and they are hurting and they have secrets and they have to tell someone And most people aren't going to spend 100 to 200 to 300 dollars an hour to pay someone to listen to their secrets And I mean the secrets they can't tell their spouses or their friends Because like the therapist the pastor's under oath and It's got to stay with me Now nobody who knows me today will ever guess Who the person was that had a relationship with their dog? And you'll never get it out of me But that's how weird the world is Uh, but that's how weird the world is Dave 77 hi paul, would you say that god's plan for humans to merely recover their position or state of being they had in the garden of eden? To paraphrase george mcdonald's man's desire something greater than to restore a paradise. I think that's right You must rise on a yet higher place with attainment of something better than he ever possessed before I think that's right. Does this ring true for you? This is what parralandra is about this is This is one of the things that c.s. Lewis writes Not just in parralanda, but also in narnia again richard roland boy He really nailed a lot of narnia stuff and a lot of louis stuff. That was amazing um With grim grizz so yeah grim. You got a great interview out of him. Good job, man Like I keep saying people People regularly fail to appreciate A few people regularly fail to appreciate a lot So yeah now how exactly to formulate this theologically it's really hard and We don't know how hard it is until we watch a really brilliant guy like c.s. Lewis work on it and Now don't get me wrong a lot of the critics of The space trilogy have a real point There's a ton of things that you can Poke holes on or criticize with respect to louis and parralandra But he tried to do something really hard Most of the time when people try this it's really bad Louis was really smart in that he basically tried to harvest from classical and medieval literature all what seemed to be the best wisdom and Put it into of all things science fiction What an audacious thing and louis did this in the 40s now louis remember Louis would continue to grow and mature and in some ways narnia is a product of the more mature louis than the space trilogies so And from his direct apologetic work so This was This was louis continuing to grow But yeah if um, dave if you want to If you want to think about those things read parralandra a few times And you'll begin to see louis just basically Here are some of the issues maybe it's this way that's what louis is doing in there Not a question just to thank you Going through a tough time with a family health crisis I'm convinced that the time i've spent in this little corner has built my spiritual resilience enabling me to support my loved ones in this difficult time I'm once saved always saved squishy protestant evangelical charismatic freak who believes god is not a tame lion. Amen So while my fellow squishy ones have been pretty gutted by a long series of apparently unanswered prayers for healing I'm just here to be the love of god for my loved ones If my loved ones can't see god but can't see me then that's my responsibility To be the evidence i'm gonna put this on the bigger screen because it's really beautiful To be the evidence and how god and how I love them why Because of that unfathomable love perhaps most potently exemplified in what I believe to be the reality of that squishy Once saved always saved stuff How dare I deny or take advantage of such unfathomable Back I do not love him to get in return in a good reformed person. Amen way to go christian christian My exposure to the plethora of perspectives in this wonderful little corner has made me more aware of the vastness Of who god is what he does and how his revelation to us image bears comes In so many diverse forms Perhaps as many forms as there are individuals. So thank you papa paul For at least being a core inspiration for the spawning of this little spiritual ecosystem It's a wonderful thing to be able to be a part of this little spiritual ecosystem It's really something else wow gosh that really touches me. Thank you. I'm gonna Save that and share that when I get notes like this Share it with my council because What what I do costs my church and they know it And they still give it and so when a little note like and and they still don't they don't understand it They don't watch this stuff. They you know but they see people come in and Visit and they hear things and so when something like this happens I share it with them because it helps them see that Yeah, this pastor that you're still paying a salary to The ministry is doing online It's important for some people and he's doing the work of the church and the work of the lord on the internet and so You know it could happen that you know if I was in another church I very much would expect the council to sit down and say vander clay We buy 50 hours a week of yours and you are not to share that with people online I I could completely believe a council telling me that We have lots of shut-ins. We have lots of evangelism that needs doing we have lots of pastoral care We have lots of sermons. We have all of this stuff. Please focus on your church. That's your job And this little church has not said that and so when I get a note like this I share it with them because What that says to them is you may not understand it Because what that says to them is you may not understand what paul is doing but You've let him do it because you've known him for 20 years and you trust him And if he says he's doing the work of the lord We believe him But when they see notes like this and when they see the donations that you guys give to living stones They say Well, if paul was undermining the gospel Would people be giving money to the church and visiting on sunday So if you ever visit living stones, you know, you'll get a chance to talk to me But you'll get a lot more chance to talk to the people of this church Just thank them for sharing me with you because they have And they do it with joy They don't really know why they're doing or what i'm doing with it But if you've if you found this little corner helpful Just thank the people of living stones because They've paid for a lot of it Can a crc church congregation or classes ban female elders or pastors? Um The way it works in the christian reform church is that it's the local option a a local christian reform church can elect um A woman as deacon elder or Christian Elder or call a woman as minister A local classes Can decide whether or not to see women delegates from churches. So in other words, you can have a church that has Women office bearers, but their classes says no and so those women office bearers can't go to that classes That doesn't happen I don't think it happens at all in the crc Um Maybe but it'd be very unusual at this point The majority of christian reform church classes allow women to be seated It doesn't necessarily mean there's a lot of women there But they allow women to be seated and when a majority of classes Allowed women to be seated then it was 2005 That women were first seated at synod Um as delegates so It's a local option but participating in higher structures depends on What those structures have decided? So in the majority of the christian reform church you can have women at all levels even though Women are about 15 percent of crc clergy and a far tiny number than that are women senior pastors and that's been some of the grievance that even 25 years after Women in office the local option became the rule in the crc the vast majority of christian reform churches Have men as senior pastors There are more women in other roles pastorate roles, but as senior pastors not as many That's a big whole other conversation pk strange theology I remember you using a phrase and I want to make sure I get it right memetic transformation. I don't think I use that phrase The idea that we are made in god's image to mimic him and to be like him I don't use that phrase, but I like the idea Of a man in the image to be like him But if we replace god with some other other than god we mimic that thing and are transformed into its likeness Yeah, I like what you're writing here If I have this wrong, you see I get remember when I talked about projection and listening to me This is a great example and it happens with church all the time I say something that prompts something in you you think I said it I got credit for it. That's kind of nice, but it really came from you And this is how we think together see the projection is actually Not a bug but a feature now like again with all this verveky stuff It cuts both ways projections distort but projections enable synthesis And and see what what this transjective stuff that verveky talks about means is there There's actually a middle space between us And that's a spiritual space And in that middle space our spirits mingle And new spiritual things are born. Sometimes they're tiny little things like your mimetic transformation. I might have said it. It's true. I might have said it but um, and the idea I very much agree with and and that's the trickiness of idolatry that if you The world is like this we all get god wrong because god god is unfathomable and so That's just a reality but idolatry if we if we're if we're really wrong on god The chief competitor to god is Ironically in some ways the image of god in us because when that image of god gets aspirations To replace the real god That's when things go bad And idolatry is just a function of that. So Thank you christopher appreciate it Okay, I gotta keep moving here i'll be Why is it that other people automatically label you a bigot when your voice your disagreement with pride movement and its associated? hedonistic ideologies That's a rhetorical device It's a way it's here's the irony One way of understanding gay liberation is that shame didn't work So what tool are people using to try to promote the cause of ongoing liberation shame Well, wait a minute If it didn't work Against all those people in the closet What makes you think it's going to work now and the truth is It sort of works. It works in some ways but um Shame has a two-edged sword in that Yeah, you might get initial compliance via shame But you're building up resentment and if you build up enough resentment over time The minute you sort of lose power over Her yeah, they're gonna get revenge and um, that's some of what we're seeing or part of what we're seeing is revenge for years of resentment, but just because Um, you know, this is another sort of modern fable And and imagine sort of this imagined. Um Human basic decency Oh if you're the if you were the victim of shame you'd never use shame against your rivals Probably not Part of what you learned when shame was used against you is how potent a weapon it is and so when You get scared or angry or motivated You'll probably pick it up And it's going to get the same it's going to have the same dynamics that it had when it was used against you That's why people wield it The only true salvation comes from christ we know christ as christians on a participatory level But when we try to formulate the propositional we fall flat None of us want to see the destructive idolatries continue because we naturally want everyone to share in the only only healing that Actually works christ's but we are faced with both external resistance and internal ineptitude How do we overcome? And by the way, this doesn't only apply to the alphabet people When we see our loved ones struggling with their own mental state or becoming wrapped in political ideologies, we are presented with the exact same problem What are we to do? The christian weapon is love The christian weapon is love now love can be hard and love can be soft Love is remarkably hard to wield because love is so costly to wield But the christian weapon is love that's the cross And love triumphs over the powers and principalities Because again people don't care how much you know until they know how much you love That's how people work love is what vervecky nails this It is love that makes us humans love grows us up Go ahead have that child Love is the most powerful weapon in the world The degree of formation or malformation will be directly dependent on your ability to love well and again, that doesn't mean just love shouldn't be confused with bland acceptance Bland acceptance can come from indifference, which is the opposite of love Child or father-son analogy in describing our relationship with god and the power of love read the gospel of john It is love It just is love there is law Law has its uses just law is important but Law only works when it's in service and alignment with love and truth And it's not a matter of love or hate Read first corinthians 13 if I speak in the tongues of men and of angels, but have not love I am a resounding gong or symbols if I have the faith to move mountains, but have not love I am nothing If I give all I possess to the poor If I renounce sex if I renounce everything and I live in a little hermitage, but have not love I am wasting my time Read first corinthians 13. It's all right there Faith hope and love the big three faith hope and love but the greatest of these is love Now what love means love is not again love is not bland acceptance or coddling Love is remarkably difficult Love is not alone But love is the chief christian tool that is what we use Paul I enjoyed your conversation with chris cavanaugh and his point about this corner flipping between metaphors and literalisms Under the cover of the word symbolism is really good and I was disappointed that y'all didn't hammer the topic more It feels like the modernist fundamentalist fight is used as a scapegoat to not address what's going on there My question for you is there any way forward? I don't know if I would frame it as metaphors and literalism because literalism isn't the right Word Probably physicalisms So I was I was listening this morning to i'm relistening to peugeot and roland talk about um The grail and i'm going to be grail obsessed for a little while probably And I was really frustrated that the video I released this morning on um Mrs. Davis. Mrs. Davis is an attempt to participate in the grail conversation Conversation I think roland and peugeot and tom holland are right that The grail conversation is linked to The modernism conversation So When modernists employ symbolism We have to Keep an eye on our modernisms In other words The physicalisms that have been reigning for the last couple hundred years through science You can do the same thing through symbolisms So you do got to watch that So Now i've not spent a lot of time in person with jonathan and john I'd love to spend more time in person with them. I'd love nothing better than to Um, you know, we've only done two conferences together the three of us And in those conferences a lot of that time is on stage and that's not the same as grabbing a meal together or Getting to know each other as regular human beings and doing other things with our bodies at the same time You know like paintball and um, you know the kind of stuff rave kelly's working on But um I I don't have concerns about jonathan peugeot because i've had enough experience with him personally that His symbolism hasn't taken him into a kooky place and neither is john revakies So No, it's a it's a real important point david But in some ways A big part of the work of this little corner is to figure that out and You see someone like cavanaugh Seems looks to me completely blind to the fact that modernity is ending Cavanaugh is something like To put it in a crc metaphor someone in the christian reform church and In 2019 Thinking oh, yeah The current regime in the christian reform church is just going to continue Yeah, it might take a little bit longer. But at some point the future will look just like I imagine Uh, no, um Modernity is going away And dr. Jim added exactly right that the new atheists were part of modernity going away Richard roland in his conversation with grim gave a prophecy He said You know this little corner is all playing around with lewis. Wait till you guys find shakespeare and I thought Yeah, dr. Jim and kale. They're already there If this little corner would take a hard turn into shakespeare There's plenty of people in this corner that would be like yeah now you're speaking my language We just haven't talked about shakespeare much But then again lewis We haven't read lewis's main book yet That's still out there and i've been I've been trying to get my head around that book We've we've been We've been playing in the lewis foothills And we haven't really gotten into what lewis thought Was the main course? And nobody has it's just not done. We're playing around with all of lewis's hobbies So Yeah, it's a big deal and in many ways that's what we're working on Howdy paul. Howdy chad How's your journey over the last years going exploring with this little corner impacted your life and work pros and cons, please For the most part so in the In the conversation between Justin and karen on the meaning code, which is another must watch kind of watch conversation Justin basically did his interview with karen like he did with me at living stones last week And listening to what karen said about her her her journey here has been like mine I've had some of the most fun in my life playing with you people It says this this has in many ways been a dream come true It has i have always wanted to have these conversations and I couldn't not Without the internet not without youtube I just didn't I just couldn't find the right place to do it Without the internet not without youtube I just didn't I just couldn't find strange people like yourselves who wanted to talk about these things because They weren't coming to the door of living stones and they weren't coming to listen to my sermons and Most of you don't listen to my sermons. Anyway, I get it The sermons I preach on sunday morning are two Christian people who are looking for a particular thing And i'm giving it to them it doesn't mean I don't love it I do love it they come out of me They're just as much mine as my other videos that I make but the videos that I make on my channel are In a different vein and have a different conversation So And you know Somebody asked me Here's an irony if I hadn't started making videos about jordan peterson And this youtube thing hadn't started and generous people out there among you hadn't been donating to living stones Living stones would not be here today. This little corner has saved living stones financially Demographically, I don't know if it's gonna you know, we've got I won't name their names because They don't they don't they're not a lot of the people who work a lot with the internet don't want to be seen on it they just use it but This lovely couple drives in almost every sunday from berkeley to be with us Think about that How crazy is that how delightful my church is? They have no idea how much my church loves them just for what they're showing this little church And those of you who have donated to living stones have no idea how grateful my little church is they they have a hard time showing it but You have kept You There have been there have been days when there's hardly been anybody here and I think to myself why are we doing this Let's just shut it down And then I look around at the people who are here and I know If we weren't here on sunday with just our handful of people A lot of these people who are now in their 80s their upper 80s Who have been coming to this church for 40 50 years 60 years plus? They wouldn't have anywhere to go to And they wouldn't be by their friends and they wouldn't have their pastor and you people have kept this church alive and alive financially and alive in terms of keeping its pastor alive because Chad wants me to talk about The late aughts when I was When I was in my tim keller phase because tim keller saved this church and saved my faith and saved My sanity in a very hard time in my life And i'm not going to go into Why that time was hard? because If that was in a randos conversation, it wouldn't be recorded Pastors have secrets too, you know They're not all that dark and they're not all that uncommon but they're there So wow What you and this little corner have done for me and my church I can't say enough Cons they're harder for me to find but there's some there This is added chaos to my life I suspect that whatever happens to living stones in the next few years If living stones goes under and I become a celebrity pastor who Whose relationship with a local church isn't what it has been And I have to do a lot of traveling I enjoy traveling. I love going out and doing these trips, but There's a cost, you know my wife I Um Nothing against any of you she just doesn't know you And so the thought of she's a pretty she's an introvert Thought of going out and spending a couple of weeks meeting new people Having conversations about so those are hard Um But on the whole way way way way way more upside than downside reputationally i'm it hasn't helped my reputation the christian-formed church I used to be a good progressive and Now i'm kind to people from abide Gosh what a crazy world Okay chad Maybe chad one day you and I with no cameras and no mics will have a conversation and i'll tell you some of my secrets We we we still sometimes watch the bachelor bachelorette with some of my adult children and my son jared is so funny because The the show is basically the modern Replication of the town square where they would torture and execute people only we do it to our most beautiful single people So funny because you know finally when they get the one-on-one date it's tell me your secrets me and the bachelor nation This is insane It's so bad Paul I recently went on a pilgrimage with my church to israel and it was very transformative have you been And if so, how has it shaped your faith? I've never been to israel If the israeli contingent of our little corner puts together a thing in february of 2024 Then that will be my first trip And i'm i'm I'll be super excited to go there and and meet people like nehema and chesie and and And have people from there show me around, you know And have people from there show me around, you know Get out your bingo cards living in the dominican republic. It's a totally different thing going and living there Than um going to punta calma punta canna or um puerta plata in a todo incluido um resort place So to to be able to go to israel and have israelis give me a sense of their country What a treat what a treat. So I hope that happens. We'll see and of course jacob is back there saying it's going to happen When you play Duaro deep with the sinners with grim grizz nate the grail country and richard roll and will you play the cleric? Peeler or do we have to call them little people instead of dwarves? When I played dnd, so I played dnd with three high school friends I was always the fighter jeff was always the Magic he was always the magic user john was always the cleric And kurt was kurt was often the dungeon master so uh I I Boy, you know I am so rusty at that I i'm i'm gonna i'm gonna be the dude that gets killed right away And the rest of the group is going to be like why did we bring him? He doesn't know how to do anything That's what's gonna happen. It's gonna be keep vanderklaai alive So recently when my kids were little we'd play age of empires two with my kids You know and they were young and I'd get these pcs and I'd run ethernet around the house and put it on a little Switch and make this little home network and we'd all battle against each other playing age of empires two That was a long time ago. Well, you know age of empires two is still with us and my son jared loves playing age of empires Two and he and joey and so He and joey decided that they were going to get me up to speed on an age of empires two And joey and jared have continued to play and they play you know on the internet yada yada yada yada and uh, jared had to realize is that When dad was an adult and jared was a boy dad was just a He could just be a beast at age of empires and it would be dad versus philip and jared On age of empires and dad would beat them and wow dad was amazing And now dad hasn't played those kind of computer games in years and so dad is bad at it and I finally told joey and jared I don't have enough time for you guys to bring me up to speed on this and odds are good at my age I'll never catch up with you because you guys have put hundreds of hours into this game And I don't see hundreds of hours in my near future to devote to Pushing these little pixels around a screen That's just the way it is every now and then I can enjoy a little bit of guilty pleasure playing some civ 6 And the only reason I agreed to play With you guys is because I love you guys and to me it sounds like Tremendous fun playing a game with nate and grizz and richard that sounds like A hoot of a good time, but I my friends will be a liability I tell you that right now So there if I die off and the first battle of the first campaign I won't be surprised Aaron What are your thoughts about bishop maximus john vervecki conversations? They were amazing That was really cool Again, those are some of the videos that if i'd had more time to make commentary videos I certainly would have there are tons of good stuff in there part of the reason I do con commentary videos is because I watch a video once and then I might watch it twice but You know when richard roland talked about that synthesis That's what i'm doing with my With my commentary videos and grim nailed it I mean like grim in that conversation is telling my secrets I mean like grim in that conversation is telling my secrets Oh, you mean paul vanderkley is doing synthesis in front of us and other people are starting channels to try it Yep, that's exactly what this little corner is doing and has been doing all along We are trying to do synthesis and we're doing it because papa peterson was doing synthesis about the bible on stage in toronto So Yeah, um I do commentary videos because You know a lot of times people say um A lot of times people say I snicker when I look at comments in the stream a lot of times People complain about my commentary peter's you're rambling and rambling. I'm doing my synthesis in front of you I'm getting new ideas as I am once again going through Mrs. Davis because I don't really have time to watch it three times in a row So if I can make a video and have excuse to watch it again See most video people they do all of this present preparation and then the video is a presentation That's great. I love it But all the conversations in this little corner And my commentary videos these are all synthesis And i'm just doing it with the camera on and that way Because you can understand And i'm very focused on my predictions from post Because I make these to get relevant  Emperor's I don't know what exactly is the experience is That's great It says this delivering a governor or something it does I watched people watching video games and that's synthesis too because they like the video game and they're trying to get better and so they're learning that's just what they're doing it's the same thing that happens when NFL or NBA players watch game tapes so I watched Peterson do his biblical series and I knew what was happening with respect to twitch and games and so I thought to myself I wonder if people would watch while I thought out loud about Jordan Peterson's biblical commentary because I want to think about this more but I can't justify spending more hours focusing on this and so when I make a video commentary I can focus on something in a way that I usually won't allow myself the time to do it because most of the video content I consume is done while I'm making breakfast cleaning the house attending to the car driving somewhere working in the yard like most of you that's when I and that's sort of the grazing I'm sort of over viewing but I I didn't I didn't have time to sit in my office and watch videos and take notes and it's stuff to do but if watching a video can become a ministry and hence the commentaries were born and the commentaries beget the randos conversations and we're third lobing it together again Chris Chris has this corner nailed he does he's right there at the center of it and he knows what we're doing and he's saying it to us and all of his genius unintelligible ways with his quirky branding and memes and cleverness that's what he's doing but that's what we're doing so I noticed in the comments there that vervekey expressed agreement with the idea that Peterson should also be engaged with these subjects especially a participatory aspects and also finding Peterson's current trajectory aggressive and off-putting yeah I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I have We just kid be if I if yes is getting him talking about what he, I think, has been super helpful with. I'll watch. I'll listen. I'll comment. I love the Exodus seminar. More of that, please. Yeah, I'm with Vervecky on this. But I don't think, see, so Justin asked me about this. And this is what I told Justin in my interview with him. See, what you have to understand about Justin in these interviews, he might use seconds or a couple of minutes from a half hour, an hour of talking. That's the process of making a documentary. Justin also told me, lower everybody's expectations with respect to this. This might not happen. And that's true. Jordan Peterson, people have written Jordan Peterson off. Don't do that. He's still working on this stuff. The book he's working on is about this stuff. He is, think about it this way. If you never watch my rough drafts for Sundays, what I'm doing on Sunday is in some ways analogous to what Jordan is doing with respect to all of his culture war videos. Doesn't mean he doesn't believe it. He believes in it sincerely. Is he paying the rent? Yeah. He's paying the rent on Daily Wire. Daily Wire is getting exactly what they've paid for. He has a day job. Jordan Peterson's day job was university professor and clinical psychologist. I really wish he could have stayed there. And I think part of him does too. Now he's got lots of more opportunities now that he's really enjoying. And I'm not going to begrudge him any of his money or any of those opportunities. I'm going to the Ark thing in the UK. And I'm going to enjoy it. I'm going to be there with eyes wide open, probably my mouth shut because politics for the most part is not my game. But I'm really curious about what's going on. And I'll be far more interested in the people that are there than in what the place actually accomplishes. Because that's how I am. Jordan is like a tide. He comes into this estuary and he goes out of this estuary. And every time he comes into it, he brings in new nutrients, new little sea animals, a few sea monsters, and a whole lot more interesting fish. And then he goes out again. And then he comes in and he goes out. He comes in, he goes out. That's Jordan Peterson's role in this little corner. And it's a vital role. It's a critical role. Every estuary needs this little fish. Every estuary needs the tides. And Jordan Peterson is the tide. And he comes in and he comes out. And when he gives us attention, he blesses us. And when he recedes, he's out there in the ocean doing his ocean things. So for me, that's Jordan. And it's almost like saying, I wish the tide were always in. No. Again, Grim nailed this, too. Grim is right in that this little corner would not be this little corner if the Jordan Peterson tide that came in in 2016, 2017, and 2018 hadn't receded in 2019. When the tide receded, all of the little estuary pools, all these little tidal pools had all these little interesting creatures in. And all the little crabs were eating all the little nutrients. And all the little fish were feeding off all of the nutrients because we had that moment of the still quiet bowl. And we're all doing our little thing. And then 2021, Jordan Peterson comes in again. Woosh. All kinds of new things come in. And then Peterson and Peugeot have their big conversation, their first one back in. And then we had the Four Horsemen video. And then we had the Exodus seminar. And then the tide goes out. And then we're like, well, where's Peterson? I don't know. The tide is out. But we're going to keep working on all the little things here. And then when Peterson finally does his standalone Exodus series, then the tide will come washing in again. So Peterson is like the tide. He comes in and out. And estuaries need tides. So God bless them. Don't curse the pattern. We need the pattern. If Peterson were always here, we'd have trouble doing some of the things we do. So his coming in and going out is actually a feature, not a bug. So that's my take on it. Crap, I'm over time. Oh, well, I was late. Any thoughts on the Noahide subject between Jacob and Father Steven? I haven't had time to watch that. Saucedric. Oh, no. What have I done to my church? I've led a sea monster like Jacob Fedorecchi into the Christian Reformed Church. And it's sort of like these seals you'll watch swimming up the Sacramento River. And it's like, this far from the ocean? That's what it's like finding Jacob having conversations with Christian Reformed ministers. It's like, this far from the ocean? And then Jacob would say, I drove you to Calvin to go to Synod. You practically invited me up the river. So yeah. Yeah. Yeah, we've got a Fedorecchi up the Christian Reformed River. And boy, that's going to be fun. I think some of these guys talking to Jacob are going to be like, what have I got myself into? But that's what estuaries are for. If you didn't have an estuary, Cedric Parcells would never get a chance to wrangle with a sea monster like Jacob. This is what makes it fun. I love it. I love it. Sea Chad, it's great. It's great. Paul, I really like your recent Paralandor video where you explain how the Unman shows itself through Weston. It was frightening and interesting to think about, specifically how the stories are repeated over and over. How can we break out of the restrictive stories that repeat over and over in our lives? Well, so again, the grim grizz Richard Roland, that one might become canonical. We won't know it until after a while. But Richard nailed that point, too. In this little corner, we do a lot of talking about. That's just sort of the synthesis thing. And where Richard and Jonathan have really been leaning into is the story making and the storytelling. So when we were up in Thunder Bay and Jonathan was telling me about the fairy tale stuff, I said, yeah, definitely do the fairy tale stuff. And what Richard talked about with Reset the Fairy Tales in his conversation with Grim was dead on. So I've had five children and we homeschooled our children. And as a pastor, I've had a lot of experience doing children's education because the truth is, when you're just getting started, even before you get to seminary or college, if you're in the church and you're a faithful person in the church, at least in terms of Protestant churches, you're going to wind up teaching Sunday school, which means you're spending a lot of time with children. I spent years in Patterson teaching day camp. These little kids right off the street, and I had a group of 12 of them. And in the summer, basically teaching them Bible stories. And you learn doing this. And what Richard described with respect to how children learn is dead on right. It's amazing. I mean, and what Richard said about the way modern education is working, he's also dead on right. If you understand children and you look at so much of what a lot of modern education is doing, you're hard pressed to imagine that what they're not trying to do is to keep children as sheeple. It's horrible. Yeah, what Richard said about textbooks is true. It's true. And that's why the wealthiest, wokenest, most powerful rulers of our world want a Waldorf education for their children. Well, that's strange. Do a little look into Rudolf Steiner. Why do they want a Waldorf education for their children? And why do they want to keep the screens away from their children? Because while on one hand, they're practicing mind control over the general population. They love their children. And so they're teaching them fairy tales and mythology and stories and, and, and. And it's not direct. Look at what Tim Keller said about children's education. He'd probably have a hard time finding it. He only talked about it a few minutes. He said, this is a PCA, mind you. Children's education and church should be Bible stories. When Protestant megachurch curriculum, when the secret movement got a hold of that and when they started sort of intertwining, it was exactly being mirrored in public school. We can't teach people those old stories because those old stories are full of problematic elements. So what we're going to do is teach our children directly morality. And you know what? That's not how morality is learned. Richard Rowland nailed it in that video. Children absorb from their environment. They don't take it in consciously. It's the blindness of modernity that everybody, everything, everyone imagine that the world is flat. Verbeke says that very well. Knowledge is flat. The world is flat. It's all open. It only looks flat because you've got a monarchical vision and you're looking down at it. That's why it looks flat. When you're on the ground, it's full of complexity. So how do children learn? Children learn the way they've learned forever. And the truth is, and one of the things you learn when you homeschool your kids is that children will learn. Just get out of the way. And now there's ways that you can help them. You can feed them. It's like getting a fish. And you look at this fish and you think, how is the fish going to eat? I know. I will grab the fish with my hand and I will poke food in its mouth. That's what modern education does with children. And it's stupid. How do you get the fish to eat? The fish is going to eat. Put eatable food in its environment and it will eat. Children are going to learn. Give them a learning rich environment and they will learn. Give them an impoverished environment and they will learn too. You just won't like what comes out of it. So that's how to train children. And what question was I answering? Gosh, this is a really bad ranty video. Yeah, the restrictive stories. Tell good stories. Give your children good stories. Raid the bins of libraries in districts because so many of them are throwing out all the good books. Right now in some places, if you say something like Little House and the Prairie, have them read Huck Finn. They're not going to know what Jim Crow is. They're not going to know what slavery was if you don't let them read primary materials from the age. Have them read slave biographies. Have them don't watch the movie 12 Rules of Slave. Read the book. Don't listen to about Frederick Douglass. Read Frederick Douglass. Everything that Richard said there. Have people read primary source materials. They will learn and they will learn from the book. They will learn and they will learn from the people of that era what the world was like. And it looks very different from what this pre-chewed baby food that we take the fish out of the aquarium and we stuff its mouth with. Those fish are going to die. I'm so frustrated by this kind of thing. And this world is doing a number on people. It always has. It always does. But we have forgotten so much wisdom. So raid. Find a school district that's getting rid of a lot of the problematic books that weren't problematic 10 years ago. And you can get them for free. Have them read Little House on the Prairie. Have them read 12 Rules of Slave. Have them read Huck Finn. Have them read Shakespeare. Have them read all of that. They will learn. And we had my same conversation with Emma. And again, and some of the Christians, like I was talking about with Richard too, some of the Christians and their. And OK, mimetic rivalry. You become like your rival. And that's the dumbest thing about the way so many Christians fight the culture war. Don't do it that way. Give your kids good books to read. Rant over. Next question. I got to land the plane on this at some point. What are your thoughts about usury? Should it be made illegal? Talked about a long time yesterday at a local estuary. That's interesting. I have a sneaking suspicion that your conversation with Peugeot has led you to appreciate icons. My relationship with icons is complex. Are you hiding an icon corner behind your camera? No, there are no icons in my office. On my trip to Europe, someone gave me an icon. It was a very generous gift. It is not in my office. I have a very complex conversation with that and also with usury. John Calvin basically changed theology, probably reflected what a lot of people were thinking but not daring to say. There's interest in there's interest. You can find in Thou Shalt Not Steal, the treatment of that in the Heideberg Catechism, warnings against basically abusive money lendering and usury. These payday check cashing places in my neighborhood, yeah, that's abusive. You're taking advantage of poor people. When I buy a car or a house, I don't have a problem paying interest on my car or my house. If you're borrowing money to use the money to make more money, you should share the return and interest is a way that that return is managed. So the basic rule, Calvin's position was if someone needs to borrow from you to survive, don't charge them any interest. Those payday alone should be zero interest. All the payday loan shops would close tomorrow. If credit card interest, same thing. There's something about the modernist imagination that thinks that law is the solution to everything and law isn't. So I would be against making usury illegal, but I think we should have a cultural conversation about interest. With the homeless people, when they ask for money, if I have it, I usually give it to them. And some of them pay me back and some of them don't. Some of them pay me back and some of them don't. That's what I do. What do you think, who do you think will win the MMA match between Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg? Zuckerberg is younger. People like Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg are rare cats. They're really unusual. They might be pillowy nerdy people, but you don't know. So I guess I would probably, in terms of who I think seems tougher, I would think Elon Musk. But Zuckerberg is younger and Zuckerberg is more secretive. When you look at Zuckerberg, it's like, what's going on? As a pastor, I look at these two and Elon is like an open book. Elon will tell you exactly what he thinks. Elon will go on Rogan and smoke a blunt. That's Elon. That's Elon. Way, I'd be, if I was in a room with both of these guys in a conflictive situation, I'd be way more concerned about Zuckerberg. He's quieter, he's robotic. What's going on back there? So, instinct, part of me would say, oh, Musk, because he's out there. But I'd be more worried about Zuckerberg because what's going on behind that? Robotic facade. There, that's my answer. All right. Was there anything I should have answered from the live stream? I paid no attention to it because I wanted to get through everything else. Oh, what did I do again? Did I rant again? Oh, I preached again? Oh. Any questions from here before I sign off? I'll give it six more minutes. Musk is toast. Yeah, that's true. That's true. That's true, that's true. Da da da da da. I don't have time to really bring anybody into the room. Yes, just hire cats. Beware of the smile. Lizards, not cats. Ha ha ha. Musk is going down. When is this thing supposed to happen? Oh, oh, oh, Cassidy. Oh, oh, questions, here we go. What would Zuckerberg tell the Babylon be? Would Zuckerberg have anything interesting to say? Musk is way more entertaining. Yes. Well, yes and no. Again, it's like the fish. Listen to Richard's, listen to my conversation with Richard. Because, and my conversation with Emma. Their parents had very similar philosophies to what my wife and I had. Fill the fish tank with healthy things. I wouldn't be, the truth is, so television for example. My wife was having a conversation with someone about child rearing and the person said, well, you can't control what your children watch on TV. What? You can totally control what your children watch on TV. When we moved back to North America and when we had a TV, which is an absolute necessity to have in your house, by the way, I hooked it up to a TiVo. And even though we had basic cable, I only programmed the channels that I wanted to have access into the house. And I only recorded what I wanted my children to watch. So, at some point the kids are gonna grow up to learn enough to figure out the TiVo. But while they're young, they're dumb. And so, yeah, they could watch limited amounts of television. They watched what we would let them watch. And if you feed them good things when they're young, they will be able to understand what bad books are and identify them. Now, as part of youth, they will read bad books. You can imagine little Pure Isle Richard Rowland reading in Paralandrum because it's in the forbidden book section of his mama's library. So, they'll find bad books, but just fill your house with good ones. And then they'll be able to learn the difference between good ones and bad. Hope Elon will surprise you. Will you vote for Cornel West? No. Paul, is there a blasphemous element to portraying Jesus how far is too far? Any non-canonical portrayal of genus Jesus is potentially blasphemous. That doesn't mean that all of them are. I enjoyed Anne Rice's book about Jesus. I'm sure there's some blasphemy in it. What should I ask Cedric for the Randall's conversation on Monday? Oh, Federici, I don't know why I let this sea monster into the Christian Reformed stream. I hear he did some, Phlebas loved that conversation and I hear he did some biography in it. I don't know Cedric hardly at all. Cedric is a transplant into the CRC. He's not a cradle CRC-er, so he's different. So, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know Cedric. But, Cedric has done the denomination of service by a lot of the work that he's done in church order stuff. So, I appreciate Cedric. He's always been an interesting guy. To the degree that I've known it. I want to fight in the Coliseum. Warning an abolition of man about bad books. Do you listen to every Restless History episode, Paul? I have listened to almost all of them. I get a little behind, but then I catch up and I go through a streak. I have listened to better than 95, probably more than 95% of them. Cast out set. Tarantino's mother told him she is more worried about the violence on the news than in movies. You know, yeah. Which CS Lewis book is the main course? This one. No, I kind of hide the face. English Literature in the 16th Century. My particular copy I bought used was owned by A.J. Yockers, Jr. February 19th, 1910. I bought it in the 19th century. I bought it in the 19th century. I bought it in the 19th century. Yockers, Jr. February 1957. This is, the book came out, completion of the Clark Lectures, Trinity College, Cambridge, 1944. Oxford at Clareden Press. I bought this copy used. Trying to see if this is printed in the UK. Trying to see which printing this is. So Lewis, if you read Lewis' biographies, the books we read were just his playthings with the Inklings. He was just having fun with his friends in his nerdy way, just like you all do with your little internet nerddoms. But Lewis was a brilliant man. This was what he spent all of his time working on. Maybe it was a waste of time because nobody's been working on it. Maybe it was a waste of time because nobody's reading it. I don't know if I'll be able to understand it. I've taken a crack at the introduction several times and still wrestling with it. But this is Lewis' main work and nobody talks about it. Let's see. If some randos, Randa makes an interesting enough series on YouTube on George McDonald's writing, would you dive in? I don't know. I have a lot of George McDonald work to do just on his writings. Dialogos isn't just within a conversation, it's above all of our conversations. And the spirits that are directing, the big currents are also directing this little corner. Angels are at work here, my friends. And a few demons too, probably. And a few demons too, probably. It's a bloody hard book to tackle. I listened to the whole thing and my mind bounced right off it. Yeah, yeah. That's true. You are. I should start a library. I already have a library. That's right, you are my library. Let's see. Oh, a grief observed, the little book Lewis wrote right after his wife died is a rare glimpse at his inner thought process. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I've read that book a number of times. Lewis, Lewis. Oh, Lewis. The spirit of C.S. Lewis, so I've told this story enough. When I started with Peterson, I was anxious because I knew I'd be vulnerable in some ways and to some things. And sort of like Dante with Virgil or Lewis with McDonald, I wanted a guide because I knew I would be heading out and that there'd be sea monsters and precipices and things that were more difficult than I. And so I needed a guide. And so I chose Clive Staples Lewis and I said, Lewis, you will be my guide as I wrestle with Peterson and whatever else comes through that door and whatever else the tide brings in. And so Lewis has been a good guide. And in some ways Lewis has been a guide for this corner and he continues to be. So, yeah. Yeah. I think great divorce moved me greatly. Nobody talks about it here. English Lend the 16th century is still one of the standard texts used today. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. You know, that's probably something that we need someone like Dr. Jim or, you know, we need someone like, that's probably something that we need someone like Dr. Jim or, or Cal to sort of lead us through someone who really knows English literature well and I don't. All right. It's 1235. This has gone on far too long. Thank you all for joining me today. Sorry, I'm not bringing anybody in. And yeah, Lewis is occupying the role of saying, he is for Protestant churches, in the English language world he still is. So thank you for joining me. Thank you for watching. Thank you for all of you who've joined my new members. Again, I mean, so there are three levels again. There's the, there's the 299 level, which is like, yeah, that's basically throw away money. And then there's that, and I'm already over my 30. So Google owes me a thousand bucks. Just think that's hilarious. I told my sister that Google offered me this and she was pissed because she's doing YouTube for the money much more than I am. And, and my, I've, so my sister who does the primitive home with Ann Clay, she does a lot of merch and she does interesting merch. So I might, I was thinking the other day that I might get into the merch game, but I want to do it differently. And my sister is an artist and she, so I might figure out sort of a profit sharing arrangement with my sister and maybe do some fun things. She's of course zero into, some of you might've noted the comment she made on one of my CRC videos. I guess she started going back and forth with some people, including Phlebas. She said, who's Phlebas? Oh, yeah. Ooh, that's a good one. Wooden shoes. Let's do some wooden shoes. So yeah, this is the last Q and A until September, first week of September. Again, between July 17 and August 17, I have no idea what's going to come out on this channel. It might be some really weird stuff. Maybe I'll just put the weird stuff in for the members. I don't know. But I'm putting a PVK shirt. Yeah, but the problem is, I don't know what I'd put on that T-shirt. Oh, socks. Socks could be fun. Anyway, so I'm going to figure that. I mean, for me again, for Louis, for me, my ministry has been my 16th cent, that has been that big book for Louis that's been my ministry. And maybe, and for me, all this stuff is like the inklings. I mean, you all are my inklings, which is weird because we're doing it this way, but that's the way it goes. So whoosh, whoosh. I'd go for socks. All right, I'll talk to my sister. Maybe we can do socks. So thank you all for watching. It's time that I shut up and I got other work to do. So thank you for being here. And as always, it's a pleasure and I'll see you again when I see you again.