https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=_JADIcgUvw4

 Do I need headphones or anything? No, you sound perfect. So well, Tom, again, thank you so much for giving me this time. And I've been I first I read Rubicon a number of years ago and found it interesting. I as a someone with a divinity degree, I obviously had some background in Greek and Hebrew and classics, and I really enjoyed the nature or the style of that book. Was that was that your first was that your first book or your first book to really hit it big? That was my first work of history. Previously, I'd been a novelist, but it took me time to work out that actually the real wellsprings of what I wanted to write about lay in childhood and youthful obsessions. So it can take time if you have a writing career to work out exactly what what furrow you should be ploughing. And so I just realized actually, you know what, I'm the Romans of my great interest. I'm going to write about that. So so was you did you get your did you get your degree? Were you intending to be to be a fiction writer? Was that your was that your goal initially? Yeah, my I am I my great love initially was was Greece and Rome and then history generally and did classical languages at school, studied them. Well, actually, not just Latin, not Greek. So I didn't get to do Greek. So I did Greek later, but did Latin. And then discovered literature and I was kind of triangulate pulled three ways, couldn't decide what I wanted to do. So by the time I was 17 as well as when I was 17, I decided that I was to be a great novelist. So when I went to university, I focused very much on literature. But the interest in in history and particularly classical world was kind of bundled into that. So the very first thing I did, I wrote a novel about Catullus that was set in a kind of a Rome that was a contemporary city. And it was it wasn't quite the great work of fiction that I'd been hoping it would be. And simultaneously, to try and make money, I was doing a doctorate on Byron and his relationship to ancient Greek literature. And this was at a time when Interview with the Vampire, the I think the only film in which Tom Cruise was blonde appeared and Byron was the original model for a vampire. So I I knocked off this kind of book in which Lord Byron literally was a vampire and got a publishing deal in England, a publishing deal in America, got a kind of three book thing. And this was kind of untold riches. So although it's never been part of my life plan, I found myself writing three more vampire books all set in historical periods. And the amount of research I did to demonstrate that there'd been a vampire in London in 1888 and in the in kind of 16th century Prague and then in ancient Egypt was absolutely enormous. And I realized that actually the reality of history is is infinitely more interesting than than having to kind of spice this up with supernatural garnishings. So after I did a novel about that featured Howard Carter discovering Tutankhamun and then there was a Fatimid caliph, the Muslim Caligula as he was known, and then Akhenaten and Tutankhamun. And I so much more enjoyed the research than I did the actual writing. I thought, you know, this is ridiculous. I want to I want to write about the period of history that is my favorite period by miles. And so that's that that's then how I began writing history. So it was a kind of roundabout way. But all the time, what's interested me is the kind of the intersection between. History and literature. And I think that is why I was particularly drawn to the classical world, because most of the sources for ancient history. Tend to be have been shaped by literary artistry. So there's a sense in which doing ancient history often is a kind of literary criticism. And there's obviously something very similar in studying first Islam, which is what I came to, and then and then Christianity. And I think particularly with Christianity, because the conclusion I've come to is that more than anything, it is it. It. It writes stories. It conveys its truths through narratives. And in a sense, you know, one of the ways of thinking about Jesus is that he's the greatest short story teller of all time. No one's short stories have had a greater impact, are more enigmatic, are more elusive, continue to reverberate into into the politics and the society of the contemporary. But also, of course, just generally the biblical narratives, I mean, the narrative of Exodus, its impact on history is is transcendent. Wherever you look in the records of Christian history, you see the trace elements, the furrows of of Exodus. And then, of course, the the most potent story of all, which is the story of the of the passion and the resurrection. Yeah, so that was that was really. That's always been my interest, the way that that these ancient stories. Continue to reverberate and to replicate through into the present and with Christianity, I've come to the realization it's actually even more successful at doing that than the Greeks or the Romans. So what did you write after Rubicon? After Rubicon, I then turned to the other great period of history, which was my love, which was the Persian invasions of Greece. And I love them from a child because it was kind of Lord of the Rings, only true, you know, an evil empire in the East. Invading the West, being seen off against all the odds. Unbelievable clashes, great tales of heroism, Marathon, Thermopylae, Salamis. You know, immense drama. But again, the real excitement of writing that book called Persian Fire was discovering that my childhood understanding of it had been pretty much bogus and that Thermopylae really Really, it wasn't the Spartans who were on the side of freedom. I mean, neither were the Persians really, but the Spartans were brutal slave owners and my childhood romanticization of them had been naive, to put it mildly. So, and what that left me with was a deep sense of respect for the achievements of Persian civilization and a sense that whereas Greek civilization kind of glows in our mind, like, you know, the blaze of the Parthenon, you know, etched against the blue sky, we can see it very clearly. With Persia, the influence is much more occluded, it's kind of underground, but it's just as deep and One of the things that it was evident, Persia had influenced not just the Near East, but Europe and then by extension the Western world generally, was this idea that the world could be a theatre for moral engagement, that it was a place where good and evil clashed, where light and dark, truth and the lie met. And that, of course, is an idea profoundly influential on Christianity and Islam. And I remember there was one of the problems, obviously, with writing about Persia as opposed to Greece, is that the Greeks wrote, you know, invented history. Herodotus, the first great historian, who I then went on to translate. It's his account that basically we depend upon for the story of the Persian Wars. But the Persians aren't writing stuff and really there's only one exception that proves the rule and this is a great series of inscriptions put up by Darius the Great, who comes to power in a coup and predictably claims that he is the defender of the truth, even though it's patently clear that pretty much everything he's saying is a massive lie. In that inscription, there's a really intriguing little short passage where he says that he is fighting a people called the Elamites and they keep rising up against him and in the end he condemns them because they do not worship Ahura Mastad, the god that Darius worships and he tells his soldiers who were going to fight the Elamites that if they die, they will go to heaven. So it's the very, very earliest glimmering of the kind of doctrine of jihad and crusade that will come later. But it's also intriguing because at the time, the notion that you might get into trouble for not worshipping somebody else's gods was a wholly bizarre one. So this is a really kind of fascinating glimmering. And I just thought, well, that's really interesting. That's something that I hadn't suspected. So that then kind of opened my eyes to all kinds of kind of fascinating highways opening up before me, which led me to write first the book about Islam and then this book, Dominion, about Christianity. One of the things, so I got my undergraduate degree in history, and you know, you begin by reading about history in a sense, and then you begin to dive into primary sources. And one of the things that you begin to notice is that the authors of these primary sources do not see the world the same way that we do. And while your books, I love, a couple of years ago, I think the author's name is Hampton Sides, Blood and Thunder, The Story of Kit Carson, which is a tremendously fun book on the American frontier. And, you know, so these blood and thunders during the frontier days were going out about cowboys and Indians and people out East would love to read them for all the drama. So Persian Fire was full of that drama. But I very much enjoyed the book because along the way you were sort of dropping little breadcrumbs about the fact that you were taking the religion of these people seriously. And not just as sort of a westerner. These are ancient people who are, you know, believing crazy things, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. What really matters is who dies by the sword. But you were noting their motivation in terms of their worldview. And then by virtue of the way you're writing, that's sort of slipping, I think, into people's imaginary. Trying to do my, I was doing my best to do that. So I tried to take the worship of the Hurramaster by the Persian kings very seriously. And then conversely, I tried to take the relationship of the Greeks to their gods very seriously. And of course, one of the great ways in which the Greeks and the Persians are parallel lines is that for the Persians, truth is everything. Whereas for the Greeks, Apollo is a liar. That's the whole point. And Odysseus, the great hero of Greek epic, is a liar and a trickster. And you can see how, you know, really, there's no intersection point on the Venn diagram there at all. But equally, the challenge is that I don't think that we can really get back to what you might call the truth, the reality of it. There's a kind of inherently fictional quality because, you know, our earliest sources really are so distant that we can't really trust them. So if you look at Thermopylae, the famous Count of the Battle, this is, in the book, I tell it as though it's actually happening. And I try to square it as best as I possibly can with what we know about the tactics and the armour and the terrain. I kind of walked the terrain of the battlefield and all kinds of things like that. But the haunting truth is that in Herodotus's account, he, for instance, describes Leonidas, the Spartan king, dying, being killed, and then the Persians and the Greeks fighting over his body. Now that may have happened, but how do we know about it? The Spartans all die. I mean, that's the whole point of the story. You know, there are some Thebans who get taken prisoners, so maybe they saw it. I mean, we don't really. But what we do know is that in the Iliad, the heroes die. And this is a battle being fought between East and West. And it's pretty clear that Herodotus is drawing on it. That doesn't mean that he's lying. But it means that he's drawing on traditions to give a kind of colour to this narrative in a way that means that in a kind of documentary contemporary sense, trying to get back to the truth effectively is impossible. And it's really interesting that you raise the example of the Wild West, because I think that's possibly the closest analogy. The whole point of the Wild West is that it is a kind of fiction that grows out of the soil of truth. You know, there is a frontier. There are these people. There are cowboys. There are Indians. There are shoot-ups. But the moment the frontier is closed, it's being fictionalised, first in novels and then in films. And in a sense, that tradition is constantly looking back not so much to the actual history, but to the fictionalisation, the mythologisation of that history. And that, I think, is basically what we have again and again with ancient history. And you can try and get back as far as you can to the original point of time. But I think unless you acknowledge the inherently mythic, the inherently fictional quality of it, you're kind of missing something. You are too 21st century. So I basically I try and have it both ways. I try and write it as history and I try and write it as an acknowledgement that it ultimately cannot be history in the way that we understand it. The mythic quality of it is a necessary part of it. So you can see why that would then make me very interested in Christian history, because I think something similar is happening there. But to a profound degree and to in a much kind of more influential manner. Well, you're hitting on all of the, you know, we're sort of on a hinge outside of modernism. You can't leave modernism alone. It matters what the autopsy would reveal on the bodies of the Spartans at Thermopylae. I mean, that layer matters. But the other layer is in many ways also colonises the first layer and is vitally important for who we are and how we see the world. And again, I think that comes through the book. When I began, so I read I read Dominion and then I thought, oh, I got to read. You know, I'd read Rubicon a number of years ago, but I sort of passed from my memory. And then I don't remember how I heard about Dominion, but I read Dominion and then I read Persian fire. And right at the beginning of Persian fire, you were talking about Herodotus. And I was trying to pull it up quick a minute. This this quote about the fact that something to the effect of the, you know, the Persians didn't write history. And I thought. What does that say? What does that say about how they viewed the world as opposed to necessarily, you know, the Greeks who invent with Herodotus, they invent history? Well, it means that the Persians think that. All is all is for the best because they've created their empire and this reflects the eternal order of truth and light. And therefore, it can't really be improved upon. And so, therefore, the role of the king is not to be an individual, but to play the part of the king. And. In that sense, the the only kings who really matter are Darius, who renews the empire, and then Cyrus, who founds it. And in that light, I think it's really fascinating that the two ancient peoples who who clearly have the greatest influence on what will become Western history, the Greeks and the Jews, both idolize Cyrus. They both think Cyrus is great. Xenophon writes a whole kind of biography of him that's that's that's a massive love letter. And in in Deuteronomy, Isaiah, Cyrus is hailed as the Messiah. It's startling. Yeah, that's quite that's quite a kind of, you know, quite an encomium. And so what we know about Cyrus derives basically from the Greeks and the Jews, both of whom were conquered by him. So you get a hint there as to the potency of the royal propaganda that he is he that he's promoting. And I think that you get a sense there of how. Yeah, how potent this this imperial propaganda can be and how influential it is and how. The notion of a world divided into rival spheres of good and evil in which the king is is the agent of of of the good is obviously an idea so effective that even people who've been its victims can buy into it. And that, again, is something that will reverberate through subsequent centuries and millennia. I so then after I after I read Persian Fire, then I got into in the Shadow of the Sword, which I I found to be a powerful book and obviously a book that stirred up quite a bit of controversy. And I think it's a really helpful book to read in conjunction with dominion. One of the things that echoes in that book, you're clearly dealing with the question of history in terms of, again, what the autopsy would reveal on such and such body versus the the mythos that needs to play a role for the construction of of civilizations for empires for people in the in the sort of Durkheimian sense that there needs to be something around which a people can form and mobilize and that mobilization is is absolutely integral to what will you know what empires are made of in many ways. You know, I love the way that you began this conversation because Because one of the things that one of the things in our sort of postmodern sense pastors have been relocated because you said we can't really trust. Well, there's a lot of can't really trust going on in terms of people's reading of the Bible and questions. The Bible obviously has been subjected to a great deal of scrutiny over the last couple of hundred years in terms of okay, how do events and our perception and then stories of events. How do these things match up and what does that mean for how we move forward. And so, in many ways, pastors have become curators of stories for people. Now, when you get to the rise of Islam and the questions of their founding, I'll use the word in a non I'll use the word in its generic sense, the surrounding mythos of Islam. Well, these, these issues come to the fore, especially as I read through that book with a careful reading about the question of God. Because you begin that book noting Eusebius how by the time Eusebius rolls in and begins to write Christian history. Well, it clearly was God's will that the Christians would triumph over Rome and you know this remarkable turn of events where a crucified Jesus would now in some ways be seen as threatening the power of the Roman Empire. That script gets turned again with the rise of Islam. And so one of the things that you begin to notice when I, for example, would be studying something like the book of Daniel. Daniel has all of these ordeals that play out. There's the the fiery furnace with Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. There's the lion's den. There's the king's table. You've got all of these ordeals playing out. Ordeals are very much premised on outcomes are determined by the God or the gods and the gods reveal themselves and outcomes. And this obviously works at a very interesting angle with Christianity because the whole premise of your savior is crucified just sort of comes to clash with this. So before we get into Dominion, what did you learn about the ancients and their gods with respect to what gods are and how they reveal themselves? They're very various. So again, looking back at the tension between a Hurtamaster and Apollo. Their expressions are fundamentally different ways of seeing the world. And in a sense, in late antiquity, a world when you get on the model of the of the original Persian empire, you get these great sprawling empires that claim to be universal. What you get from them is a kind of desire for gods that are universal. And so over the course of late antiquity, you get gods that become more and more powerful. And that's evident in the way that the Roman emperors basically throughout the third century from the moment that the Emperor Caracalla decrees that that every free male in the Roman Empire will be a citizen. And so everyone basically becomes a Roman. The way in which there had previously been individual cults, individual ways of worshiping these gods becomes unsustainable because you need one god for one empire, one civic identity. And so over the course of the third century, you have emperors who are basically auditioning a variety of gods for this role, whether it's Serapis or Sol Invictus or Apollo or Heracles or whatever. And of course, the god who finally passes the audition is the Christian god. But equally, the very fact that the Christian god has submitted himself twice to covenants, first on Mount Sinai and then in whatever way you want to explain the new covenant, there is this sense that the just as Christ has physically been nailed and bound to the cross. So the new covenant has kind of committed the Christian god to a kind of specific relationship to his people. This comes to be seen as a kind of unacceptable infringement on the totality of divine power. And the Muslim god is terrifyingly more powerful than the Christian god, really. He does not commit himself. He does not bind himself to covenants. He can do literally anything that he wants. And the result is that in the Quran, the power of the god of the Quran is so immense that almost it's hard to know what to do with it. And whoever can lay claim to it really has kind of limit the potential for what can be done with this power is potentially limitless. And so Islamic history becomes a kind of contest between the figure of the caliph and the figure of the ulama, the scholars and the lawyers who attempt to control this power. And it's so powerful that in a sense a lot of the differences between what become Islamic and Christian civilization can be explained by that. The way in which, say in Christian civilization, you have a god who, because he's bound by covenant, therefore it makes sense to think of the universe as being governed by laws that he has prescribed, in which he is content for the universe to obey. Whereas in the Islamic understanding of god, that's an infringement of his power. And so therefore, you know, every time a stone gets dropped from a building, the reason it drops isn't because there is some law that explains why it drops. It drops because god intervenes to make sure that it drops. And so that's why you have Uton in the Christian world, but you don't have his equivalent in the Islamic world. I don't think I've ever heard that differentiation in that way. Because, you know, if you zip all the way over, oh gosh, there's so much history here. Well, let's go back perhaps to the Hebrews and the Babylonians and the Persians, because, you know, part of what happens in the ancient world, again, I've been reading this very interesting he Jewish scholar. I don't know if you've read anything of him. I hadn't heard about him until just a few months ago. I confess I haven't. He makes the observation that there really have been fundamentally two systems going on through history. One was kind of the common system in which all of the gods emerge from what he calls a meta divine realm, out of which they emerge and then the gods procreate, create this and that, and gods and demigods and all sort of filters down. But what's fundamental is that there's a meta divine realm which has within it the laws to which the gods must somehow obey or hold themselves. It becomes the arena in which the gods work. His assertion is that the radicality of the Hebrew god is that in many ways God is in effect the meta divine realm, but the god is personal. And I haven't read far enough in his book to notice this, but one of the things that I noted when I was, for example, going through the book of Ezekiel carefully was the transition that happens when, for example, the Babylonians come and destroy the temple of the Hebrews. The normal script would have been that that Yahweh, the god of the Hebrews, had been destroyed by by Marduk and the god of Babylon. And so you have this playing out of gods and the Hebrews would do the Jews would do the rational thing, which would be to simply submit to the gods of the Babylonians and assimilate into their world and the ancient Near East would have gone on. Instead, the Hebrews have this idea that somehow their god, and Marduk doesn't even get a mention in the scriptures, their god somehow has engineered this whole event and you don't see any mythology of God's battling or any of this stuff that we'd find much much further on. But that this somehow is the manifestation of this one god and he was to punish his people and they themselves ought to hold themselves to the covenant and so on and so forth. And again, what this produces is a similarly very large god under which all of this other drama as opposed to a realm, an impersonal realm in which these gods are always contending with one another in order to achieve supremacy and the particular goals that they desire. I noted in Persian fire there seemed to be hints within the Persians of something similar to what we perhaps find in the Hebrews where you have the truth and the lie and the emperor of Persia takes it upon himself to dispel the lie and bring the truth in a universal sense. And your point here of the division of the god of the Hebrews covenanting himself to people in a in a faithful way is really fascinating because it obviously is in scripture. But the observation that in Islam such a god need not as as an emperor in a sense need cannot be held to his word by those beneath him. But we find for example in the book of in the book of Genesis with this incredibly fascinating passage where the Lord comes to tell Abraham what he's about to do in the city where his Abraham's nephew is holding and Abraham goes to Dicker with the Lord but dares not go down all the way to Lot. And in fact there's a very interesting textual question in that passage as to whether or not the Lord is standing for Abraham or Abraham is standing before the Lord. So you know the question of these gods and their relationship to one another and the relationship to the cosmos itself is really at play here and then of course we'll get mixed into this great drama that will take place within Christianity between these worlds. I don't know if that makes any sense. I think that on the topic of gods binding themselves to covenants there's a kind of prefiguring of the crucifixion in in in in in gods relationship to Moses because what happens in in antiquity is that gods are summoned as witnesses to covenants between different peoples and so you summon you know if you're an Egyptian signing a treaty with the Hittites you both people will summon their gods to serve as witnesses and there's enough commonality between these kingdoms and their understanding of the divine to ensure that both can accept their respective gods as the witnesses. The strange thing about the God of Israel is is that he submits himself to a covenant so there's a sense in which he is simultaneously he's the only god you know he's the only one who can serve as a witness but he is also subjecting himself to that and I always wonder when Paul had his vision whatever it was whatever he saw and he must have gone and had a period of thought what that what is going on here what has happened whether this this this is what drew his attention the idea that the very act of of signing a covenant was in a way a kind of binding and that the new covenant and and the original covenant both of them required a form of humility from God that that is the counterpoint to his omnipotence and that seems to be a tension that runs throughout the Old Testament as well as through the new but I absolutely hasten to add that I am aware that in discussions of the Old Testament that this is a vast continent which I have very few maps and which I've kind of only scratched the surface of so I wouldn't in any way want to pontificate about the Old Testament studies which I know is essentially a field that requires a lifetime of study and my lifetime I have not to make the strange thing the strange thing of course with the Hebrew God is there's there is no higher court I mean God's come and and bear witness to the cutting of a covenant there is no higher court and I think it was in dominion that you know there's this strange there's the strange reality of the fates and I'm trying to think if it was in dominion in your book where there's this tension between the fates which seem to be in some ways you know the highest court and the gods because even the gods are are held to yes yeah the judgment of the fates and and so it's it's interesting watching watching those civilizations work with these tensions in terms of their their metaphysical systems and and how that then of course then you've got this this Hebrew God comes on to the comes on to the field in a book with with really no mythology as such the kinds of mythologies we find in terms of the origin of the gods and the the lives and deaths of the gods so on and so forth I mean you may disagree with me on this and again I'm aware that this is a controversial field but it does seem likely to me there are kind of trace elements of a mythological dimension in in the Old Testament that seems to have been edited out so there do seem to be trace elements of this kind of idea of the great god fighting with a sea serpent fighting with a sea monster which is kind of you know there in Jobe and and and how you know have you managed to hook Leviathan and all that kind of thing um so and also that that extraordinary psalm where he where where god condemns the other gods because they have not cared for the poor of the weak whatever and sends them hurtling down um and that seems that that does seem to me that you can that actually the the the Old Testament bears witness to a process of discovery on the part of the people who come to enshrine these texts as as scripture um and that doesn't seem to me actually an imponderable challenge to to to belief that to the it doesn't it seems to me perfectly possible to acknowledge that this is the process by which this happened and in fact it becomes rather a kind of powerful witness to the way in which over the course of the centuries the Jewish prophets and the Jewish people kind of awoke to a full understanding of what it was that they were dealing with um if one wants to deal with on a theological level but on a purely historical level I think that um the emergence of of this one god I think is part a historical process in in which I think the the the translation of the of the um Judean elite to Babylon and then the conquest of Babylon by the Persians and the influence of Persian understandings of the divine and of good and evil do seem to me quite important but again I say you know I'm aware that this is a field of study that requires considerably more scholarship than I can possibly provide but I do think that probably almost certainly that the intersection between the exiles the Babylonian exiles and Cyrus the great and the god that he worshiped and then the Persian kings worship is clearly in some way that it's very difficult to pin down quite important and I think the evidence for that lies both in the clear parallels between Persian and Jewish practices and understanding of God but also the huge significance that Cyrus has in Isaiah. Now when I when we were um I meant when we were texted texting before a little bit you mentioned that um when I was reading uh in the shadow of the sword you mentioned that your your some of your thoughts had changed since putting out that book and I know that when you write a book it's kind of it kind of goes out there and you're sort of stuck with it out there what what what were you referring to what it what is how did dominion sort of change your perspective on on your previous book? It was chiefly on the theme of of the idea of religion so in in in in shadow of the sword I use religion and I use the words Judaism and Islam as though they're unproblematic as though there's something called Judaism there is something called Islam there is something called Christianity these are religions it's like saying that you know a labrador or a poodle is a kind of dog that the the definitions are clear everyone accepts them they're not an issue. I even as I was writing the book I came to think that actually I was applying Christian assumptions to to the the category of Islam and the category of of Judaism and by the end of the book I was worried by this and thought this is something that I want to pursue further I want to look at you know what do I mean by religion because I'd already come I'd already decided that I couldn't use the word religion to describe whatever it was that the Greeks and the Romans were doing but I thought Judaism Christianity this is this is this is the line of descent but I changed my mind over that even as I was kind of writing it and certainly by the time I came to Dominion I was pretty confident that that actually the category of religion is yet another example of the way in which we are all so Christian it's so impregnated our very language that it's only with some effort that you can begin to appreciate that so I I would now want to make what in in the shadow of the sword I call Judaism and Islam even more distant and and and strange and unfamiliar because I think that but in a way I think that in a way Jews and Muslims have been in a sense Christianized by the sheer hegemonic force of westernization which in itself is is a form of Christianization to a degree that that almost none of us realize and I think that that that makes the the study of the kind of pre-history of what it is that people are believing and thinking about the the relationship of the human and the divine before the 18th century very very difficult very difficult I don't know how familiar you are familiar you are with the name Owen Barfield yes yeah it was a friend of CS Lewis had some very interesting ideas on um what he would call the evolution of consciousness has sort of these three phases of initial participation and then sort of a separation from participation and then a final participation you know for example this as I've delved into Barfield's work over the last couple of years a little bit you know one of the things that you see and again I think you're I mean part of the reason your work caught my imagination was very much this question of religion that as it very much has to deal with with secularity and and the development of secularity but what you find if you're attuned to these these movements is that these things have come around in different forms in many different ways this sort of a a deconstructing of things you know for you see in the Protestant Reformation the the Protestant reformers have a deal of skepticism with respect to let's say the Eucharist and the host and is its efficacious nature in and of itself in terms of how that moves the world the the power of let's say the papacy to have the keys over number of years that one might spend in purgatory you know that that's in a sense of separation from participation and then whereas let's say in original participation one the sacrificial the sacrifices that one affects and how these move the gods and how these move the world you know for us reading back into them we might we might see you know the let's say the pharaoh's magicians in the book of exodus we might see the the oracles surrounding greek and roman emperors and kings as well this is their religion that's separate from mobilizing their army so and so forth but quite obviously they didn't have that word they didn't have that category this was in fact how the world works the temples completely interfused that's right completely infused that's right and and so then then again and what you find is that these separations occur and you can even read this in jesus for example when the you know when when if what when i was so after i left i grew up my father was a pastor went to christian college you go to college and now you're a little bit free from the parents it's like i can decide whether or not i want to be a christian i thought well let me give the let me give the new testament a good read with my own new college eyes and and you begin i begin to note that so many of jesus conversations have to deal with and conflicts have to deal with things like whether he heals people on the sabbath and you know jesus couldn't wait till a monday to you know let this paralytic walk but obviously jesus is pushing their buttons buttons and jesus says things like it's not what goes into your mouth that makes you unclean it's it's sort of what's in your heart and you begin to notice this these these things sort of separate and and in this other sphere you have sort of a religion developing and then they seem to keep going back and forth coming together so in the protestant reformation well you know big discussion about how to think about this eucharist but other things now in increasingly you know urbanized europe that it's the it's the assumption it's the it's the regard that i have in towards god which is a faith that counts rather than my participation in the sacramental system which the roman catholic church has been working on for the last number of centuries and you know you see this in a sense in a religiously pluralistic polytheistic system in the ancient world but there's no question amongst them that these things matter and that your your relationship with the god is of at least as much concern as the number of troops that you can put on the field i think there is something completely distinctive about christianity that that that no other way of understanding humanity's relationship to the divine has has really made central to itself so if you if you look at uh at what christians come to call polytheists the idea that um you know the the romans for instance had gods for everything notoriously they had they had gods for door hinges there was nothing in the roman world that wasn't in some way governed by the divine and so it's it's not just that the gods are present in springs and trees and roads and even cities um it it's also that they are kind of the equivalent of um insurance companies everything you you know just as we take out insurance so the romans had religiones religio a bond which you pay a god and then the god will look after you so there's so so so whether you're you know a businessman or a soldier or obviously an emperor everything you do is is done in the context of your relationship with the god the god is is is is looking over you if things go wrong it's because you haven't paid the god enough for the guiones if it goes well it's because you have there is a sense in which the the the divine and and the human is absolutely infused now if you look at at the jews and and then islam as it emerges of course the jews do not accept that there are gods everywhere neither of course to the muslims there is only the there is only the one god but that one god has given a framework of law that enables his holiness his presence on the earth to be everywhere so whatever you wear whatever you eat whatever you do the the rhythm of your life um that god is everywhere and the fact that he is enthroned you know up on the heavens far distant from the springs and the the trees that people in their folly had previously worshiped doesn't alter the fact that if you are obedient to torah if you are you know you if you you you pay attention to the sunnah you are going to lead a life in which every aspect of your life is governed by a sense of the divine christianity plow goes in a different course and and it's one that evolves over the 2000 years of its existence and it's manifest right from the beginning there are little acorns scattered around the new testament so the most most obviously in the account of of how jesus is asked should we pay taxes to the romans and he of course famously asks for a coin and there on the coin is the head of caesar and and so he says render unto caesar what is caesar render unto god what is god's and and this sense of a tension between the kingdom of heaven and the kingdom of earth which is caesar's kingdom is a dynamic that's there throughout the new testament and throughout the early emergence of of the church and there's a sense in which christianity emerges with a consciousness of itself as a parody of of the augustan cult of of of of the roman empire and in the it's in the parody it's in the blasphemy that true holiness is to be found christ is is is is a blasphemous parody of augustus if you are a roman that is why he is the figure of christ is so shocking and it's why paul has a sense of himself as such a kind of countercultural subversive figure he's not just reevaluating the jewish understanding of scripture he's also creating a blasphemous parody of of the worship of caesar and so that sense of there being two kingdoms two cities the city of god and the city of man is one that constantine and his successors will obviously have to negotiate and then in 410 when the city of rome itself is sacked and you get people saying people who have not accepted christianity saying this is what comes of abandoning the religiones we the gods are offended it's what then precipitates the single most influential work of theology ever written in latin which of course is augustine's city of god and augustine's argument is a refinement of this idea that is absolutely implicit in the new testament the idea that there are two kingdoms the kingdom heaven and and earthly kingdoms and those who are in the earthly kingdom belongs as i mentioned of the cyclone and the cyclone is the limit of human memory which could be 80 years could be 120 years but generally is held to be 100 years which is is why in due course in french c'est la will be become a century c'est la in spanish and this idea that there is a dimension of the cyclone which is a dimension of flux it's the it's like the the river of time on which leaves are born you see them fleetingly and then they're born away on currents never to be seen again and if that's true of individual human beings then it is also true of kingdoms and of empires and even of rome and this is what augustine teaches rome itself is a thing of the cyclone it is a city of man and therefore it will be born away and our only hope of eternity the only hope of redeeming ourselves from this flux from this great river is the rope ladder that the church can provide which is the religio the bond that will join us to the eternity of heaven and this gets institutionalized in the latin half of what had been the roman empire because the roman empire collapses in the eastern half it doesn't and so over the course of the centuries that follow the collapse of rome's empire in the west you start to get a sense that is completely distinctive to that outermost westernmost fringe of eurasia that you get nowhere else which is that earthly rulers earthly autocrats are not complicit in the dimension of the eternal in the way that they are in constantinople or baghdad or the cities of india or china or japan that they should back off and in the 11th century this conviction becomes strong enough to initiate what effectively is europe's first revolution this great project of reformatio of reformatting of remaking society in the way that an individual christian is remade and reborn when he's baptized or she is baptized so the ambition in the 11th century is to remake to re to rebirth christendom and that requires kings no longer to have a stake in the supernatural they can no longer appoint bishops they have to be humbled in the snow to be whipped through the streets of their own cities if they offend and the result of that is that this radical sense of a sacri of two dimensions a dimension of the cyclone and then a dimension of the church which provides the religio beds down over the course of of the centuries that followed the 11th century and by the time you get the reformation second it's it's the reformation we call it but it's just a second bout of reformatio another great convulsion things change with the reformation but the idea that there is a dimension of the cyclone and a dimension of religio doesn't of course the understanding of religio does change because in the middle ages religio is the particular property of those who are particularly concerned with it monks nuns hermits whatever but there are no monks there are no friars in in in in protestant europe so everyone has a religio and that bond what is the individual bond that a that a protestant has with god that becomes the great center the idea that it's about your personal being your personal relationship whether you personally have grace whether you personally reading the scriptures the spirit descends on you and so it becomes much more personalized even as it's it's being kind of increasingly shunted to the side of what is coming to be defined not as the cyclone but as the secular and if you like the the cyclone has been secularized the concept of the secular no longer has the the kind of theological context that augustine had given it and instead you're starting to get the idea the more that that that protestants come to think that religio religion is something personal so the more the sense of the divine can be bled out of the rest of society and so by the 18th century you come to have this idea which is entirely distinctive to western europe and and of course to the various states that are being planted in continents beyond europe including the united states this idea that you have a dimension called the secular which is separate from something called religion and europeans when they go to the world of islam the world of india china whatever export that understanding and it's something that we have imposed on the rest of the world and the rest of the world have so internalized it that jews and muslims and hindus and buddhists can all think of themselves as belonging to things called religions and think of religion as something that exists separate from society and it can't be emphasized how weird and distinctive and idiosyncratic a way of understanding the world that is and a huge amount of of um i think of what's happening in the world at the moment is a kind of kickback against that from people who are not of christian backgrounds so i think it's in a way i mean i think it's a huge part of of of what explains zionism and zionism is an attempt to reverse the status of jews as people who have a religion they want to go back to being a people they want to go back to being the people of israel i think that variously erdogan's rejection of attatürk secularism and the the kind of bloodthirsty literalism of al-qaeda and the islamic state are both in their very different ways responses to a sense that islam has kind of been christianized it's it's kind of become a religion which it never was before and likewise i think that what's happening in in india with modi modi is his his promotion of hindukva his promotion of the idea that india is is is properly hindu is a rejection of the idea that the founding fathers of the indian republic who were all educated in english and therefore with british political and sociological assumptions they had imported this british concept of the secular and now modi wants to get rid of it and i think that part of the convulsions that are roiling the world at the moment is is a reflection of the fact that western power is retreating and therefore the categories that the west in its heyday in the 19th and 20th centuries had exported is now kind of coming to seem more shadowy and the problem that we have in the west is that we don't understand how contingent how culturally bred these categories are and how fundamentally christian they are well that's a long answer sorry no it's a great answer i you could have got another five ten minutes i i i agree i but but also you see the problem and this goes back to why i've changed my mind about in the shadow of the sword is is that we back project it as well so we back project these categories so if you look if you get a children's book on ancient greece or you know or even an adult book on on ancient greece you'll have categories on the economy on warfare on women and and one on religion and you'll have a chapter about the greek gods and sacrifices and then you'll move on to stuff about battleships but only someone bred of christian culture could write that kind of book only only christians and people influenced by christianity could talk about ancient egyptian religion in the same way that they could assume that judaism was a religion it's the same thing we we we and it's what humans always do we we you know we have a distinctive way of seeing the world we don't recognize that it's distinctive because we're like goldfish goldfish don't realize that they're goldfish we don't realize that we as you know living in the secular world that we do are deeply christian well and you know what we've been oh there's so much here so there's so one of the one of the people that i've been having conversations with on my channel is john vervecky who is a scholar out of the university of toronto and and he like many talk about the fact that well in sort of a post-christian context we need to get away from these two worlds mythology and whereas you can look at you know the talk about the axial age you can look at various two worlds mythology coming you know out of the out of the ancient world you can look at platonism for example and and even when even when we began our conversation when when you're talking about the the greek historians we can't trust them we're we're working with this we're working with this question about how well well well well well well well well i i'm it's not that we can't trust them but trust them for what is exactly the question yeah it's it's that their understanding of truth is different to ours right and why is that because and i so when your deling pod conversation which i thought was you know he says at the end of us this is the best conversation you'll have and sometimes i've listened to a whole bunch of that to all the guys but it was a very good one the you know so what happens then with obviously the rise of of of hitler and the nazis this is a this you know nazism is a radical i always i always wondered okay why do the nazis hate the jews and and after i listened to you this sent me on my a whole another reading binge of you know what what was really behind the nazis and and this this vision of post darwin we're going to strip off all of the um you know all of the intellectual stuff and and in some ways they look back and say you know with nicha well you know the jews sent us on this track and so we're going to look at the most successful successful people in the world and they're the germans because we have to disregard the jews and so what gets manifest is simply darwin that power in is of itself is is what we must do and so if you look at let's say the work of timothy snider who says you know the the nazis wanted to get rid of states because states impose this this unnatural layer upon us whereby you know going back to not going back to nicha we'd have all this craziness such as we should have regard for the weak and and the strong should just simply rise and so there's this big question right now of okay so so if not christianity that sort of sets the the thought world for all of our all of our material movements what then well i i mean the i think i think there's more to um you know there's kind of a really grotesquely horrible paradox at the heart of why the nazis persecute the jews um because of course they yes the nazis believe that strength should should triumph over weakness and they believe that that strength should properly be uh vested in the idea of race rather than a nation absolutely um but they are aware that um it's it's a struggle between different races all of whom have different strengths and hitler in particular when he looks back at the classical world which of course he greatly admires he admires its glamour its swagger its strength its power its beauty its charisma um and he looks at the parthenon or he looks at the coliseum and he sees now nothing but rubble and he says well what what went wrong and his answer is that um the jews who are a kind you know they have a cancerous cosmopolitanism so it's kind of the reverse of of what we might think that the that the jews regard themselves as as a distinctive people to hitler actually the danger is precisely that the jews preach a kind of cosmopolitanism and on top of that they they preach a concern for the weak and they do this as a way of bringing down the strong so it's a kind of cod nichianism and the person who best exemplifies this who who is most devastating in the consequences of his teachings is the jew paul as hitler describes him because what what paul combines is a cosmopolitan conviction that there is no jew or greek and a sinister regard that there is no slave or free indeed that there is no man or woman and that this conflation this is a kind of poison a radioactivity that will slowly poison the the the beautiful strength of of the greeks and the romans and that therefore it's the jews in the form of paul and the christianity that he's preached that brings classical civilization down and the risk therefore for hitler if he's to have a a rike that he wants to last for a thousand years is that if the jews are left then they will produce another paul and so the the grotesque paradox that i mentioned is that that that hitler targets the jews because he blames them for christianity even as he is able to invoke traditions of christian anti-semitism to do it so it's it's a kind of horrifying no-win situation for the jews you know to be targeted for being jewish is bad enough but to be targeted for being christian is kind of a horrible insult indeed so so and i and i love how you how you laid out the the you know we might say that this is the this is post-colonialism you know continuing to follow its path in in turkey in the islamic world in hindu in in india where do they go because you know do they do they try to remind their i mean especially and i can see why for example some of the questions that you raised about the origin mythos of islam become particularly disturbing when you know and i i found i found the you know the bbc documentary that you did also quite interesting and compelling because in a sense what what this leads to is a sort of state polytheism where separate peoples try different different um mythical overlays and we see which ones triumph over others that's a that's a rather that's a rather scary new world as opposed to sort of a a a a multinational christian empire that one might argue the 20th century sort of had yeah i i i don't know i mean i don't know what what will happen um and and i don't know i mean really the question is how how christianized have these traditions become and and is it possible to decristianize them and you know a lot of the projects that are going on in various parts of the world are our attempts to to explore that um and it's hard to know where they where they will go but i mean adding to adding to that is that we too in the west are are embroiled in something rather similar because um it it does seem to me that um that one of the the kind of unsettling implications of the emergence of the idea of the secular and the idea of religions as things that are are kind of you know at a margin is that in a way atheism is a kind of logical endpoint because ultimately everything gets so drained of the sacral that everything ends up secular um and that does seem to me a a challenge for for for christians to face which is that in a sense the the the great campaign which is is there right from the beginning of bringing people who've walked in darkness into into light and toppling idols and banishing superstition which in turn is something that goes back to the old testament prophets and to elijah and the priests of barl and to elijah and the priests of barl and all that kind of stuff um and which leads you know saint martin and boniface and so on to to go into woods and to chop down the trees of thor and to um consecrate springs and all this kind of thing and then in the reformation inspires protestant reformers to condemn the catholic church as being a sump of paganism and to kind of again topple idols and smash statues of madonnas and things like that and and to talk about discovering the light and then that in turn feeds into the enlightenment project which then turns on christianity itself and there's a sense in now in which you know is there anything left and you know it's how so the the challenge that that jews or or muslims or hindus face in kind of decristianizing their understanding of the world is paralleled by the challenge that christians face which is in a way to resacralize their world is it possible for people say from from a radically protestant background to what do they do with with angels what do they do with places where miracles happened what do they do with this kind of vast inheritance of the mysterious and the supernatural and the miraculous which has to be a part of of any christian faith i would have thought really because otherwise what are you saying about the bible that none of this happened and that's why it seems that christianity is so much more vital in somewhere like africa because in africa it's much easier to believe this kind of stuff um spirits are much more much more kind of manifest whereas in the west i mean i don't know lots of christians that i know seem incredibly embarrassed by my you know talk of angels or or or the you know miracles or anything like that and yet it does i do think that if that that without a kind of resurrection of as it were of those kind of dimensions i don't i don't really see that that christianity as it's been understood for the past two thousand years really has a future um i mean it clearly has a future diffused into a kind of liberalism or secularism or whatever that kind of dimension in which its ethics and its morals have been so internalized that the people just take them for granted but as the expression of of something profoundly mysterious the idea that there is a one creator god who's fashioned humans in that in his image and who came down and was tortured to death on a cross and rose from the dead and you know this great miraculous fulcrum around which everything organized is much harder i think to to continue to believe in that if if the entire world is completely drained of the sense of the the miraculous and the strange and the weird well i mean i don't know what you as i don't know as a pastor what what you think about that well that's maybe maybe i speak as as as someone living in in england which is that much less godly in america i don't know well these these are many of the i i got i didn't start doing youtube because i said oh i have all this extra time i'm gonna blabber on the internet for two hours a day um you know i i i started this because i noticed the work of jordan peterson and i noticed and what caught my attention about his work was not the the fuss about pronouns so much but the which which is interesting in terms of this question about materiality am i male by virtue of i have an xy chromosome so on and so forth but what i noticed was that young i noticed that men basically between the ages of 25 and 45 who had checked out of christianity usually in their teens were after listening to hours of him ramble about the bible through evolution other psychology and union archetypes and all of this began to want to go to church again and i had been you know as a as a christian minister watching a good number of people walking away from the faith over the last you know 20 30 years of my ministry and for the first time what i had seen as a one-way street suddenly people were coming back down the same road and i said well what do i i have to admit that i'm i don't really know anything about jordan peterson apart from an interview he did over here with a channel four yeah and there's something about lobsters or something yes yes but beyond that i i i i i i've never read him or watched him so but i know that he's he's a kind of been a big deal but what is it about him that is well that's exactly what i want to know weird is he well no it's exactly why this guy whose relationship to the church people watching people who had been having let's let's call it nihilistic anxiety and depression after watching hours of his video would find relief and their eyes he was depressing them so badly that they were rushing to church to escape it he was he was telling people all sorts of things that any mother would have told them clean your room don't just date and have sex with this girl marry her um he was he this this entire movement of men who had very much been post christian and depressed were finding themselves with renewed interest in the bible renewed vigor in terms of taking responsibility for their lives and then of all things going to church and of all churches often orthodox and roman catholic churches and it you know the more i dug into this so as a christian minister who has a dramatically empty sanctuary i wondered why people were paying 40 bucks a pop to watch him lecture and ramble for two hours about the bible were so interested in this guy and what was happening as a result of it and this led me then down questions about many of the issues that you'd look had been looking at and essentially wrestling with an idea which a number of people have been wrestling with over the last hundred years of sort of a meaning crisis in the west and you see that as you know why why is it that young men who had the who had already made it to the uk or france or the united states who had the opportunity in comparison to people living in gaza or the west bank or syria or iran now suddenly wish to you know i'm going to go and fight for isis you know what's that about the contemporary western trajectory is well we're animals and once we sort of have our needs met you know we'll be fine and why would we want to risk all of that to go fight for an islamic state in the middle of the desert that of course was something happening to many of the heirs of islam but what's happening to many of the heirs of christianity leading people to imagine that you know as as as dostoevsky and tolstoy noted you know once we have sufficient food and bread and we have all of our appetites met what then is there to live for and you know you who've spent a fair amount of work and in in late antiquity i was reading robin fox's book on agustin a number of years ago and and trying to get a sense of you know why of all things do you have in late antiquity parents pulling their hairs out because their daughters now suddenly wish to be virgins forever um you know these are not children of the poor these are children of the wealthy that that we are strange animals and that we need a mythos to inhabit i mean on that on that it's it's because you know it's because of paul really it's it you know the whole idea of paul as this kind of blue meanie who turns up wagging his finger and ruining everybody's fun everyone's having great sex and then up he pops and oh no it's like a cold shower couldn't be more unfair because why why are why are girls embracing virginity because they can and that's what christianity gives because what christianity gives to women is a sense that their bodies are sacred and that they've been created in the image of god and indeed paul says of course you know paul is all it's the love of christ for for his for his people for his church that has you know is the great fulcrum around which everything is organized and so therefore if if if if a man and a woman are to live together then that must be what it modeled on the christ as as the image of the man and the church the image of a woman and that gives in the context of of of roman understandings about sexuality an unbelievable dignity to both but an enormous pressure on the man because in in in in rome the binary is not male or female it's the female citizen and everybody else and the female citizen is perfectly entitled to do whatever he needs to do to get rid of his seminal fluid in any orifice of any inferior in his household that he likes male or female it doesn't make any difference what their age are he can do whatever he likes to them and this is the assumption about sexuality of a society in which the gods are all rapists all the gods rape that's what they do and and so roman men rape and and and to to to to be a non-male citizen in uh in the roman world is constantly to be at the risk of rape and a world in which no one has any problem with this whatsoever and so what paul introduces to men you are like christ therefore you can't go around you know sodomizing the page boy or raping the the scullery maid you just can't do that that's not what jesus would do you know what would jesus do he certainly wouldn't do that and to women he's he's saying your bodies are sacred uh you know you men do not have the right to just jump you and use you and abuse you and of course this is demanding i mean you know really demanding on men who just kind of assume that they can do what they like but demanding on women as well because of course it you know it requires a a kind of consecration to the idea of the holy that that that in its own ways is demanding but is but that that's what underlies this unbelievable reconfiguring of sexual roles and an understanding of sex that kind of eats like an acid through the traditional roman understanding of sex and and which you know we are still the heirs to and that's that's what the me too movement demonstrates that we the the it doesn't you know the entire sexual revolution of the 60s which kind of idolized and enshrined figures like dianysus the dianysic the figure of the rock star having sex with as many underage group as you possibly could actually we it's we you know we're still sufficiently christian all of us progressives as well as believing christians that we don't want that world and the me too movement wouldn't work unless men as well as women basically subscribe to a fundamentally poor line understanding of of what proper sexual relations should be but again does that um does that understanding of sexual roles can it survive without the theology that underpinned it and there's a sense in which uh wokeness is a kind of a kind of hectoring without any theological strength behind it which is why i think so many people find it's true that it doesn't come with a sense of of you know this remarkable sense of of of the way in which a human's body is hardwired into an understanding of the divine and the supernatural that goes back to the creation and that's the the power that i think christians as well as as those who are not christians have lost because christianity in the west has kind of bled itself of of that sense i i think the you know so so throughout the ancient world there are many different schemes of of saying no to one's passions and one's appetites and you'll you'll find various religious things what what tends to as let me lay out this for you i think what what actually propels and compels people is in some sense a a higher golden vision towards which people aspire and in the in the in the wake of that laws and rules regarding appetites form and so for example you know pauline pauline restrictions comments to the corinthians about you know you ought not to lie with prostitutes um you know the kinds of things paul is trying to nuance with the with the corinthians all of that is in the service of there's this vision which is of christ himself and of aspiring to become such a thing it's in that wake that these sexual ethics and all of this all of all of these actionable life uh rules are created because the the vision of course i mean i what you said earlier in the conversation which was this um this blasphemous parody of the worship of caesar of course you know paul says to the corinthians it's christ crucified which is you know foolishness to the greeks because you know here in which i think is you know at the heart of your book so here is this how can the vision of this one the the son of man which of course from daniel seven is this is this is this imperial hero who inherits a universal kingdom for all for everlasting he is the one who goes to the cross and and so what energizes the west and energizes you know it wasn't just that you know oh somehow celibacy is hotness because you know we've sort of sexed ourselves out that's certainly some of it but there's a there's a vision out there that compels people to undergo the sacrifices that vision can somehow be lost and in successive generations some of the habits which have generally been healthy and made sense at other levels sort of get maintained but i think your basic thesis is correct that once that vision is lost of the thing to which we strive the the it's just a matter of time when the rest of the scaffolding goes away i mean i'm talking personally here i'm not i'm not i believe you are talking um you know giving a kind of cool measured analysis of christian history which which is what i try to do in dominion i it's speaking personally um what i found in in researching the book the more i read it the more kind of animating i found it was a sense of how kind of radiantly potent christian theology was and it's not surprising that i should have done because of course it this is the most successful way for explaining humanity's relationship to the universe that that has ever been devised and it's been framed by some of the greatest and artists and poets and what i felt was um that things that i had been taught as a child at church the things you had to do i've just been told why you had to do them as as as rules and i kind of respect them i you know i'm sufficiently the the child of my childhood that i uh that that i tend to live by them but i you know i didn't have a real sense of of of why what the kind of impulses were for this these ways of seeing it and therefore i didn't really have a sense of how strange they were and how distinctive and how contingent and the more i kind of washed myself in the the kind of the the radiance of the kind of the the radiance of this astonishing tradition these astonishing this astonishing way of seeing the world the more these kind of the the more these assumptions came to came to life for me and i think that that's both a challenge and an opportunity for for for people who who want to teach that this is all true who want to to say this is all absolutely true because in a way we're simultaneously too familiar with the christian story and so we've become anesthetized to the the sense of the weirdness of it but at the same time we've bled it of a sense of of of the strangeness of the strangeness so it's simultaneously you know we've we've we've lost the sense of we it's it's familiar to us but at the same time we've lost the sense of we don't really understand it it's simultaneously familiar and strange and this is why i found writing the book such a a kind of transfigurative personal experience was that i found ah now i understand stuff and the more i i look at it the and and it's not like it's all kind of a positive they're kind of incredibly you know it's kind of quite frightening as well a lot of it but i think that's also part of my understanding is that actually the kind of jesus meek and mild stuff the the idea that god is nice the idea that um you know jesus was nice is really kind of inadequate to the the complexity of it all and the ferocity of it all and the challenge of it all and therefore the poetry and the majesty and the mystery of it all and it kind of you know i'm still very much in the process of synthesizing all this um but the sense of the power of it you know this i kind of warm my hands from at it what can i say i mean i kind of you know a contemporary it's a bit like getting your first apple product and you don't quite know how to use it and then you start to work out how to use it and then you discover there's all this other stuff and you wire it in and before you know it you're completely hardwired into it and you had no idea how on earth you function without it because it's all designed to go here am i being blasphemous and saying there's a kind of um there's a kind of power once you start buying into the fundamentals the principles then you discover that more and more and more of it makes sense however equally there is the challenge but there are so many different ways of making sense of it that you can never rest content with the idea that there is one single way so that's that seems to be the problem and i mean it's kind of interesting saying that that people that when they go back to church go back to catholicism or to orthodoxy because i do think that you know speaking of someone raised in a protestant tradition protestantism is i think part of the problem i think that you know there's much that i you know i find it i find kind of the emergence of protestantism i find the puritans people who traditionally i've been kind of taught to despise i find them very very inspiring and you know i find that the kind of honesty the the the um the kind of spiritual integrity of it so moving and powerful i find the idea of bunny and the pilgrims progress incredibly moving and powerful i find all very powerful but at the same time i feel that the there's a kind of almost dare i say graceless gracelessness perhaps not the emojis but the the the and again going back to this idea that i was saying earlier that there has to be a sense of of the mystery and perhaps that's what you get with the catholic and orthodox churches that you don't get with the spare ornate strip cleaned protestantism that that in a sense it's it it's protestantism has been so stripped of a sense of mystery that you might as well go the full Dawkins why not um well i don't know if that makes sense no it makes perfect sense and i mean i again i was struck by your book because i i've been watching the the the debates of course you know same-sex marriage is something that's just you know going into protestant denominations all over the place and people having to work these things out and i very quickly saw this is a this is a christendom civil war that there are there are there are competing aspects of christianity that are at play in these questions yeah but i i think when when you know it's not accidental that right at the center of the protestant reformation was the question of what are we doing when we gather around this table in obedience take my body drink my blood what on earth does that mean and why does that connect out with the rest of with the rest of our lives you know i was i was touched at the end of dominion you know talking about your aunt and and you know leslie leslie newbigan who i think is um you know these these issue if you know where to look people have been playing with these issues for quite a while now because they are not new and and they all these things happen but you know that the hurt the the church is the hermeneutic of the gospel and in many ways you know in a sense what you saw in the in the love of your aunt is is this vision of that there's something powerful there in that in that sacrificial in that sacrificial grace filled love that obviously one finds enormously compelling and beautiful and intriguing enough to pay way too much money for last year's hardware which you'll get from apple but in a really nice i mean i have to say the the the idea of of the kind of of pentecostal spirit the idea of pentecostal fire the idea of of of people being illumined and being sufficiently illumined that they suddenly decide slavery has to be abolished for instance i mean it seems it's an incredibly powerful instinct and i i watch from a distance with fascination pentecostalism um it doesn't really feature in in dominion uh but but i'm i'm i'm very interested in it and i'm partly interested in it because in a way it's with islamic radicalism it's the great convulsive transformative spiritual force that work in the world at the moment but for all the attention is islamic radicalism gets uh pentecostalism gets nothing but it's kind of burning away under the surface um so i that that that you know i'm really interested in that but but but counter to that i'm i'm just too um too undemonstrative and embarrassable to have anything to do with it we we have a a ruac uh just right just up the hill from where i lived and um i've gone there a couple of times and i just feel so embarrassed and everybody is swaying and dancing and speaking and i sit there rigid with embarrassment um and i just can't surrender to it um but equally um in terms of kind of discovering um a sense of of the strange and the beautiful i've basically gone to the opposite extreme which is um over the course of of uh writing dominion i went to a number of churches that i hoped would give me um you know a bit of flavoring because i i wanted to be respectful of the beliefs and convictions of the people that i was writing about so i would try to find churches that kind of mapped on to you know lutheran luther i was writing about luther go to a lutheran church and reform churches and so on and um and for um i it brought me to go to um the oldest church in london which is called saint bartholomew the great there's also saint bartholomew the lesser and it was founded by a man who was supposedly henry the first jester he went to rome and and prayed uh for to to to to to be healed and vowed that he would go back and found a hospital in a priory if he did and he duly did so he went back to london and he founded saint bartholomew's hospital which still stands to this day and he founded these two churches and um the the church was then at the reformation was stripped the priory was closed down and um in due course what had been the lady chapel was turned into a printers and among the people who worked in that printers was benjamin franklin so you have almost the entire history of dominion you have you know the papal revolution you have the medieval church you have the reformation uh you have the enlightenment um but the church goes and it's it's a kind of fusion of of of the medieval and the high anglican so you have um incense you have the angelus you have the lady chapel has been restored equally you have the king james bible you have the book of common prayer you have reformed theology and it's just fantastic and it gives me a sense of of of the kind of beauty and the and the strangeness and the the poetry of it um so i think that's for me rather than the ruac but i can kind of feel the power of the ruac as well yeah well pentecostalism is basically a culture slide along all of these issues it's a it's a denial of modernity and you know modernists are trying to have apologetics to argue things in modernity to prove this and that pentecostals just say you know be filled with the spirit so so incredible power there i think there is there well that is that is in fact as you say that is the power that is the the reason it's it doesn't get any attention like islamic fundamentalism is because they are more or less in alignment with the moral you know the moral landscape that the west has been in and so it goes under the radar yeah so what what are you i know i know you know i've got to i've got to let you go what kinds of things are you thinking about in terms of the future for for working on because these things are not accidental well i at the moment i've gone right back to my roots and i'm translating satanius's 12 lives of the caesars for penguin classics which um will replace robert graves's so i'm doing it purely for the brand but of course it's it's and then after this i'm going to i've done um i've done rubicon who you mentioned that i did a book called dynasty about the um the julia claudians and the next book i'm doing after this uh is about the heyday of the roman empire so it's called pax but it will be a slightly ironic title because it's book ended by the titans' sack of jerusalem and then hadrian's war against the jews um but this is you know this is the world of of of the coliseum and of hadrian's wall and of pompey so i've got all that to come um and my ambition ultimately is to write an entire history of the fall of the rise and fall of the roman empire that will end with the um depopulation of rome in the sixth century so there's a moment when there's a siege and the whole of rome is depopulated and that that seems to be a good endpoint but of course it will also effectively be a history of the coming of christianity because um you probably won't remember but in rubicon there is um there's some some lines of virgil um from his the fourth echelon which describes um have a child we born and bring a reign of peace and virgin name checks a virgin and this was celebrated by christians both in antiquity and through the middle ages as a a prophecy of christ and they are very strange verses and i remember including them in rubicon as a prefiguring of what was to come um talking about the peace that augustus brings to the roman world i wanted to include them as a kind of a nudge and a wink that you know we know what's coming and then in uh and then in dynasty again christians feature we're seeing it through the eyes of they're seeing them through the eyes of nero who is who is um blaming them for the fire of rome and they're weird jewish cultists and that's all they are and then in the next one the next book they will appear uh when pliny the younger meets them and writes to the empatration to ask what he should be doing with them um and so it will go on but but but once i've done that my ambition is kind of to follow through some of the issues that i've left hanging in dominion and to look at the 60s in particular as the equivalent of the first decade of the reformation i think that that in time people will come to see the 60s as having an analogous significance i think that it's generated a great convulsive process of moral and ethical churn that is absolutely on the level with the reformation so i want to look at it in those terms which i don't think anyone has really done before people have written histories of the 60s but i i don't think they've put them quite in that context so that's what i that's what i'd like to do because i i fear i felt particularly by the time i was getting to the the the stuff about the 60s and the aftermath that i was just kind of scratching the surface really there's so much to write about uh and my sense of it's changing all the time as as the years turn by and are you know i mean that's the fascinating part one of the fascinations of history is this kaleidoscopic effect that the past changes it's not just the future that that that that is open and unstable it's the past as well and our understanding of the past is constantly changing depending on on how the future is developing and and i think that that seems to be clearly true of the 60s well i i i very much look forward to that book i thought your chapter um your chapter on the 60s i i thought i thought that chapter was a masterpiece i i i thought it was i thought it was tremendous i loved how you wove it through and um i've you know i i've very much um i've very much benefited from your work and i you know with with great excitement i'll look forward to your new projects coming out and uh and continue to um use your work and talk about your work and in my own project so i'm well thank you i thank you very much for your support which has meant a great deal to me over the past few months because because you know i it is a kind of terror incognito for me um the world of contemporary christianity um and i people have been very very welcoming and very encouraging and very kind and uh so i'm very grateful for that well thank you much and um i will let you uh it's it's it's evening already for you so um yeah i'm just gonna make supper so thank you very much and um i'll i'll probably post this tomorrow uh morning in california time and i'll send you the link and and once again keep keep doing what you're doing because i think i think it's helping i i don't know what you i don't know what your pastoral ambitions are but i think you are helping a lot of people sort through their stuff i have no pastoral ambitions well well your work i just have ambitions to to to write history um but if that has pastoral imp you know that's i'm very happy but there are there are thousands of people going through again what has been called a meaning crisis and like you say the past does change and we ourselves we derive our identity in many ways from the past and so working through these issues help helps people find a um find something to live towards and and that's no small contribution well i i it's lovely of you to say that um and obviously dominion in a way is a kind of personal pilgrimage for me as well it's it's been a process of trying to make sense of myself and the world the society the culture in which i live um so see if other people um feel similarly then obviously i'm thrilled that's it's happening and it'll continue thank you tom beautiful to talk to you thanks a lot bye have a good night