https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=TJ3azTRrtvA

 Hi, this is Paul and as promised last week I wanted to do a full commentary video on Tom Holland's conversation with Glenn Scrivner. Now I've been recording with OBS, which crashes sometimes, and I was recording directly in MP4 and I've lost a couple of files because of this, so no more recording in MP4. For those of you who pay attention to those kind of things, most of you don't. So let's get on with the video. Glenn opens this thing up with a... he doesn't bury the lead. Whoops. I have lost my faith as a liberal. I've lost my faith. I don't really believe in it. But in my gut I still do. I think Glenn has a real nice little opening here. Part of his reset series. Tom Holland. Back to the beginning, back to the book of Genesis and looking at that ancient origin story to see if the ancient text can still speak today. On reset we are going back to the beginning today with Tom Holland. He is the author of many books, including Dominion, The Making of the Western Mind. Tom Holland, thanks so much for joining us. Thanks very much for having me back. Hey yeah, we had a little chat I guess about three and a half thousand years ago, or November as it was known in the old money. Yeah, pre-COVID. And the lighting is much better on this video than the last one. The last one was a good conversation, but this is fun. And Tom Holland has a really, his bookshelf game is right up there at the top. Very long time ago. Pre-COVID, but it was post the launch of the hardback edition of Dominion. And now the paperback has come out. And I wanted to begin by asking you about the paperback cover, which I absolutely love. But it's such an interesting compare and contrast, I think, to the American. You know, I didn't know booksellers still did the hardcover paperback cover thing where the paperback cover is cheaper and you know, everything's been sort of disintermediated by Amazon now. But I do like that cover. I do like the cover. I do like the new cover. The UK covers and the American covers have always been a little bit different here. So that's of course the bookseller business. Contrast I think to the American cover of your book. You know, if you're... Now, Glenn's an Aussie. So yeah, he's taking digs at America. You know, these wayward colonies of the UK. Going to write a book about the influence of Christianity. One way of doing it would be the American way. And you show Salvador Dali's crucifixion and there is Christ kind of, you know, everything else is in his shadow. Whereas this is going for a very different approach. What are you trying to communicate with this kind of collage? The multiplicity of influences that Christianity's had and the way in which that influence is expressed in trends and in developments that perhaps people might not automatically think of as being Christian. So you have feminism, you have the Beatles, you have Martin Luther King, as well as more obvious symbols of Christianity, cathedrals and angels and so on. And also that you've got hints of the classical world that both influenced the development of Christianity and which Christianity very radically transformed. So I guess the collage on the front of the paperback is suggesting that this is a long story. And it's a pretty long book. This is tracing a long story. Whereas the American cover, as you say, features Dali's famous painting of Christ on the cross. And I guess that's equally making the same point that this is where it all begins. This is the kind of ground zero of this immense earthquake which you can trace out across time. But it's kind of a different emphasis, I guess. When Tom Holland first came to my attention, I'd read Rubicon years ago when I think I picked it up cheap at Audible and really enjoyed it. I've always enjoyed history. My undergrad degree was in history. But when he appeared on Unbelievable with N.T. Wright and they talked about the Apostle Paul and this depth charge in the ancient world. And of course, this all in the backdrop of Stephen Pinker and others who want to sort of say, well, the Enlightenment sort of put Christianity away. Now I've been listening to Will Durant's volume 10 of his enormous series, The Story of Civilization, and I've been in the 18th century French Enlightenment. And Voltaire really goes after the church. And in many ways, what happens in the West as a result of the Protestant Reformation is that states replace the church. And I just had a conversation with Job this morning and we talked about this a little bit and I'll probably post this video tomorrow because I try to sort of intersperse the conversations with the monologue or commentary videos. And you know, Voltaire and Rousseau remain sort of deists or Unitarian theists and they don't really slide all the way over into atheism. And what Voltaire really goes after is the church, the Roman Catholic Church. And of course, there's a very interesting relationship in France with Geneva, for example. John Calvin, of course, flees France and is a refugee in Geneva. And Geneva is full of French refugees. And so Voltaire and Rousseau sort of always hop back and forth over the border between Geneva and France. And so there's a lot going on there. And so again, part of what we're indebted to Tom Holland to is early on when I started making Jordan Peterson videos, one of the convictions I came to before I ever made YouTube was that the culture war in the West is a Christendom culture war, that both sides are armed and seeded by Christianity. Now that sounds strange because of course, Voltaire goes after the church and the Enlightenment was against superstition. But all of this is deeply embedded in the church. And as Tom Holland really brings out these questions of, you know, I was just this morning listening to Heather Hying and Brett Weinstein's podcast number 50. And I thought real hard about just making a hot take YouTube commentary on that, at least portions of that video today, because there's somebody emailed me and basically said, you know, the things that they're poking at, you've been taking a stick to lately. And that's about exactly right. But all of these are within Christendom. And as Jordan Peterson said to Susan Blackmore, when Justin Briarley is asking him, you know, yeah, Christian, it's the water that we're swimming in. Can't we recognize that? Of course, Tom Holland, basically, in his own journey back to 2016 and the I think it was his article in the New Statesman, where he basically gives us that lead that Glenn pretty much sends up to the front, where, yeah, I've left the Enlightenment faith and well, he's deconstructed that. Okay. The real question will be deconstructed into what? And this is where I think Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson are so interesting, not that they're necessarily providing answers about what we're evolving into with respect to the Christian faith, because the Christian faith is always reshaping in order to colonize and address its current culture. And I think they're sort of illuminating the background of what Christians are going to sort of colonize and move into and reshape. Now, some of this is always a deformity and some of this is probably reformation, but yeah, let's get back to it. For those who haven't yet read the book, obviously they need to go out and grab the paper back now, but what is the thesis in a nutshell? The thesis of the book is... The audio book is also excellent and Tom reads the beginning, the intro and the conclusion of the book, and so I very much recommend the audio book. Essentially... What is the thesis in a nutshell? The thesis of the book essentially is that Christianity is the most transformative and revolutionary ideology that has ever existed and that in its distinctively Western form, it continues to completely saturate the way that people in the West view the world, not just morally or ethically, but an issue as fundamental as how they... the things that they take for granted about how, say, sexuality operates, relations between men and women, how society is structured. This is my point about both sides of these culture wars fighting with Christian critiques, coming to that with Christian expectations, battling with Christian morals, but it's complex, and so they're both using different sides of Christianity to often come at each other. We wouldn't see gay marriage without Christianity, and that sounds... Whoa, what are you saying, Paul? We wouldn't see gay marriage without Christianity. We wouldn't see women's liberation without Christianity. Now there are very conservative and traditional Christians that say these movements are against, but I would say, okay, then your take on it is that these movements are heretical, but the same with Marxism. You don't understand the rise of Marxism without Christianity. Again, Christians might say that some of these are antithetical, but what Tom is noting is that all of these things are coming at us, and it's sort of like the culture war is a fight at the epigenetic layer. Which elements of the Bible do we turn on? I don't know a lot about this because I'm not a biologist, but from the little that I've read, basically what the epigenetic layer does is decide which genes to turn on and off, and I'm sure someone will correct that in the comments section. And that's sort of what happens in the culture. Now some elements of the culture, I've made this point again and again in my videos that the Bible was sort of left behind when it came to geology and biology and some certain aspects of history, but in the Cold War, it continued to function as a moral guide, and it was only after the 60s that begins to come apart, and then after 9-11 at the end of the Cold War when the American anxiety machine turns to resurgent Islam and certain forms of Islam that the celebrity atheists sort of awaken, and as Dr. Jim had said, I think they awaken because Tom Holland doesn't lose his faith in a vacuum here, just like Rhett and Link and others deconstructing from their evangelical form of Christianity or cradle Catholics who perhaps, like someone like Joe Biden, who continues to identify as Catholic, but is not going to toe the line in the church when it comes to contraception or even abortion. So there's a lot going on here, and these avenues of deconstruction are many, and they're all over the place. The nature of progress, all kinds of things that people might be tempted to take for granted and just assume exist out there in the sky, but aren't at all. They're very culturally contingent and they're very specifically bred of the deep roots that the West has in Christian history and theology. Where do you find people most objecting to that thesis? Where do you find people most considering their views to be neutral or obvious or universal, whereas I guess your argument is those things would be contingent on Christian history and how it's shaped us, but where do most people kind of trip up on this? Now, it's interesting that I've obviously watched this video a number of times, so I know where he's going to go with this, but part of my last video I did about Jordan Peterson, modernism invites people to imagine that they finally are just seeing the world as it is. And part of what's happened in terms of brain science and cognitive science is that everyone, not everyone, but the science is trying to force people to say, no, you're seeing through programming. And when Jordan Peterson talks to, it was interesting listening to Brett Weinstein mention Vancouver One, which I think was the most important of the four talks. The other talks didn't tend to break as much new ground. They had some good sound bites, but didn't break as much new ground as the Vancouver One talk, where, and it was interesting that Brett Weinstein hit on that same segment that really showed me God number one and God number two with Jordan and Sam. But there's modernism basically for all of its supposed intelligence that it brings to it, it brings that it affords itself, sort of says, well, we see the world as it is. Everyone thinks they see the world as it is. And I was just talking to Job and Job with the process of his deconstruction from enlightenment faith and his continued evolution into Christianity notes that, you know, now someone coming to him and wanting to talk him out of Christ's resurrection or out of belief in God, Job, just to him, it sounds, it's just crazy because what was so unbelievable to him before is now feels natively believable and vice versa. Well, what's with that? Well, we all see the world through code. We all see the world through, there's an a priori structure that Jordan Peterson talks about and there's the genetic layer and then the culture layer. And you, and it's sort of like someone imagining that they can, I think I've got one sitting here. It's, it's sort of like someone imagining that, well, if I put this, just cause a little avalanche. If I put this camera in front of the camera, I used to take my videos with, if I put this camera in front of my car, then my car can see the road. And it wasn't until they slapped cameras on things that, no, this is just taking in light. And I just bought a, bought a new car and got rid of an 18 year old and a 15 year old car. I don't go through cars that fast, but bought a new car. Sorry for the disruption. That was my mother calling me. My sister, my older sister was in surgery and my mother called me when my father died in 2013 and then called me when my sister died in 2018. And then I see my mother calling when my sister's in surgery. It was like, I better answer that phone. So that's why I kind of got off the line quickly, but where were we? Well, one of the inspirations for writing this book was an event I did in the wake of a previous book called In the Sh** in my sister's vine, Shadow of the Sword, which was about the world of late antiquity and had at its climax, the emergence of Islam. And the argument of the book was essentially that the Muslim understanding of where Islam had come from was in its canonical account, quite late. So in Christian terms, the earliest life that we have of Mohammed is essentially kind of 200 years after his lifetime. So in Christian terms, that would be equivalent to say the Gnostic gospel, some of the Gnostic gospels. And what do the Gnostic gospels tell us about the lifetime of Jesus? Probably not very much. They tell us much more about what people say in around 200 AD thought. And so likewise, the argument of In the Shadow of the Sword was that the received accounts of Mohammed's life and how the Quran emerges tell us a lot about what Muslims thought in say the year 800, but very little probably about what was going on within the lifetime of Mohammed. And this was obviously to lots of Muslims, quite a controversial and sometimes upsetting thesis. Now even, and it's interesting, you can go back on the internet and find YouTube videos about people challenging Tom Holland on this and The Shadow of the Sword. It's very interesting book. And part of what I often see people saying is like, well, all religions are the same. It's like, no, not all religions are the same. Not all of their origin stories are all the same. Not all of the historical. Now, Tom Holland here is speaking about, he's acting like a modern historian, okay, an enlightenment historian. And so what modern historians try to get at is again, the physical layer, what happened. And that's usually what we mean. We mean the physical layer when we say something like what happened and what were the thoughts are and modern historiography tries to get at that. And his book caused a lot of irritation because he said, well, basically the, you know, unlike Christianity, its origin stories are quite old or they're not as close to the time the calendar dates as what happened there. And so that annoyed people. And I remember one Muslim in a talk I was giving saying, you know, why have you done this? You'd never do this to your own beliefs, your own, you know, if you think that they're myths, why? That you'd never do that to your own beliefs. It's like, Christianity has been doing this to its own beliefs for a very long time. I mean, the enlightenment was basically birthed on doing this to Christian beliefs. And you're not questioning your own myths. And I felt that that was a very germane question. And the values and assumptions that I had were essentially those of the enlightenment of kind of liberal secular humanism. It never crossed my mind, for instance, in writing in the shadow of the sword to think that God had actually spoken to Mohammed. You know, and I wasn't being neutral in thinking that that was the position of someone who's not a Muslim. So therefore, it's not a neutral position. It's interesting how pluralism and multiculturalism are often pointed to as elements of deconstruction. And now pluralism and multiculturalism are also deconstructing enlightenment thinking because again, there's been this habit that well, in modernism, I see a world of objects. That's Jordan Peterson's phraseology. And no, just like with, I have a new prop now. This is kind of fun, but what did I do with it? Where's my, oh, here it is. Okay. Just like with this camera, this camera isn't seeing anything. In order to see something, well, the camera isn't hooked up to anything right here. The, you know, my, even the camera that I'm using right now isn't seeing. And so what do we mean by seeing? We mean recognition. Now the, I'm using a Sony camera. There's a little box around my face that the, the camera has been programmed to read patterns. And so it picks up on my face and keeps my face in focus. And if I duck down, sometimes if I duck down, it grabs, it grabs the face here. And so, you know, this isn't modernism says, well, if I just put these on, then it will see. It's like, well, I can put this on my head and doesn't see anything. There's a, there's a whole lot of stuff that has to happen. And, and modernism sort of just blows through that naively and says, no, I just see, oh, okay. And so I, in, in the wake of that, I did think, well, what, you know, what are the beliefs that I hold dear? What are the values that I hold dear? What are the assumptions that I take for granted? And I thought, well, you know, I'll, I'll. In a sense, he was forced to see himself in a new light from the perspective of the other. Try and trace them back. As far as they will go. And it, it was already kind of clear to me that, that actually the, the, the enlightenment myth, the idea that, you know, there'd been a period of light in ancient Greece and then darkness, and then the light switch had gone on again with the enlightenment was mythical. And, and you know, when he said that, when I first watched this video, I thought, wow, he sees that clearly. And now suddenly I see it more clearly that, that many of the new atheists are people who are right now sort of the, with the white knuckle grasp on the, on the 18th century, please don't take Voltaire away from us. They're that's sort of their origin story that the Greeks and then the enlightenment and everything else is darkness and is like, oh, the story's a lot bigger than that. A restructure had gone on, you know, there'd been a period of light in ancient Greece and then darkness, and then the light switch had gone on again with the enlightenment. What was mythical, a restructuring, if you like, as it turned out, I think of, of, of Christian myths, of Christian ways of seeing the world. But one of the things that I wanted to set myself with dominion was basically to look at almost everything that I took for granted and say, well, how far back can I trace it? And invariably it went back not to the enlightenment and generally not to ancient Greece, although Greek philosophy has a huge, does indeed have a huge influence on Christian theology. But in the fundamentals, when I trace those threads back, they lead back to Christianity. And that was, that was why I wanted to write the book. Just as when I wrote In the Shadow of the Sword, the most retubative criticism came from Muslims who said, you know, this isn't a myth, this is true. So with this, with dominion, the most retubative criticism has tended to come with, with, with, from people who believe in, in, in, in the enlightenment myth, the idea that it all begins, or humanists who believe that their values are just kind of imminent and not culturally contingent, or can be traced back, you know, that they just exist everywhere. But I think that these are myths. And again, what does he mean by myth? Myth is a tricky word because myth is often used as a put down. Well, that's just a myth. In a sense, what we're saying here is the last video with Jordan Peterson and, and Susan Blackmore, we had, you know, religion S and religion W, you know, your religion W, the myth is sort of the, the narrative version of that, that, and it's really interesting because the myth, it's, does the story, is the story the myth, or does the story encode the myth? And does the story somehow contain the myth? And because you can, you can say, look at it in narrative form and say, well, the, there's the myth in there, or then you can kind of take it apart and put it, break it into rules or other kinds of things. But the story contains, communicates, in a sense, the, the myth is, is sort of like a virus in that it has to, you know, virus is just kind of out there, this little bit of coding and a lipid, you know, how much I've learned about viruses in the last six months, woohoo. But it's just this, you know, this, this DNA and a little lipid sack, and it needs a cell to kind of come into it. And it's the same way with a myth. It's the, the story has to connect onto our stories and, and, and then colonize. And nobody likes having, you know, people don't like to be told that their myths are mythical. Yes, yes. Well, I mean, speaking from a, from a, I mean, I found it unsettling as well. Sure. So I, I, I have sympathy. And, and this is what's, this is what's really interesting about Tom Holland and, and why I said to Job earlier today, I mean, so often I don't think of things until I, they come out of my mouth and it's like, oh, and perhaps this entire YouTube journey is to, just to give the other members of my consciousness Congress a way to bypass the gatekeeper and to get it out there. And, oh, well, I guess I really think that. And again, pose question to me, which just floored me. Do you think I believe in God? Poe and I hadn't spoken before that video. And I thought, given the fact that when your daughter with a medical situation, with the birth of your daughter, there was distress and you prayed. Yeah, I think you do. I think Jordan Peterson is right that, that, that we actually believe things that the, the person sitting in the consciousness chair doesn't necessarily know because they get out voted in terms of the, the rest of the consciousness Congress and a new faction takes over. So, so what's interesting about Tom Holland is in many ways we're watching, we're watching something birthed in real time with him. Now, obviously we just get little snippets here and there, but you know, Glenn has, Glenn spoke with him about a year ago and now Glenn is talking to him again. And so in some ways, Glenn is doing with Tom Holland, something similar to what, you know, I've done with Job. So had you been kind of mostly kind of brought up and formed with the sort of the Edward Gibbon myth that's, yeah, that basically. Yeah, yeah. I mean, I've said, I'm sure I told you this before, but I was, I was kind of brought up in the Church of England and went to Sunday school and so on, but was always more emotionally and indeed to a degree spiritually engaged by the gods of Greece and by the glamour and the potency and the charisma of Greece and Rome. And I did feel that, you know, when I shut my eyes and I thought about Greece, I would see blue skies or think of Imperial Rome and it's heyday, I would see blue skies. And then when I thought of the coming of Christianity, Constantine's conversion or whatever, it would be autumn. It would be drizzle. It would be rain. And that's kind of very synesthetic response that was kind of. And it's, I can't, I can't stop him in order to butt my nose in and interrupt him because I didn't have my mouse in the right place. So, well, if you, if you search on YouTube, you can find a Edward Gibbon treatment, a Will Durant, somebody Rocky C on YouTube has taken. So if you read Will Durant's books, you can find all of these little, one thing I like about his books is basically has all of these tiny little biographies strewn throughout his books. And so this guy's kind of taken the snippets from the audiobook and put them all together so you can hear all about Voltaire or all about Edward Gibbon and really interesting characters these are. Oh shoot, where was I going? Oh yeah, the, and, you know, growing up as a Protestant, you get these retellings of history too, where, well, the early churches, you know, there's your enlightenment period, the early church, the Christianity was pristine and pure. And then of course Constantine, well, there's the great fall. And then it's all darkness until the Reformation. And then it's all light again. And Christianity is restored. And son of a gun, if it doesn't look just like the Christian reform church or like the Lutheran Missouri Senate, the Missouri Senate Lutherans or the, and then the Azusa street mission happens and there it is. Now we're back here and, and we've gotten back to the real Jesus. And yeah, we've all got these, these versions, these myths flowing around amongst us. An emotional one, essentially, rooted in, in, in things that were not kind of necessarily intellectually grounded. But I did find when I read Gibbon, kind of 15, 16, that it provided absolutely the kind of intellectual cladding. Precocious lad to read Gibbon himself, the, you know, the, again, the, the treatment of Gibbon and his, and his work on the, on the fall of the Roman Empire. And you can find it on YouTube. It's, it's worth listening to. It's about 30 minutes. That it provided absolutely the kind of intellectual cladding for what was this gut impulse that, that, you know, the gray breath of the Galilean had, had turned the, the glamour and the charisma of the classical world to ash. And yes, that was, that was very much the kind of gut instinct I had. Yes. Which itself is, I guess, an inheritance of, of the. Well, and, and, you know, if, if you're not used to looking at history, you don't appreciate what historians are always doing. And so Edward Gibbon writing in his own time is basically what historians often do is you retell the old story in order to, well, you want to retell it in a way to discover something new, which is what happened with Tom Holland, but often we tell it in a way so that it lines up with the agenda we're trying to, to promote. And so with all of the drama around the New York Times 1619 project, well, it's, that's what historians do. You retell the story to create the myth to live within it. And so this is where, you know, when I listened to Brett and Heather Weinstein, that video is going to be seeping into this video. I just know it until I treat it directly, but there's so much thinking that history is just out there, but, but you don't, you know, it's, it's again, it's analogous to, does this camera see? Well, this camera doesn't see anything. Well, it's cause it's not hooked up to a computer, hook it up to a computer, run it into the intro that it doesn't see anything. What do you mean by seeing? And so was it true that, that, you know, slave holding changed the course of America? Oh yes, definitely. But the problem we have is all of these agendas are usually, you know, this is the one variable. And what a good historian does is try to, and consciousness forces us in to say, see one thing and historians hopefully open it up and say, well, there's actually many pieces coming into here. So then, you know, a bold claim like Tom Hollins that, well, Jesus of Nazareth, he was the world changer. And of course, Brett Weinstein was deeply involved in the whole, um, game B, was it game B or plan B movement where, well, we've got to somehow have something go viral to save the world. And so back when I was doing my sermon series on the Sermon on the Mount, that's part of why I looked at that, because if you want to look at how someone changed the world, look at Jesus and because he changed the world incredibly and dramatically. Well, so did Genghis Khan. So did Adolf Hitler. So did Joseph Stalin. So did FDR. But the crazy thing about Jesus was that, was not only that he did it and what he changed it into, but how he did it. He didn't write a book. He, you know, had 12 official disciples and maybe another 70 around or so. And he taught in, and I should really find this clip that it was what Tom, when I did my talk with Tom Holland, I should probably go through that and do some clips out of that. But you know, Jesus is just the most effective little storyteller the world has seen. Well, why would a storyteller like that be so effective in changing history? Again, it's because the virus thing is that the viruses of so many of Jesus' story just maps on into us. And the thing about it is there's so many different of us's over time because we're so deeply formed by our context and our story. And Jesus just keeps colonizing in many, many, many of them. Which itself is, I guess, an inheritance of the way that Christianity has shaped us. This is sort of a darkness and a light kind of moment. And in Edward Gibbon's telling of things, there is the vanquishing of an evil by the dawning of a light and that sort of stuff. But I guess, would you say that that itself is testimony to how deeply the Christian myth has worked its way into us? Well, and again, I was mentioning I was on the Bridges of Meaning Discord server and Andrea was there, Andrea with the bangs. And Andrea's super hero, superpower is basically when Edward Gibbon comes up, she would be like, okay, who was he again? What did he do? And I'm not an expert on Edward Gibbon, but again, doing all the reading, listening I'm doing of the Enlightenment period, if you know that period at higher resolution, well now suddenly both elements of the Enlightenment that have sort of filtered through to the 21st century are clear, but other elements of the Enlightenment that were very much that haven't filtered through, for example, Voltaire was not down with democracy at all. And many of these French philosophes, they were they were for they were for monarchy because they thought an enlightened monarch is the best form of government. Don't leave it up to people. They didn't trust people at all. Now people are like, oh, the people, the people know everything. It's kind of wonder, okay, Tom Jefferson, you know, where did you get some of these ideas? I think Gibbon himself, myth has the moment and in Edward Gibbon's telling of things, there is the vanquishing of an evil by the dawning of a light and that sort of stuff. But I guess, would you say that that itself is testimony to how deeply the Christian myth has kind of worked its way into us? I think Gibbon himself is, I mean, he was raised Protestant, he famously converted to Catholicism, then turned back to Protestantism and then became a kind of Enlightenment sage. But I think always remained in his gut a Protestant. And I think that the the Enlightenment is a kind of And again, a Protestant in the 18th century, especially in Europe, where it's deeply contested, is a very different thing from a Protestant today. So what does, what does Holland mean by a Protestant? A Protestantism was in that way, in some way, sort of Protestantism is so hard to talk about because what do Protestants have in common? What is the essence of Protestantism? But it was a lot of it because the Roman Catholic Church was so powerful and had been so tyrannical in many respects that, and I know some products, some Roman Catholics will get a little nervous, yeah, they did kill Jan Hus and they certainly would have killed Luther if they had the chance. So let's, let's, we're not, we're not saying they're on a level with Pol Pot or Stalin or Mao or Hitler. They didn't kill millions of people in these inquisitions, but they, but burning at the stake, and John Calvin, you know, burns her Vita set the stake. Let's, let's be fully honest with all of this stuff. And so it was a brutal age. I'm not trying to pick a fight between Protestants and Catholics, but to be Protestant at that period was, was sort of the way that you could stay up to date with all the new ideas. And, you know, in ways that, that some of the reformers very much would not have agreed with. And so Rousseau and Voltaire would in their turn, not only upset Roman Catholics, but they would upset, you know, Calvinists in Geneva. And so they would kind of keep hopping over the line depending on, you know, who was hating them most at the time. And then of course, all the, all these French philosophes didn't always get along with each other either. I think, and then became a kind of in-depth Catholicism and then turned back to Protestantism. And again, he did, Gibbon did when he was young. And so as a young man, he, how did this go? He converted to Catholicism when it was at Oxford and, and, and his father sort of had a fit. And then, you know, we're getting you out of that school and getting you into another school and then sort of converted back. But as, as, as Holland said here, really took in the enlightenment and, you know, it's helpful to remember that in some ways, the enlightenment is, you know, a few hundred years later, a redux of the Renaissance to some degree. And so they, they go back and they look at the classical period with a sort of awe and, and try to get at that. And you'd, you'd see with many of these figures, they'd, they'd have their pilgrimage to Rome, not in order to have their pilgrimage to Rome to see the Roman Catholic Church, but to see the statues and to see the art and to, and so, yes, you do have this recurrent fascination with the Greeks. And at one point Voltaire, who was, who was very much against war, you know, very much wanted the, the European powers to, to liberate Greece from the, the Ottoman Empire because, well, and, and, and, and, and sort of an enlightenment crusade. Now he didn't get his wish and eventually the, the Ottoman Empire became the sick man of Europe. But, you know, all of this history goes up to the First World War. And of course, in the First World War, these, this enlightenment vision that just people imagined, again, Job spoke about this well, and this will be, this will come later this week, my conversation with Job or early next week, because like I said, I've got a bunch of things buffered up. But, you know, the First World War, we're just imagining this, this grand synthesis between Christianity and the science and the technology. And, and that was getting manifest in all sorts of different ways. The European powers had their own disagreements about Christianity that comes out in that, that really interesting book by Philip Jenkins, The Great and Holy War, on the First World War, the religious aspect of it. And of course, it just, it just comes, just gets ground into the mud in France and Belgium. So, and then became, he is worked its way into us. I think Gibbon himself is, I mean, he, he, he was raised Protestant. He, he, he famously converted to Catholicism, then turned back to Protestantism, and then became a kind of enlightenment sage. But I think always remained in his gut a Protestant. And I think that the, the enlightenment is a kind of recalibration of the Protestant Reformation. I mean, that's why I don't think it's anything spectacularly new. And everything that. And I think I agree with Holland, and the more I'm reading of the 18th century, the more history I read. I'm not a professional historian like Tom Holland. And yeah, I've got a lot of books behind me, but he's, I mean, Tom Holland is the real deal. And he's a novelist. And so he, he writes his history. Tom Holland's a really special historian in that, you know, he's not teaching in a university. And so I'm sure with some historians, he would lose a little bit of status because of that. But he is taking the riches of history and, and writing them, you know, in a way that many of us can connect with. And so that way Holland has this own viral aspect with his books. Gibbon is, is doing in questioning the church in, in kind of mocking it as a source of superstition and idolatry is what. And that again, you get to the philosophes and get to enlightenment. That's what they major in. They're just attacking the church. Protestant reformers were doing to the Roman church, to the Catholic church. And that attitude towards idolatry and superstition is of course one that Christian missionaries in, you know, in the early middle ages are bringing when they go into the dripping woods of Saxony and Boniface. You know, right there, the dripping woods of Saxony, you know, he didn't have to, it's good. Chops down the tree that is sacred to, to Thunor in the way that Protestant reformers kind of overthrow statues of the Virgin or Gibbon sneers at the, at the stories of the saints written by Jerome. There is a kind of continuum there. And of course, ultimately it goes back before Christianity to the Hebrew prophets and to the legacy of Isaiah or Jeremiah, who are absolutely talking about bringing people who walk in darkness into light and who are dismissing the idols of Babylon or Egypt as, as, as mere stock and stone. And that is the, the, the great continuum that has run from the Jews, from, from, from, from, from, from, from, from, from the Babylonian exile, through the Jews of pre-Christian period into Christianity, through the reformation into the enlightenment, into the present. And this, you know, there's something very Barfieldian about this, about a history of consciousness. And, and to note when, when Jesus says something like, it's not what goes into your body that makes you clean or unseem clean, but comes out of it. How to maintain that in the same narrative thread as the Mosaic law. And in other words, and I think in many ways, this is what we're, this is what we're wrestling with today because with all of the formation, again, I was talking to Job and, you know, Job puts up a crucifix in his, you know, in his bedroom and his wife conceives and Job prays with a rosary. And so in this, in this, what we're doing is once again, wrestling with this, these polarities that, that Barfield nicely pulls out and says, okay, and how are we deconstructing and then reconstructing? And how did this Mosaic code form Israel? And then to Brett and Heather Weinstein, because, you know, Brett is so allergic to supernatural, you know, oh, protect me from the supernatural. But at the end of the day, supernatural. But at the same time, recognizing, well, something that the Jews were doing, well, maybe they didn't, well, maybe they didn't all believe this stuff, but they acted like they did when, well, I don't believe in a God, but we're still going to hold Seder and we're still going to have Bar Mitzvah and we're still going to, we're still going to practice these things, even though, and it's like, okay, which, which elements of your consciousness Congress or you're kind of giving us up, okay, you don't have to say you believe in any of these things because then you're going to lose status in the university, but you have to act as if you do. And that mere acting then creates in you, this is what I got to get at that Brett Weinstein video, that that creates in you a buffer, which, and I think, I think Colin puts his finger on it here because it sort of acts as, as sort of a way to, okay, it's heaven and earth, heaven and earth, heaven and earth. It's back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. And we, and we see this with Jesus and the game isn't done until all the layers, it's kind of like a Rubik's cube until all the cube is put right. And so we see this in the Hebrew prophets and we see Jesus and continuity with the prophets. And you know, last week, I, my sermon on the fifth commandment, honor your father and mother on one hand, Moses, you know, honor your father and mother, you have to honor your father and mother. That's deep in your culture. But then Jesus comes and says, unless you hate your father and mother, um, well, what do you mean hate? Well, discipleship comes first. Okay. So you've got, you've got Heather and Brett talking about the family and it's like, boy, boy, these, these two are sounding like evangelicals from the 1980s in some way. And of course they'd sort of be horrified, but no, the family is the basis of civilization. And it's like, well, my good, my goodness isn't, hadn't I heard Jerry Falwell senior say things like that. And you know, Dave Rubin becoming, you know, David Rubin basically becoming the second coming of Dan, of Dennis Prager and, but not writing the same kind of books. And, you know, and I'm watching these things happen and it's like, okay, we're moving back through these things. We're trying to get it onto your father and mother now, unless you, you know, I come first over your father and mother, let the dead bury their own dead. Again, watch my sermon on the fifth commandment. And, and it isn't, it isn't in sort of the simplistic way on and off in a binary way, but you can't lose the binary in that you still need the nuance. You still need the binary. It's got all the things have to come together. And again, I think it's really beautiful that Holland reaches all the way back to the Hebrew prophets and begins to notice the turning, the same turning that barfield noticed. So when through the Jews of the pre-Christian period into Christianity, through the Reformation, into the enlightenment, into the present. So when Richard Dawkins is often called evangelical, and he is, he's preaching good news. He's preaching good news that light has come, that if you let the light into your heart, into your mind, then you'll be purged of superstition and idolatry, that you will be elevated to a new understanding of the way that the cosmos functions. And this is, this is again, a very kind of culturally contingent thing to be preaching. I mean, why, why, where does this impulse to, to, to condemn superstition and proclaim the coming of light? Where does it originate? It's not, it's not, it's not a given. It's, it's something that is. And again, what do you mean? One person's superstition is another person's religion W, their worldview. And this is how the world works. And again, watch Tom Holland's, you know, were the Greeks religious? Well, they weren't, they weren't self-consciously religious in the way that religion S, the way that secular people look at religion. So, you know, Tom Holland is just, we're all coded. It's bread of the culture in which Richard Dawkins has emerged. Okay. So to steel man, Richard Dawkins, he comes back and he says, well, obviously Christianity had a role to play in the banishment of superstition and establishing enlightenment values and establishing a scientific method that wants to investigate the world and overturn superstition. But that's just one voice among a whole chorus of voices. What's so special about Christianity? Because it's a very, very distinctive way of, of understanding the world. And one of the things that, that, that is so intriguing about Western liberalism, Western secularism, Western humanism is that it has inherited from Christianity and to a sense transmuted the conviction that, that what it teaches is properly universal. So this is something that, that you don't get say in, in, in, in classical Indian cultures. You don't get it in China. This, this, this desire to propagate a particular way of seeing the world and spread it around the world so that everyone comes to share in it. And essentially what happened over the course of, of the imperial heyday of the West, which is now coming to an end is that- I should go back because, you know, maybe it would be a good question to ask Tom, because when I listened to Tom Wright, you know, the Roman ways, I mean, why, why were the Jews so obnoxious to the Romans? The Romans saw, you know, they were, they were tolerated because of a favor done for, for Julius Caesar, but the Roman way was the way the world is. And so the Greek ways and the Roman ways, now they weren't, they, they, they clearly weren't spread with that same kind of missionary enthusiasm that the apostle Paul and the New Testament church were, but, but there is, you know, there is a sense of, well, this is the best way to live. I want you to live this way too. Was that true of the Romans? I don't know. But what happened over the course of, of the imperial heyday of the West, which is now coming to an end, is that there were certain areas of the world where people could be conquered and their gods could be banished and their civilizations could be effectively either wiped out or so transmuted as to be unrecognizable. And their Christianity was planted unapologetically. So that's the case in North America, in South America, in Australia, in New Zealand. But there were other regions of the world where European Christians went and they found themselves confronted by civilizations that in many ways were vastly more sophisticated and ancient than their own. So India or China or Japan. And the way that Christians there exported their values was to pretend that, or indeed to assume that concepts that were absolutely bred of Christian theology, Christian history, like the notion of the secular, like the concept of human rights, could somehow be divorced from the culture that had bred them and would just kind of manifest everybody had them. And this was incredibly effective. So there's an Indian scholar, I quote in the book, who says that Christianization proceeds in two ways, through conversion, which is obvious, and through secularization, which is much less obvious. India was not converted to Christianity, but it was converted to secularism. That's why when the British leave, the Indian Republic is defined as a secular republic. Likewise, say in Turkey, Ataturk rejects Islam. He doesn't think that he's converting to Christianity, but he does basically convert to secularism. And as a token of that, he transforms the cathedral of Hagia Sophia that had been the great monument of Orthodox Christianity, had been converted into a mosque with the conquest of Constantinople. Ataturk converts this mosque into a museum, a neutral space. Now, I think that the conceit of the West has always been to assume, well, this is just the natural order of things. You know, all around the world, this is the way. It's kind of like the life cycle of a butterfly. You know, caterpillars become butterflies. Superstitious, backward people who worship gods become secularists. This happens everywhere. Now, again, maybe I'll have to do a montage, because when you listen to Bret Weinstein, well, we have to take all this Christian stuff, we've got to get rid of the supernatural. And it's like, Bret, listen to this guy right here in this little speech he gave right here. It just he's just he's just laying it out in front of us all. And we're not paying any attention. But but we are seeing now that that is a complete delusion. That this is a very, very culturally contingent assumption. And we see this summer where where in India, Modi has gone to Ayodhya, the city that supposedly was the birthplace of Rama, the great hero of the Ramayana, and which many Hindus have come to believe the Mughals deliberately built a mosque on the site, which led radical Hindus in the 90s to destroy that mosque. And Modi went this summer to lay the foundation stone of a great temple, which will be built to Rama on the site. And essentially, it's it's a statement that India is not a secular state preeminently, in Modi's opinion, it's a state that should properly be defined by by this vast inheritance of Hindu sculpture, Hindu scripture and tradition and practice and ritual, the kind of totality of of Hinduness, if you want, that Hinduism is not a religion in the in the way that the Protestant missionaries who and administrators who'd come with the British in the 18th century had assumed that to be Hindu is probably to, you know, it's not to practice a religion, it's to be Indian. That's essentially the kind of core assumption of Modi. And this is something that is obviously deeply threatening to the secular foundations of the Indian Republic and a reminder that, you know, the English language and cricket weren't the only legacies that the British left behind, which have endured and persisted after the era of the Raj. And likewise with in Istanbul, President Erdogan's reconsecration of the Museum of Hagia Sophia as the Mosque of Hagia Sophia is a very, very blatant statement that the era of the secular is over in Turkey, that this was this was not a kind of, you know, the secular in Turkey is not something neutral. It's an expression of an alien. And I would argue specifically Christian way of seeing the world that that gives all the more potency to the reconsecration of this great building that had once been a cathedral to Islam. Yes. Yes. Now, now what's going to be so interesting about this is, okay, so Brett's fighting the he's fighting the war of the American campus right here. But it's happening in Turkey, it's happening in India. You know, who knows what's going to happen in China? Who knows what's going to happen in China? What's going to happen in? I mean, if if you understand history through the lens that Tom Holland just laid out here, Brett Weinstein has bigger worries than what happens at little evergreen state, because essentially the worldview he's propagating is going away. And none of us quite know what the next religions will look like, because part of what religions do is is they don't just I mean, look at again, I've made this point before, if you look at the 911 terrorists, they weren't from the they weren't Bedouin that were somehow people who were not in one way or another touched by the flood of secularity and the colonial peat and the colonial period. They were the sons of middle class and upper class in the Islamic world that had been trained by Western universities, and yet flew planes into buildings shouting Allah Akbar. And, you know, when they when they when they raided Osama bin Laden and al Qaeda computers, they found modern day pornography. And it's like, OK, what are things going to look like moving forward? We have no idea. And this is where listening to, you know, watching the the wave that Jordan Peterson taught touched off touched off and listening to Tom Holland begin to piece these things together again as a again as a I'm going to be on I'm going to be in with a nuance form coming up. So just got a text from Rod. Tom Holland's sort of putting the pieces together here and. You know, he he isn't, say, drinking the Kool-Aid of the of the woke crowd who are I mean, James Lindsay is definitely right. I mean, that's exact. When I listened to James Lindsay, I thought, well, here's an atheist coming to exactly the same conclusions that I am with respect to the world. And I think that's the kind of thing that's going to be happening in the I thought, well, here's an atheist coming to exactly the same conclusions that I am with respect to what I see happening. But it's not just happening amongst the atheism plus crowd, it's happening amongst evangelicals and Roman Catholics and. An Islamic people and secular people, this wave is going through and unlike some others on the Internet. You know, whereas I have I have certainly share concerns with Bretton, Heather, with respect to that wave. Bret is right that, as he said in that video, that well, guess what? When they finally topple things, there isn't going to be a redistribution. Some pigs are going to be more equal than others. I mean, Orwell, Orwell watched this in the Spanish Civil War and figured it out and wrote clearly about it. And it's it's our American propensity to ignore history where we don't we don't teach our children these lessons very well. And so they have to get their history from Jordan Peterson and from YouTube. But this is where Tom Holland's voice is so important. And I think the church has to hear him because, well, there's a reason people are interested in orthodoxy right now. All right. But what is that reason? Can you just go back? Because the orthodox like Nathan Jacobs and Jonathan Paget are not just like the orthodox coming over from the old country. There's a mixing that's going on. And so when India lays the foundation for a new temple and Turkey reconstitute the Hagia Sophia as a as a mosque, you thought little inter-christendom culture war was big. Just read the history of Europe and you know, Voltaire and some of the French philosophes are joking about, you know, the Turk. And well, basically what World War One meant was many people imagined that that was going to be the end of Islam. It didn't end. It came back and so there's a lot going on here. So that is the waning of the Christian revolution in terms of geopolitics, in terms of India and in terms of Turkey. Where do you see the influence of Christianity waning here? Because I guess there's two ways of seeing some of the convulsions that are happening in the West. One is to see them as in a sense, hyper-Christian hyper-Protestant convulsions of the West. And the other is that you see the Christian hyper-Protestant convulsions of the same revolution and another way of seeing it is it's the waning of Christian influence on the West. Which is it? Yeah, well, I think that the person who really did get this right was Nietzsche. And Nietzsche said, you know, posed this question, can you have Christian values without Christian belief? And he also said, kind of riffing on Plato, that God is dead, but his corpse continues to send shadows on the walls of the cave. So it looks as though he's alive. And I think that the state of the West at the moment is, I mean, we I mean, we That plane went over Tom Holland's house, over into the recording, now through my recording, but I've heard that plane every time I listen to this thing. We're so Christian, and I think that the state of the West at the moment is, I mean, we're so Christian that almost everything we do remains kind of rooted in Christian assumptions. And again, Jordan Peterson, if you look at the commentary with Unbelievable with Susan Blackboard, Jordan Peterson makes the same comment. And yet, I think that the question remains open, that once you have generations that grow up that once you have generations that grow up that are not familiar with, not just with the practice of going to church, but with, I think, just as importantly, the kind of the basic biblical stories that have structured the way that people think for centuries and centuries in, say, in this country. And important to recognize that there are other new stories that are structuring them. And again, to what degree will Joseph Campbell, a la George Lucas and J.K. Rowling and J.R.R. Tolkien, you know, this is where Jonathan Peugeot's work comes so important because he's paying careful attention to storytelling. How will these stories that are in many ways derivative from the Bible, or will people just continue to watch crappy Netflix? In other Western countries. You are kind of depriving the roots of their fertilizer. And so the question becomes what happens to the blooms? And I don't really know the answer to that. I mean, it's an open question, I think. I don't know whether Nietzsche is going to be proved right or not. But I think that... And of course, Peterson says Nietzsche was proven right in the Nazis and in communism. And Holland is saying, well, is, you know, is this going to come to fruit in the West? You can see the way in which deprived of certain Christian orthodoxies and certain fundamental Christian narratives. Now, again, to... this is what happens when I have a video in my head and I'm talking about another video. Brett Weinstein's observation about Jewish practice, I think, was critically important because most of the time, Western academics will keep this at the level of ideas. And ideas are really important, but it's always both and. And of course, this is where Vervecky comes in, because it is both and. And it is going back and forth between heaven and earth. This inheritance of kind of Christian assumptions are starting to go off in what a traditional question might regard as slightly heretical directions. So one of your chapters in Dominion is entitled Woke. And so it seems to me like some of the convulsions in the West, you would say, a testimony to this revolutionary spirit that traces its roots back to Christianity. Is that, now that we've had an extra year since the hardback came out, is that still your sort of contention? Yes, I think that the word woke is a riff on the idea, obviously, on being awakened. And the idea that people fall asleep. First we have the airplane, now we have the cat. They fall into sin, basically, and therefore need to be woken up from that. And to wake up to the light, to the truth, to liberate themselves from the chains of oppression is fundamental to the history of Anglo-American Protestantism. There are cycles of what are called awakenings that ripple through Protestant Britain and Protestant America. And this summons is something that seems to happen every few generations. And I think it's clear that the civil rights movement was absolutely part of that. That was part of this cycle of awakenings. And it's why it had such an impact in Britain, because it's part of the cultural DNA. Having said that, I think that one of the things that's been striking about Black Lives Matter and the way that it's kind of erupted over the course of this summer, is that on the one hand, the Christian dynamics are absolutely evident. Most fundamentally, there is the deep-rooted assumption that those who suffer oppression should be freed, should be liberated. And the narratives that underlie that most obviously are the Exodus narrative and the narrative of Christ rising from death and casting off the chains of death. And those were the stories that inspired and motivated Martin Luther King, for instance. And you can see them, they're still fundamental. The influence of those stories remains absolutely manifest. That's why people went out on the streets, because they felt that these were simply true. And again, why did the death of an innocent man put to death by the apparatus of a kind of imperial power have such an impact? Why did somebody crying, I can't breathe, have this impact? Well, at the heart of Western civilization, for centuries and centuries and centuries, has existed the figure of someone suffering an unjust death, dying because he couldn't breathe. And again, if you listen to Peugeot on George Floyd, Peugeot makes exactly the same comment. So the ripples that are set out from these are very, very profound. The difference, though, between this and again, this. I mean, his point here is that Jesus recoded the world and it happened. If you think about what people are, we're these non-player characters, but we get recoded by others. And so Jesus just and this happens. This happens. You know, I was thinking about that again. We are coded by our parents. We watch them, how they do. And we don't even know we're being coded. But again, you go back to my sermon on the Fifth Commandment, our parents are the most godlike neighbors we have. They're our first neighbors and the most godlike neighbors because they code us. They share if we are being raised by our biological parents, they share their biology with us. And then they share their culture code with us. And again, it's not just a copy machine or even DNA replication. And that's why the meme imagery is fairly low resolution because the coding is just so expansive and so subtle. And so what Jesus basically does is slip new code into the world. And by billions of billions of people watching each other, it gets transmitted from person to person. And the coding not only codes us as individuals, but begins to code us as principalities, as collective individuals, and as nations and families and groups and people. And well, how does Jesus do this? When I can't see him, well, blessed are you who believe who have never seen. Well, it's the stories and it's how Jesus' stories play on the other stories. And it's just layer after layer after layer after layer. And so Brett and Heather are like, well, I'm not Christian. And Jordan Peterson scoffs like, oh, come on. You're not that naive about the amount of coding that you're the amount of code that you're running as compared to all the other people out there. And Tim Keller has this great illustration that I read in one of my videos from his book on preaching where, you know, he compares, let's say a Viking to somebody walking down the street of New York City today. And, you know, with respect to sexuality, we're just coded through and through, and we don't even know we're being coded. And the civil rights movement is that this has not been overtly Christian. And indeed, in many cases has been kind of antithetical to Christianity, has seen Christianity as a kind of part of white oppression. And so that. And again, Ren Girard. Well, the only thing they have at hand to attack Christianity with is Christianity itself. And that's well, then what are we doing? Well, we're working through the narratives together and we're actually producing the coding as we're having these conversations. And again, maybe if we can sometimes it takes heat and heat is the catalyst by which coding happens. And in many ways, the. You know, what happens with the Nazis is that there's all this slow simmering of eugenics and and all of those ideas. And then the Nazis sort of come up and everyone's like, oh, we don't want that coding and down. And then communism comes. But it seems we we didn't those of us in the West who didn't live under communism didn't get enough of their coding. So then again, to have Heather Highing reading a book by Rod Dreher. And if you've read Rod Dreher's blogs over the last five, six years, as I have, it's like, wow, the world has gotten really strange as as as Heather Highing reads Rod Dreher. Wow. It means that the relationship of the assumptions that govern Black Lives Matter, although they're deeply rooted in kind of a Christian seed bed, are not necessarily anchored in them. That again, Holland, they're they're deeply rooted, but they're not anchored in them. And this is why this is why Holland is I mean, Peterson had the potency of a preacher. There's a little nice alliteration. But but Holland has the the skills of a novelist, because again, if you go back to my conversation with him, I wanted to dig into his life before this. And often when I talk to authors about this, they don't they want to get right to the book and they want to talk about the book because they're all excited about their ideas. But I I want to go back and I want to dig into okay, you what makes you tick? Why this idea? And because they're rooted in them, but not anchored by them. Oh, that's that's good, Tom. And the consequences of that, for instance, I think that one of the the very profound shifts since the 60s has been a reaction against the doctrine of original sin. And and again, in my talk with him, you know, what projects? And he said, you know, I've got these other things, but I want to write a book on the 60s. And I think he's he's exactly right. And I I'm already he hasn't written the book yet. And I'm already Hey, I got a preorder that sucker in the 60s. The idea that we are all born with sin was seen as as a kind of repellent. And so we've we've in a sense become plagiarism or Augustine's doctrine of original sin. Now the airplane's going over. You know, he formulated in the context of a disagreement with with with with a British theologian called plagiarism, who argued that we can we in a way we can become perfect through through our own efforts, but that it is possible to become perfectly virtuous. And I think that that there is a sense in which in its more radical manifestations, those who condemn sin in others are reluctant to contemplate that they too may share in sin. There is a kind of pelagian sense that it is possible to become virtuous, completely virtuous. And in a way, I think that the doctrine of original sin stands as as revealed as something that is profoundly democratic. Because if we're all sinners, then we're all at fault. And you can tell other people, you know, to take to take the beam out of their eye, but you should be aware of the fact that you have a motion in your eye as well. And if you don't have that, and if you don't have that, then then then you feel all the more qualified to sit in judgment on on on those who you feel have have failed to to kind of emancipate themselves from sin. And this gets into you can find. So when Tim Keller was really at his peak, you know, he's pastoring a church in New York City, but is pastoring a church from the Presbyterian Church in America. That's a denomination more conservative than my own. And so what's what's going on with the the gay question? And so there's a there's a Veritas forum video of of Tim Keller talking about if you just YouTube, Google, YouTube search, Tim Keller, homosexuality, that's the first video that comes up usually because he's having a a really good conversation with someone. And, you know, Keller basically says, well, it's not gay or straight that makes you, you know, gay won't send you to hell just like straight won't get you into heaven. And then Keller says it's self-righteousness. And see, right there, you can see how ideologies are crippled religions because Tom Holland rightly connects woke with Pelagian and says, oh, OK, just because I just because I acknowledge my privilege now I can it's like, oh, yeah, I've seen this. That's that's when I first saw that trick. I acknowledge my privilege. It's yeah, you're just like a Calvinist who says I'm totally depraved. I know that trick. I know that move. I've watched. I've done it. I've watched it. It's the same move. And it doesn't mean that any of the people that you're purporting to have mercy for and purporting to love in terms of you're not actually expecting you will sacrifice for the justice for others. You're expecting that these other people over here will sacrifice for the justice of others. You're just a middle man. And the self-righteousness. Oh, that's that's the thing. And that that Tim Keller used to pull out. Illustrate so wonderfully is that here's here's the problem is once once you see once you imagine you know the truth and once you kind of make that inside turn from I'm no longer part of the bad guys, I'm one of the good guys. Now suddenly you're setting yourself up with self-righteousness. And I'll tell you, nobody loves the self-righteous and Christianity is just too thoroughly embedded. And so in fact, these things are playing and all these little tripwires are in the culture. And again, if you've if you've watched this played out in Christian churches, it's like, okay, I can see what's coming next, because I've watched people do this just with different words and just with different illustrations. In a way, you then become the the the the the anti-theist stereotype of of a kind of persecuting judgmental person who refuses to accept that the person you're sitting in judgment with that you are you are you know you are bread of the set of the common stock of humanity. We're all in that sense, you know, in Augustinian terms, we all we all share in the same sin, we all share in the same fool. And this is where Holland is so western. And this is where he's, you know, so I've listened to a lot of orthodox and orthodoxy is very fashionable right now. And in many of the places I'm going, but this is where Holland is very western because, you know, he sees and reads Augustin, he says, Okay, I'm recognizing how Augustin is speaking to us here. So I say so. So that's that does seem to me one of the the the really, really significant changes since the 60s is is that a lot of the kind of virtue spirals that have happened since the 60s. They're rooted in deeply Christian assumptions. But because they've cast off the Christian doctrine of original sin, because they've cast off the overt acknowledgement and engagement with the doctrine as such, they're unaware of it. The risk is of a kind of judgmentalism and arrogance, I think. And I guess those those shackles sort of began to be thrown off in the Enlightenment, you had, you know, Rousseau, a man is born free, but everywhere is in chains. And therefore, the result is, I need to release this spark of liberty within me and disrupt the structures that are out there that are holding me. But that is kind of almost the photo negative of original sin, really. Well, and, you know, again, reading about Rousseau and a little bit of Rousseau, it's very interesting if you play off, say, Voltaire and Rousseau and, you know, the way Voltaire and Rousseau did not get along. And Rousseau was sort of the bad boy. And, you know, if you listen to Jordan Peterson on Rousseau, not, you know, Jordan Peterson has zero respect for Rousseau. But, you know, Rousseau kind of comes along and he's sort of the romanticism was a way for people to sort of reappropriate church. But of course, Rousseau becomes a Unitarian and really lays the roots for the, you know, the New England Transcendentalists and with that whole romanticism wave. So again, it's all these interconnected elements with so much nuance and fascinating. With the fallout of that. Yeah. Yeah. Let me read out. So in Dominion, you talk about the Declaration of Independence and, you know, what a wonderful statement of, you know, human rights. How long is my video going to be? Equality. You say that all men had been created equal and endowed with an inalienable right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. I'm glad you corrected them. It's not unalienable. You're right, Tom. It's inalienable rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. They were not remotely self-evident truths that most Americans believed they were owed less to philosophy than to the Bible. To the assurance given equally to Christians and Jews, to Protestants and Christians and Christians and Christians and Christians and Jews to Protestants and Catholics to Calvinists and Quakers. And again, what what Holland notes there is that these Bible stories encoded the culture so that when these ideas came about, this is self-evident. And again, you see that in Brett and Heather. Well, this morality, this is just self-evident. And these are people that would say, well, they're both highly educated people. They know something of the Bible stories, but both of them, you know, they talked in the video 50 a little bit about their their religious background. And so they're somewhat familiar with the Bible stories, but it's it's in the culture already that every human being was created in God's image, the truest and ultimate seed bed of even when if you ask someone and I get asked, I got asked it in the question and answer last week. Well, what does it mean by image? What do we mean by that? And again, this is where Peterson rushes in. Well, we we act it out, he says to Susan Blackmore, we act this out. Ask me to describe it analytically and I can't, but I acted out when you sneeze and I say God bless you. Or I acted out when I'm rushing somewhere and someone darts into the road and I break. I acted out all the time and we've all come to act it out together. And that's become the deep code in our culture. A code so deep we can't see it. It's like the deeper magic under under the table in which Aslan is killed. The American Republic, no matter what some of those who are used to Protestants and Catholics, Calvinists and Quakers, that every human being was created in God's image, the truest and ultimate seed bed of the American Republic, no matter what some of those who had composed its founding documents might have cared to think, was the book of Genesis. And to that I ask, really, what about the Stoics? What about Daists who were sort of founders of the American Republic who would not perhaps, you know, would claim not to be going back to Genesis, but would be drawing on more sort of classical sources for their belief in human rights and equality. What would you say to that? They're wrong. There was no concept of human rights in Greece or Rome. But that's the birthplace of democracy, Tom. Right, so this is a kind of perfect illustration of the way in which when we look back at the classical world, and this is one of the reasons why I wanted to write Dominion, what you see, what you look at, is viewed through a kind of smoke screen. And the particles that constitute that smoke screen are Christian. So it's incredibly difficult, I think, to kind of brush away that smoke screen, often because we don't even realize that the smoke screen is there. We don't even realize that what you're seeing is something that's kind of distorted. So democracy, clearly, it's a Greek word. And again, the philosophes, they were not down with democracy either. They wanted to, you know, have the king be more enlightened. Power of the demos, which we might translate as the people. And so we're tempted to think that something called democracy is there in ancient Greece that our modern democracies then pick up. And our idea of democracy, which is expressed, I mean, even though the founding fathers, of course, were finding a republic rather than specifically a democracy, but they assume that there are things called rights and that everyone shares in them. And they're saying this even though notoriously, women don't have the vote and black people are allowed to remain slaves under this constitution. And this is something, and this is a kind of great source of tension and stress that ultimately will lead to the American Republic tearing itself apart and collapsing into civil war. And it takes a very, very long time for these ideals, these democratic ideals, to be fulfilled. Many would argue that they still haven't been fulfilled properly to this day. But the idea that democracy is an expression of a kind of ideological notion of the rights of each individual is very, very deeply rooted. And so when we look back at ancient Athens, the criticism, it's the point that is almost invariably made is, well, yeah, it was a democracy for the Athenian men. Women didn't have the vote. You know, there were slaves, metics, foreigners didn't have the vote, which is entirely to see it through Christian glasses, Christian lenses, because that is not what democracy was to the Athenians. The Athenians were not saying that this is, that our way of government is an ideological one, rooted in abstract values. It's exactly the same answer that he gives to, were they religious? They're working the world. Abstract notions of rights, of individual rights. What the power of the Deimos expressed was a highly complex, subtle, emotionally grounded sense the Athenians had that they were bread of the soil, that they were autochthonous in the Greek word, that they were literally creatures who had emerged from the earth of Attica. And that they popped out of the ground like daisies. They'd done this as favorites of the gods and specifically of Athena. And that therefore, the Deimos, the body of the Athenian people, had, should have power because that was what the gods and Athena specifically had willed. And that in this kind of nexus of the divine, the earth, and the human, everyone who was bread of this soil, everyone who was a true-born Athenian, had duties to the soil and to the gods that they had emerged from. So men, it was their responsibility to fight, to sit in the assembly, to pass laws if they were required. Women had the responsibility above all of liaising with the gods. So if you go to the British Museum and you look at the Parthenon friezes, you'll see that it's women who lead the Panathenaic procession up to the Acropolis. It's women above all who mediate between the human and the divine. And that in the opinion of the Athenians is just as significant and just as important, in some ways more important role than for men sitting in the assembly casting their votes. The point is that democracy for the Athenians, democratia, is something that is expressive of a way of seeing the world that Christianity has radically, radically dissolved. So completely dissolved it, that we don't even recognise it when we see it. We think that it is about rights, about responsibility, you know, about individual rights, that kind of thing, ideological frameworks of the kind that we might see in a modern democracy. It's nothing of the kind. But because we're so Christianised, we can't recognise what it is that we're missing. And again and again, that is what happens when you look back at the classical world. We're so habituated to seeing the world through Christian lenses that we don't even recognise what it is that we're doing when we do that. Yes, yeah. We don't recognise how theological they were in what they were saying, but we also don't recognise how theological we are when we express beliefs in things like human rights. Well, but also you see, I mean, going back to atheism as a kind of logical endpoint of a strand of Protestant Christianity, we're tempted to look back at ancient Athens and ask, well, you know, did the Greeks really believe this stuff? Of course they didn't. We kind of assume that nobody really believes this stuff, that, you know, they're all philosophers and they all think it's nonsense, that the very idea that the gods exist is something, you know, is kind of an irrelevance. And so we can talk about Athens, you know, religion could be a kind of chapter in a book on the Greeks, but by and large we then move on to more secular stuff like voting or fighting or anything. And we don't recognise that this again is a deeply, deeply Christian idea. The idea that there is a secular space and that there is something called religion which exists to one side, and that the Greek religion is so patently ridiculous with all its stories of gods that no one could possibly have believed it. This is Protestantism writ large. And the fact that most historians of ancient Greece and that most people who write about it, you know, this is the model that they adopt, they probably don't think of themselves as Protestant historians, but that's exactly what they are. I mean, that's what I was. We laugh, we laugh, we're Protestants. Welcome to the family. I would love to go back and we will, we'll compare and contrast to sort of the Christian origins story and, you know, where we've come from according to Genesis one to three, with those sorts of more classical origin stories. But just on this point, it can be very difficult to disagree with your thesis, can't it, Tom? Because in some ways, you know, a critic of Christianity comes and they give some critique of Christianity and your response can be, how very Christian of you. Rene Girard's response to it, this is a response that's been making the point. You're using Christianity against other aspects of it. That's the whole point of a Christendom civil war. Is your thesis unfalsifiable? Or if not, what would falsify it? I mean, I think that it requires you first of all, I think, to question your own assumptions. You know, this is why I've written the book. I was questioning my own assumptions, asking, not allowing anything, saying, where does this come from? Where does this idea come from? How saturated is it in assumptions that I haven't acknowledged? It's kind of bias training, I suppose. I think that when you do that, you're forced to acknowledge, or at least I was forced to acknowledge, that it's actually very, very, very difficult to stand outside the Christian influence because essentially the West is Christian in the way that the Islamic world is Muslim. Well, and this is where, if you listen to Tom, let's see, what book was it? In one of his books, it was Dominion. He makes the point in Dominion that, you know, basically, oh, the colonialists, well, the colonialists did not only stop trading slaves themselves, but they stopped others from trading slaves. They stopped the slave trade. Well, how, how, how what of them for stopping the slave trade? Because, I mean, and I watch people do the same thing today. And so we've got to stop these African countries from discriminating against their gaze. Down with colonialism. It's like, what, do you not understand what colonialism is? You know, what if, what if India, what if in India, they, and again, this is out of Tom Holland's books, what if India, widows of powerful men start throwing themselves on the funeral pyres? Well, you say, well, that's, that's not going to happen. Well, why not? Residual Christianity in their culture from secularism, because, you know, okay, they're going to build this temple, but hasn't Christ already infected? And again, back to Nietzsche. Nietzsche looks around and says, Christ infected all of this and look to the Nazis, the Nazis, you know, again, I, it was a number of months ago when I was, you know, reading Holland, I was trying to get my head around that. Okay. The Nazis were antisemitic. Well, okay. But, you know, why, why all, why, why does everyone hate the Jews? Voltaire hated the Jews. That the French philosophes were plenty antisemitic. I mean, everybody wants to point the finger at, at Martin Luther. Fair enough. But Voltaire hated the Jews. Oh, what did the Nazis have against the Jews? And I read it and, and I start to discover, well, you know, maybe, I don't know how antisemitic Nietzsche was, but the Nazis basically looked around, the Jews started this mess and it's all unnatural. It's a radical green movement. That's Nazism. It's a radical green movement. We need to get, we need to get rid of states. And so if you read Timothy Snyder's books about, you know, basically the, the poor people who are stuck between Stalin and Hitler, Hitler's trying to get rid of states so that our natural Germanic toxic masculinity will crush you. And, and then, and the Stalinists are like, no, we've got to, we need the state now to really become repressive so that the state will dissolve away. And it's like, you're all, you're both nuts, but where does it come from? Oh, oh, it's the Jews. Why? Because they're the ones who started us along this line. Oh, now of course, a lot of the medieval Christian antisemitism, the whole nother story, but it's there. And the way that the radioactivity lingers in the air after a radiation leak, that it's just there. It's just, you breathe it. And it's not going to go away. That's the thing. I mean, you know, as, as someone who was pastoring a church of mostly boomers who are now, who are now dying of old age. And after church on Sunday, Rick and I, you know, what guy are going to make famous, Rick and I sit in our little thing. And Rick is always looking at what are other churches doing with live streaming? Maybe we can learn from them. And I'm just listening to the other preachers and watching these other churches live stream and think, what has happened to Christianity? This is just so bizarre. And I look at Tom Holland and I think, well, I'm, you know, I'm trying to know the future. We're leaning forward. And so I listen to Tom Holland. I listen to Jordan Peterson. It's okay. What's the next, what's the next, what does faith, what will faithfulness look like 20, 30 years from now? And as a pastor, what do I need to lean forward into? I don't know it, but I think when I look at this new wave of people coming into the church, okay, how does the church need to be ready for them? And how will they change the church? And then you can't really help it. Now, of course, there are ways to, you know, there are, there are very different ways of seeing the world. And, and, you know, what's happening in India gives you one example of that. I think what's happening in China gives you another. In our own European history, we have the example of the Nazis who absolutely repudiated not just doctrinal Christianity as the French revolutionaries had done, as the Russian revolutionaries had done, but some of the most fundamental tenets of Christianity, among which, you know, we talked about the image of Christ on the cross, that is about, that is a profoundly visual statement of the notion that the slave will conquer the master, that the tortured will conquer the torturer, that the oppressed will conquer the oppressor, which the Nazis regarded as ridiculous. Everything that the Nazis were about was to reject that. And also, of course, they rejected what you were just talking about, the idea of Genesis, that all human beings are created equally. You know, the Christian refinement in Paul that there is no dual Greek. The Nazis completely thought that there were differences between Jews and Greeks. And they launched genocide on the back of it. So we do have that example. And so if what is, if we want to know what an un-Christian world looks like, we can, for starters, look at the Third Reich. What is it? The Nazis thought what they were doing was right. They didn't sit down and say, you know, it's like the the Mitchel and Webb sketch, are we the baddies? They didn't think they were the baddies. They thought they were the goodies. They thought what they were doing was right for the German people. The fact that we have enshrined them. They thought they were doing what they were doing is right for the world. I mean, that's just for the German people, but for the world. Because if you could, I mean, again, read Timothy Snyder's books. I mean, we're going to send all the Jews to Madagascar. Okay. And the Poles, that was a Polish idea as well. Got all these Jews around, let's send them to Madagascar. But of course here, you know, 90 years later, this is history that we've forgotten, but they were going to fix the world by solving the Jewish problem. Well, what's the problem with the Jews? Well, the Jews are bringing all these ideas and we have to get back to nature. Well, what is nature? Nature is red in tooth and claw. So why are you so squeamish about it? As, you know, literally demonic, we don't need Satan because we've got Hitler. We don't need hell because we've got Auschwitz. We don't need devils because we've got the Nazis. But we regard them as diabolical because we bring Christian frames of reference to their ideologies. So in a sense, the shadows of the corpse of God on the wall of the cave, that's what the dread of Nazism is. The kind of the nightmare that there are Nazis lurking everywhere, waiting to take over, which is a huge part of contemporary liberal discourse is... And again, you can listen to Brett and Heather on that. And I think they're quite articulate about that. It seems to me clearly belongs to the deep, the lengthy Christian tradition, the anxiety that evil may triumph and that large numbers of people have given themselves up to evil, which you see manifest in the witch craze, in the Albert Jensen crusade and all kinds of things like that. We don't dread Satan anymore because Hitler has taken on the role of Satan, but we dread Hitler for the same reason that Christians dreaded Satan. So you've offered a very stark alternative to standing within the Christian tradition. You know, I mean, first of all, there's Nietzsche. Do you want to go that path? There's Hitler. Do you want to go that path? For those... Well, of course, you see, Nietzsche wrote, when Nietzsche wrote, he didn't know what was going to happen. He didn't, you know, but he says that the death of God will basically kind of bring about terrible convulsions, deeds of great horror. And he was, you know, I mean, he was right. And then of course, well, then we're going to have to create our own values. And again, in some ways, when you listen to Brett Weinstein, boy, I'm doing a commentary on that video. I'm not even playing it. You know, well, we're going to have to, we're going to have to do this without the supernatural stuff. And I'm just, I'm listening to this and I'm just thinking, dog on it. I'm going to see you two in church at some point. The Nazis, what the Nazis did depended on their repudiation of the fundamentals of Christian doctrine, even as, of course, it also drew on elements of it. So the traditions of anti-Semitism, the apocalyptic strain of, you know, the thousand year Reich, that, you know, there are clearly, even Nazism is flavored by the inheritance of Christianity, but it is the most radical attempt to reject Christianity that Europe has seen since, you know, since the time of Constantine. And again, look at Ross Douthat's, I suppose I could find it and play it right here in the middle. Hang on. And of course, I just saw that Jordan Peterson dropped a video right in the middle of this big, long video. Timing people timing. Anyway, here's Ross Douthat's comment, which is that one thing the professor was saying in talking about, in talking about the sort of intellectual, maybe academic political side of this is that at a moral level, it's heavily, you know, if this is paganism, it's a much more egalitarian focused form of paganism, right? Then, then. Now, again, this is he's responding to Stephen Smith's thesis, which is that, okay, what is paganism? And so Smith looks at, it says, basically, the disenchantment thesis has some real weak spots. And so what we want to do is re-understand paganism and secularism. And so let's understand paganism as Christianity as transcendent religion, paganism as imminent religion. And again, I think there's some real issues with that thesis, but it's also fruitful in revealing some of this. And so, you know, Nazism was a deep immanentism, a deep naturalism. And what the paganism that we associate with the much more hierarchical aristocratic societies of, of at least pre-Christian Rome. And one, one question that I have is, you know, when we talk about sort of de-Christianization or a pagan revolution, in certain ways, we live through one in the West, in the sense that late 19th and early 20th century Europe, not just sort of popular culture, but high culture as well, was pervaded with very explicit forms of neo-paganism in certain ways, up to and including, you know, W.B. Yeats and the fairies, right? I mean, this is not, fairies are a particular obsession of mine, but, but the, and, but it does, but since that ended where it ended, right, in National Socialism and everything associated with that, I wonder if there's sort of a permanent, maybe not permanent, but there's, I think there's a clear desire in some quarters to move beyond Christianity, but never move beyond Christianity in that way again. Do you think where sort of, I mean, you've, you've, you've written about sort of Nietzschean sort of flirtations and forays, and those are often on the alt-right or the far-right, but I mean, do you, do either of you think that's at all a fair description of sort of today's relationship with the aristocratic side or the hierarchical side or the cruel side of a sort of pagan turn? I guess, well, I think, yeah, probably that is a fair description of what a lot of people would like to do, but I guess something that's a point that I think is relevant to that and to this kind of, oh, make your own religion, you know, kind of boutique spirituality type of thing, you know, that we've been talking about is that that may be possible under certain circumstances and plausible. It might not be under all. I've been reading over the last couple of months some of the theologians around the early 20th century who were involved in the sort of fundamentalist modernist controversy, and I don't remember which one said this, but someone said during good times, Christians tend to favor the Greek side of their religion, and during bad times, they shift to the Hindu side, outside of their religion, and there's something about this kind of spirituality that it seems to me is available when things are relatively prosperous, you know, and people have their good life, you know, their job or their position in the university or whatever, and then they can go down and enjoy a little spirituality of this kind or another, but I'm not sure that's sustainable under other kinds of circumstances. I think there can be circumstances that can push things in the direction of something more of a choice between, and again, I think that something like the scientific naturalism or the full-blown Christianity or other kinds of transcendent religion are just more intellectually coherent and rigorous positions than this kind of mushy middle, fashion-known religion thing, and I'm not sure that things may not occur that might push us one way or the other. That's why I'm just skeptical that that kind of thing that can flourish now or at a time, you know, when most of the middle-class people and so forth that are probably doing relatively well off will necessarily be sustainable over the long haul. Tara, do you want a last word? Sure. Now, going back to sort of the 19th century model, I think it's really telling because in the, among the occultists of 19th century Europe, my doctorate was on this, I'm going to get really excited for a second. There was this kind of sense in which real occultism, real Satanism was contraposed with the sort of bourgeois alienation of modern life. Like a genre called He's Mose, which is written in 1891, was basically all about this sort of disaffected man who discovers Satanism but ultimately realizes that it's just like a bunch of people dressing up and there's no real Satanism and the real Satan is, you know, the emptiness of modern life, and sort of actual like theistic Satanism is almost coded as a kind of re-enchantment, like a desirable re-enchantment of a world in which like there really could be black masses and blood sacrifices. And I think similarly the sort of Nietzschean model that you brought up that I see in, you know, the Jordan Peterson slash all the way to the Bronze Age perverts of, I've got to get that in. I think she has Jordan Peterson dead wrong. There every talk of the world, a kind of a way in which this kind of cruel paganism or the sort of brutal paganism is coded as an opposition to an unenchanted modern life but one that that re-enchants for better, for worse, and I would think worse in my, I believe, the body, a biological hierarchy, you know, that is a kind of paganism of, you know, blood and lobster dominance and the idea that there is just like a real, there is something in our bodies, in our hierarchies, in nature that is enchanted but not necessarily good. And I think that as in the late 19th century, that model of like we're going to venerate nature as a kind of divine force because it's the only way that we're not going to end up in an alienated from our materialist technology driven lives. I think of it, I see it very much as the same thing. And that notwithstanding the horrible errors of the church in not repudiating Nazism sufficiently in, you know, in not excommunicating, you know, Nazi leaders in some ways going along with the Third Reich, you would say notwithstanding those inconsistencies, the Christianity, what are you pointing to at that point? What is it that is standing against Christianity, standing against Nazism because Christians in history collaborated with all sorts of evil all down through the ages. What are you boiling down to the kernel of truth that you identify as this is what Christianity is that actually opposes Nazism? Well, I think that there are two kind of pretty non-negotiable values, which are the ones that I said, the idea that we're all created equal and the idea that, you know, the first shall be last, the last shall be first, that Christ comes not as a conqueror but as a man's nail to a cross. That's interesting, you know, because when he said the first of the last month or something, okay, how is that connecting here? But Christ is the last because he's nailed to the cross and he will be first. I'm 50-something years old, I've been a minister and I never saw that connection. But are kind of two doctrines which remain fundamental to Western liberalism. Right. I mean, you know, where do they come from? They don't just magically appear. Right. And I think that Western liberalism is profoundly shaped by, it's kind of like the mirror image of what the Nazis did, but why do we find what the Nazis did so terrible? Because we are instinctively Christian. Yeah, yeah. And in the book and in the passage that I read out, you trace back the Declaration of Independence and this Declaration of Human Equality back to Genesis. What in particular are you thinking of from Genesis? Man, and obviously there are two different kind of stories that have been bundled up together in the Genesis narrative. One of which, in one of which the role of women is considerably inferior to that of men, but in the other men and women are equally created in the image of God. And that- I'm not sure I'd agree with his take on Genesis too, but- Gives to human beings an incredible dignity. If there is one God who has fashioned the entire cosmos and that God has created human beings in his image, then the dignity that accrues to that is common to all human beings. Right. And in the literature of the ancient Near East, the king might be said to be in the image of God, but suddenly you've got humanity, male and female. Yeah. Male and female. I mean, as everyone knows that there are all kinds of echoes of the Genesis narrative in Mesopotamian myth in particular, Canaanite myth. But in the Babylonian account for crucifixion, humans are created quite specifically to serve as- He meant in the Babylonian account of the creation. I know he's misspoke there. And I remember hearing that. Babylonian account of the crucifixion. What's that? Serves as slaves to the gods. In the Babylonian account for crucifixion, humans are created quite specifically to serve as slaves to the gods. The gods get tired of building temples, so they create humans to build the temples to them. That's not the role that humans have in the Genesis account. Humans are not created to be slaves. Humans are created to live in the image of God. Right. Right. It's very temple-like language throughout the Garden of Eden. Genesis 1 is a temple text. John Walton. Go ahead, Hank Cruz. You can continue to troll Esther. Yeah. Humanity has this sort of priestly role to work it and keep it, and that they are placed in God's most favored place. And therefore, yeah, emphatically not slaves in that way. Are there other things we can learn from Genesis chapters 1 to 3? Glenn's like, I got my reset thing going here. Can we get a little Cain and Abel and some more of these Genesis stories going on here? Preacher's got to work his angle. 3, do you think, as you think back to those origin stories? Well, one of the consequences of the Genesis story that has always intrigued me and led to the first kind of glimmerings of doubt that I had as a child is, of course, the way that it contradicts what we now know is the prehistory of this planet. That this is not how, this is not what happened. And we're not giving up our modernism. And Holland does it exactly right. And this is the point that I've made always. Christians are way more secular than they imagine, and secularists are way more Christian than they imagine. And as I tweeted out today, after watching Brett and Heather talk about this thing, secularists are sort of like, are religious in the way that white people don't have a culture. I mean, it may have a kind of quality of the truth of myth, but there's no place for the pre-Cambrian explosion or trilobites or dinosaurs in Genesis. And that was always an issue for me because I was obsessed by prehistory, and I would have large numbers of books which showed the sweep of life on earth. He's got a real book thing. And then I'd have illustrated Bibles and the challenge of matching them up, you know, was kind of difficult for me. But what I now recognize is that we would not have those prehistory books or those books detailing the immensity of geological time and the growth of life over the millions and millions of years if it weren't for Genesis, I think. Because what Genesis gives us is a sense that the world has a beginning and that time flows from that point forwards. And in the Christian Bible, Genesis is one book and Revelation is the other. So people who read the Christian Bible from cover to cover leave it with a sense that time moves in a single direction, that there is a beginning, Genesis, and that there is an endpoint that will come. And that in turn gives us a structure of time, you know, time's arrow. And again, this comes to saturate the assumptions of people in the West so thoroughly that they don't even think of it as being something, you know, just take it for granted. Even though in other cultures, in other civilizations, in other philosophies, the idea that time is a cycle, that it goes round and round and round, that there are cycles of creation and destruction. And now this is where we get into Protestantism, and you can get this from reading Charles Taylor because Taylor also notes that there's different qualities of time. There's sort of primeval time and there's, and you even have this in Protestantism because again, before Constantine, there was like the early church time and that was pure and then it's all lost. And so I think time is a very funny thing, but this sort of the arrow of time, linearity of time, one directionality of time. Again, this is all coded into us. It's very powerful. But if you have that sense that time is going around in a cycle, it's hard to make sense of, say, fossils in sedimentary rock. In a sense, to make sense of what the layers of sediment might tell us, the antiquity of rocks, what bones of giant monsters dug up out of quarries might reveal about the past, you need a sense of time which certainly in Europe has been given to us by Genesis and by the Bible. And again, that whole framework comes about in Europe bathed and immersed in Christianity. Which helps us not just with the scientific method, but I guess it helps us with all those rights and equality issues that we're speaking about. And we mentioned that Martin Luther King Jr., that the arc of history is long, but it bends towards justice as well is another, I guess, inheritance of that kind of Hebrew vision, do you think? Well, yeah, but... Hebrew, but again, you've got Daniel, you've got the resurrection. Again, I had a question and answer last Friday on this and got into some of this there. Hard to know, we're studying Job and our men's group and Job very much wants to go toe to toe with God before he dies. And a Christian would say, no, I'll go, I'll see God after I die. And it's just like the stark difference in how that story changes from, you know, from the, in the second temple period. But the Hebrew, yes, I mean, but of course, what the Old Testament completely teaches is that things go horribly wrong and that there are horrible smash ups. But yes, the idea that ultimately there is a divine plan and that all shall be well is there too. And that... And the New Testament remodulates, you know, this is what happens in the, in the dispensational theology of the 19th and 20th century. And again, it's not an accident that that comes about in that time, given what's been happening in philosophy that, well, now we've got to suddenly go back to the Old Testament and understand it literally and the kind of literalism that it applied to that. So, you know, the, the, the Al Apsa mosque has to be removed from the temple mountain. There needs to be a new Jewish temple there and they need to do new sacrifices and all this needs to happen. And it's like, oh, it continues to change. That's been the great, you know, that's, that's been the, the reassurance that, that the Bible provides is that no matter how terrible things are, God is good and God is all powerful. And therefore ultimately things will be good. But that is obviously requires a certain leap of faith. And so the, I think a lot of liberal agony at the moment is that, you know, since the end of the Cold War, there has been a kind of assumption that history has come to an end, that, that things can only get better. And in the absence of, of, of religious faith, there have been all kinds of sociological or physical, philosophical attempts to construct reasons for, for believing in that. But I think that, that, that now, it was so interesting in the absence of religious faith. Okay. Which religion are you talking about there, Tom? Religion S or religion W? Religion S in the absence of religion faith, religious faith, religion S. Well, religion W will have its way and those ideas will function religiously amongst us. And that's exactly what we're seeing now with the woke and with this new ascendant morality. In 2020, those attempts look pretty threadbare. Mm-hm. It becomes evident that actually there isn't some law woven into the fabric of, of, of, of human society that means that things will necessarily bend in a liberal direction. Things go horribly wrong. So ultimately to believe that things will be all right, again, kind of requires a leap of faith. And again, again, this is, this is kind of where, what, you know, what I, I, I kind of realized is that things that I had taken for granted were actually beliefs. Right. And require a leap of faith to believe in them. And to that extent, they remain Christian assumptions. Right, right. And speaking as a Christian minister, I would say it kind of requires you to look at that victim on the cross and to believe that he is the victor, to believe that's, that, that, and that somehow that is the path. And that somehow ultimate reality works out because, you know, the, the arc of history, we tend to think of the arc going that way. Actually, the arc goes down into the valley of shadow. Oh, look at, yes. And so, so when I look at Northrop Price, it go back to the University of Toronto, Northrop Price videos on the Bible. It says these, this is the, this is the story arc of biblical stories. This is the story arc. That's right. They don't, they don't just go up, they go down and then they go up. I was writing, I can't remember whether I talked about this the previous time you spoke, but when I was in the midst, when I was writing this, I went to a Yazidi town in northern Iraq that had just been liberated from the Islamic state. And, you know, people had been crucified there. And the people who'd done those crucifixions were a couple of miles away, within striking distance. And I remembered standing there in this place where people had suffered crucifixion and knowing that the people who'd done it were, you know, absolutely on my doorstep, on the doorstep and feeling this great abyss of kind of existential terror. Not just at the thought that men who could inflict such cruelties were, were as close as they were, but kind of broader terror at the idea of a world in which the cross did not signify what it signifies for me and for most people who were brought up in a western country. You know, you don't have to be a believing Christian to kind of subliminally have a sense that the cross is a good thing. That if you, you know, if you're lying injured and somebody turns up with a red cross on their uniform, that this is going to be good. And to think that actually that might all be delusion, that the cross might actually represent what it represented to the Romans, namely the right and the power of the powerful to torture to death those who were less powerful than them, was a kind of, it opened up a really terrifying existential abyss in front of me, which is why when I went back, I rewrote the opening of Dominion to talk about the crucifixion. And it's why at the very end of the book, I talk about that experience because I think that, you know, humanity can't bear too much reality. And I think that for us, in the West, humanity can't bear too much reality. But what is the humanity? Is it that facade of nice whereby we like to believe that we are deep down good and generous and self-giving and the realities are the realities, you know, it's, and again, it's like I've got Brett Weinstein on my mind because of that video. You know, Brett talks quite right about, quite correctly about these, you know, what happens to human beings when we sort of do not have enough to eat and do not feel secure? How do we behave towards one another? What do we do? What do we do to each other in order to to protect ourselves? Humanity can't take that much reality. Humanity can't bear too much reality. And I think that for us in the West, we don't want to think that maybe the torturer will win. And a huge part of, again, And this is where, again, Darwin and Nietzsche, in what in the materialist language does death not win? It always wins. It finally wins. And what does it take to believe that it won't win? Again, to go back to Black Lives Matter, I mean, that is a great convulsive expression of that. It's a kind of a group, it's a communal expression of horror, the idea that the torturer might win, that the slaver might win, that those who grind down the oppressed are our histories victors. And why do people think that? Where does that even come from, if not from Christianity? And you see that manifest, not just in what happened to the EDS, but in what's happening in China at the moment. Million people being targeted. Right. Yeah. And so what do we do with our minorities? What do we do with the least and the last and the last and the weak? We exclude them. He's got his preacher stuff down. We extinguish them. Christianity is just so unique in valorizing the victim, seeing him raised up so that the first shall be last and the last should be first. Right. Right. Yeah. It's Christ or the pit, Tom, isn't it? It's Christ or the pit. No, because, you know, I mean, there are, Roman civilization was not just about. There's some interesting editing moves in this video. I, you know, before, I usually listen to these videos. I don't watch them because there's not a lot to watch. And so I'm driving or I'm, you know, bathing or I'm doing things around the house. I'm always, you know, that's how I get all these videos. And it's like, you're using the webcam on that cheap, on that expensive map book air. They put the cheap old webcam in. Torturing people to death. I mean, Roman civilization was not just about torturing people to death. I mean, it was certainly a feature of it, but people lived and laughed and loved. And, you know, so that's not the totality of it. But I wouldn't want to live in a world without that assurance. And therefore there is that kind of leap of faith. I know we spoke back in November and I said lots of Christians praying for you, Tom, and you said, keep the prayers coming. So in the last year or so, where do you find yourself? So much cuts here, evangelists, that I am. It's like, all right, Tom, let's see if we can, let's see if we can get the money. Let's see if we get the money quote on air. Oh, my stand keeps going down. So good on you, Glenn. Do you consider, you know, that one on the cross? Do you think of that as a kind of a dead end in terms of the end of a story? You're in the valley of the shadow and that's that. Or do you think he might be a doorway through to hope and peace and joy? Doorway to hope and peace and joy. I'm a veteran deconstructionist. I hear that Christian language. I think, okay, what do you mean by that? What do we, what do we, what do we, I mean, I, you know, I do this to Tom Holland. I do it to Jordan Peterson. I do it to Brett Weinstein. I do this to myself. I'll say, here's all this Christian language that we have. What do I mean by this? What do we mean by this? And I'm always looking for, what do we really mean by it? What does it mean to act out? What does it mean to live out? And what does it mean to believe it or to not believe it? And do I or don't I? I think that, well, I've said that I've realized that all my, the kind of the liberal assumptions I had float on the faith, that without faith, they have no, no func, you know, they have no validity. And again, this is, okay, so your, your enlightenment belief is just as much a product of faith as Christians who think that Jesus rose from the dead. And I think that's exactly right. So essentially, I've, I have lost my faith as, you know, as a liberal, I've lost my faith. I don't really believe in it. But in my gut, I still do. I have no objective reason for thinking that anything that I thought as a liberal is true. I, you know, I don't believe that human rights objectively exist or anything like that. I don't. And again, okay, objectively, what do you mean by objectively? Um, you know, again, I'll have to, maybe I'll just have to get my talk. Maybe I'll put my, maybe I'll post my talk with Job up on the Discord before I have a chance to post it on the channel, because I know that's where a lot of the, my most ardent listeners hang out and chat. But we're, this is what he said right there is why I keep saying we're all sort of post-modern now. And I know, I know, um, Carl really bristles when I say that. Carl bristles anyway. It's just what Carl does. Because, because our, our, our beliefs, and this is what, this is what Charles Taylor gets into in his book, that, that we don't believe these things naively anymore. And so what, what Tom Holland's not only ver horizontal multiculturalism has given him, but because he's a historian, his vertical multiculturalism, he, he recognizes that he, he is code and he sees the world through code. And, and so that in some ways sets up the meaning crisis. But, but okay, well now I have to live with that because I know that's who I am and how then shall I live? You know, the old Francis Schaeffer question. I don't objectively think that there's anything in the arc of history that suggests that, um, the strong won't crush the, the weak. Um, that, that powerful states won't enslave parts of the population that they want to enslave. I mean, all of these things, I, I, you know, just, and so it does that open up a kind of existential abyss? Well, and once you, once you realize that, okay, so you might be the victim of a state and here in the West we've had things so good for so long. Well, we have our states to protect us from the other states, but at some point you realize, and again, I went here with Job with this, you know, you might be vulnerable and your little life may be snuffed out. And what does that mean then? What does then the resurrection mean? Kind of, but what it also does, and I'm speaking entirely for myself here. Um, who were you speaking for before? Is that because I now understand where my beliefs and values came from, that, that rather than just drown completely beneath a kind of despair, um, I can cling to stories. And I think that ultimately, um, the, the, the power of Christianity is expressed most potently through its stories. And those stories are not just in the New Testament, but, but in what Christians call the Old Testament as well. And those stories don't have to be literally true. So the Exodus doesn't have to be literally true. Okay. So now he's getting into the coding. So now he says, okay, I am coded. I get that. I admit it. I confess it. I am coded. I've been coded by the, the enlightenment. And now I am aware that I'm coded and I no longer see it. So now, even if I have a meaning crisis, to what degree I am an agent, and of course, Sam Harris is skeptical, but there's no other way than to, to act as if I'm an agent. So what, what is the code I want to run? You have to be a agent as well. And those stories don't have to be literally true. So the Exodus doesn't have to be literally true. So now he's talking as a modernist, literate, literate. What do we mean literally true? Well, the video I wanted to make for my church channel last week that I, you know, get, get into this question of the Bible and, and what are we talking about when we're using this language? Maybe I'll use a clip from this. I really want to clip up this video because there's so many good takeaways in it. True for the story itself, in my opinion, to be true. So I speaking as a modernist historian that tends to look at that one layer. I think that stories, how certain stories have such a power that you can surrender to. Power in what way? It's a coding power. That's what he's talking about. And how certain stories have such a power that you can surrender to them. And essentially, that's, that's what I feel that I'm doing is that I have surrendered to the truth of the stories and therefore of the, the kind of the poetry and the mythology that they express. And I'm happy to identify myself with the truth of those stories and to see them as true. Now, again, which, which video am I going to post first? This one or my talk with Job? Cause I've got Brent Weinstein in my head. I've got Job in my head. And now I've got Tom Holland in my head. And it's like, they're all coming together. So I'll post this one tomorrow. And then maybe Job the next day. But I've got a really good one from a young man, Gen Z perspective that I want to get out there too. In, in, in, in a kind of a moral, a poetic, a mythical sense. And I realized that the whole issue of, of whether I think they, you know, is, are they literally true? Did Moses literally part the Red Sea? I've just decided I'm not worrying about that. Yeah. Because I think, I think the power of those stories is sufficiently great that I can say, well, I'm going to believe in them. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. Wow. Wow. Yeah. If you're, if you're just listening, you should pull up the video at this point. You know, we're well into the video, but just, just watch his face carefully as he's processing this. It's, it's like the Truman show. Because I think, I think the power of those stories is sufficiently great that I can say, well, I'm going to believe in them. Yeah. Yeah. And, and, and, and what, what, what, what, what I, what I've kind of felt after four years of, of fairly intensive immersion in Christian writings and studying Christian lives is that essentially the beliefs that, that, that, that I hold as a liberal are, are when I try to think what the roots are, they, they seem anemic and uninteresting compared to the interest and the kind of the potency of, of the Christian mythography that gave birth to them. And I'd really rather have the poetry and the power and the myth than the kind of the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the pallid simulacrum, which is basically what I think I previously had. I will put. However, however, I mean, against that, I think. His consciousness Congress is working. That, and again, I speak entirely personally here. And I'm sure that this is my own, my own fault. You know, I haven't looked hard enough. Don't, don't, don't equivocate boldly. Go there, man. Come on. You can do it. But I felt that. We're cheering for you. Over the course of this year, the churches have been a let down. You don't work in churches, boy. Preachers know all about let down churches. I think that, that the experience, you know, and this is one of the most interesting parts of it, because right here with COVID, he's, he's, he's, he's trying to, and I'm not saying I haven't worked through. I mean, we're all doing this together because, okay, we, we understand the reality of the virus and we understand the reality of, of all of these pieces. And how do we actually piece it all together? And, and it, because it'd be Peterson's right. It's in life. It's in your action. It's in what you do every day that, that you finally piece it together. You know, the experience of, of, of pandemic, it, it sets you to asking, you know, why is this happening? It raises profound issues of, of theodicy. And there was one, there was one moment where I felt that a kind of answer was being given. It wasn't an explicit answer. It wasn't a kind of theological attempt to explain why did bad things happen or anything like that. But it was when the pope held an open air mass in St. Peter's square and he was socially distanced. It was just him. In the background, you had the bells of Rome clanging out and you had the whale of sirens dealing with the, the, the pandemic. And he prayed before an icon that had been sent from Constantinople to Gregory the Great. And Gregory the Great is in my book. And Gregory became pope at a time of plague. And he led processions and he prayed and the plague came to an end. And Gregory in turn had written a commentary on the book of Job. And Job, of course, is the Bible's most unsettling and profound attempt to answer the question that everyone who's going through the pandemic is asking now. And I felt watching that on a kind of live stream that we were, we were, we were going through things that previous generations had gone through and that, that, that, that in a sense the, the line that reached back from the pope in that square through the experience of plague in, in Gregory's Rome, back to the writing of Job and the, the, the, the kind of horrors of the world in which that book was written. But it was all kind of part of a continuum and that, and that if there was a God, then, then that was a kind of expression of the answer. Okay. If there is a God, okay, what do we mean by that question? Is it a super thing or is, is, is God someone we can relate to who hears our prayers? And, you know, I want to differentiate that because somebody wrote me a really good email about, well, Paul, when are you going to really turn on the personal thing here? And I am because you can't listen to Christians, ancient or modern, and not notice the, the absolute embeddedness of God number two in how we act. And, and, and can is, you know, Peterson says, well, that's a, that's probably a reasonable representation is an old man in the sky. Okay. Uh, but, but now when it comes down to a pandemic, okay, where, where are we? How, how does that work? Answers that were being given that, and it felt incredibly profound and comforting and unsettling in all kinds of ways that, that, um, you know, that I, that weren't to be found on, um, government health lines or, um, accounts about, you know, what we should do to, to stay healthy or how we should even help, you know, help others or anything like that, that it was, it was kind of cutting directly to the heart of what it is to be human in a world where these awful things happen and situating them in this vast cultural inheritance, of attempts to explain it in a certain way. And that, that we were therefore part of this continuum and there was a kind of comfort there that people had been there before us. Now, so I had that experience and I waited for more and I didn't get them. And I felt that, that, that, that the response of the churches was a kind of. Now, now he had, Tom had appeared on unbelievable to talk about the pandemic with, was it Michael Bird, an Australian scholar, very interesting conversation. And again, it's, you know, Tom is working through these things and I'm not saying I have the answers. I'm just saying we're all working through them. And so I don't, I have to say, Oh, Tom is working through them and someday he'll be like me. And I think Tom, I think Tom and Jordan Peterson are, are sort of out in front here, feeling their way forward and reporting from what they're feeling about the pandemic. And yeah, it gets so interesting because I look at, I look at Tom here and then we have, you know, someone in our, in our discord community who's been involved with the Bethel Redding church up there. He came down for a meetup. And of course that answer is, well, it's, you know, to, they're, they're, they're right on, although I don't know what Bethel Redding would do with Gregory the great praying and having the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, having the, having the virus go away or, you know, Copeland who, you know, blow the virus away. And you can find that on YouTube. So, so Holland is, is dealing with all of these issues of modernity right now as is getting beyond modernity. He's, he's dealing with, okay, how do we piece this world together again? It's, it's the Barfieldian question. It's, it's the Hebrew, it's the Hebrew prophets that say, you know, those idols are wood and stone and our God is a living God. And it's Jesus that says, it's not what you put into your mouth that, that makes, that defiles you. It's, it's what comes out of your mouth. What does that mean? And, and it's, it's all of these things. And so, and so Holland is, you know, he's, he's doing the work here. Pallid echo, and I waited for more and I didn't get them. And I felt that, that. And, and he says, you know, the church, the church is letting me down. You know, he's saying, okay, okay, I'm, I'm coming to the church and saying, all right, well, I'm listening. And he's got his ear out and he says, I'm not hearing anything that's helpful. And, and again, when I started on Jordan Peterson, it was for the same reason, because, oh yeah, I'm, I'm the one of the ones in church talking. And I see Jordan talking and it's like, you're being more helpful than I am. What does that say about me? What do I need to learn from you? And of course, a bunch of Christians are like, don't learn anything from him. Okay. I've heard, I've heard from, I've, I've listened to a lot of you guys for a long time. I want to listen to him a little bit more. And I want to listen to Tom Holland a little bit more. And, and, and again, it's, it's, it's Tom Holland isn't basically saying he's got the answers, but he's asking good questions. And one of the things that I learned, that I've learned as a pastor is pay very close attention to the good question askers. Because if, if you want any of the things, the riches that you believe yourself to have, you had better attend to those questions. And that's, you know, I, I do, you know, I do some criticizing of the ascendant morality and, and sort of the left and their stuff, but, but on the right and the conservatives, you know, I've got, I've got questions for them too. It's like, okay, well, okay. So here you believe you have all this stuff. You're not impressing those people with it. So how much stuff do you really have? And, and again, I don't know if it wasn't the question, the answer, but the Jesus smuggling thing, the heart of the Jesus smuggling thing is, is, is, is offering the pad answer. Oh, Jesus is the answer. And we know the answer. It's Jesus. Okay. Well, how is Jesus the answer? Well, well, we want you to pray and go to church and tithe and, and then Jesus will be the answer. Well, plenty of people are walking away from that. What kind of answer is it? And, and, and how is it? I mean, no, shouldn't ask those questions. No, we should ask those questions. We should pursue those questions. We should go after those questions with everything that we have and, and work them through fearlessly. That's what we should do. And so I, I'm not, I'm not bothered at all by someone like Tom, Tom Holland, who has, is, has deconstructed his enlightenment belief and now looks to the church and says, what do you have as, and he's unimpressed. And I think Christian ministers at that moment, just like with Jordan Peterson, at that moment should look at ourselves and say, why are we such lousy witnesses? Why are we doing so poorly? What have we want to say? We have the answer and then we put the answer out and people say, I don't think so. And of course, some of that is just the people themselves. It's just what people are like. But another part of that is maybe we should look at ourselves and say, maybe we're not doing our work. Maybe we're just continuing to regurgitate the same old thing to people. And again, it isn't necessarily a new thing, but, but maybe, you know, why is, you know, as Gandhi said, you know, I'm terribly fascinated by your Jesus, but your church is off putting. Okay. Well, maybe the church should look at itself and say, okay, what, what do we need to, what do we do? What do we need to, and here in this time of COVID, you know, churches have all this, oh, Christians, Christians stayed in the plague. Okay. Well, now we got a plague. Are we staying in it? Does that mean not wear masks? Does that mean close our churches? That mean open our churches? And the answers aren't easy, but the answers weren't easy centuries ago either. And so now it's our time. And so what do we do? We do the hard work and we listen to things like this and we ask ourselves, okay, what should we do? So I feel part of this continuum and there was a kind of comfort there that people had been there before us. Now, so I had that experience and I waited for more and I didn't get them. And I felt that, that, that, that the response of the churches was a kind of a pallid echo of, of public health announcements. And of course, terribly important for, for bishops and vickers and so on to, to, to give public health announcements. But I, I, you know, that's what public health officials are for. I've kind of feel the churches are there to, to, to give answers and to situate our, what's happening. And I, you know, immediately comes to mind Andrew Root's book, Pastor in the Secular Age, where he has this amazing chapter where he walks through exactly what, how the ministerial progret profession and the church has changed through these different phases of, and he's also walking through Charles Taylor's book, these different phases of history. And one of the, one of the things about the church though, is that they're all over the maps. You've got Pope Francis with his icon, you've got the Eastern Orthodox who are dealing with this. And I talked to David French, who's in, you know, Church of England down in, you know, a beautiful community down in the South of England. And, you know, you've got John MacArthur, who's, you know, taking Gavin Newsom to court. And we've got plenty of churches in Sacramento that the preachers are like, well, you'd better come to church and you'd better not wear a mask because this is a question of faith. And, and you've got churches all the way in the middle. And so we're, you know, and I, I simply assume you had, you had Christians in past ages. This is part of the distortion of history. We have Christians in past ages that manifest the menu of options then too. But, but I am not a menu of option. I am an individual and I have to make decisions. And again, back to the, the Jordan Petersen stuff in there that it's now suddenly my beliefs are manifest in the decisions that I make. In, in, in, in, in the context of this kind of weird, weird shit that they're teaching. And I haven't felt that, that I haven't. What would that look like though? What would that look like in any, I mean, obviously now Glenn's doing the right thing. Okay. That's another question. Go deeper. What more can I learn from you on this, Tom? He can explore it. The Pope in Rome can do that, that great theater, that great drama. What would, what would it look like in, for instance, an English setting or an Anglican setting? Goodness. I think that it, that it might be expressed through open air, open air services like the Pope did. George Woodfield? Yes. Uh, that an attempt to, to, to, to, to root what's happening in the, um, the cultural and the scriptural inheritance of, of, of, of what's gone before. And I think that's right. And at least that's what I'm trying to do. And you've, you know, those of you on my channel have had a chance to see my rough drafts at least, and the final drafts are over on the church channel. But I think that's right. To root, to root this in the bigger story. I mean, I haven't heard much. I've heard almost nothing about, um, you know, why this is happening, about what. About why this is happening. That's interesting. Because of course, you know, on the American scene, all this is happening because of the gaze, one side will say, or let's flip it around. This is happening because of racism. Uh, this is happening because of, you know, we've had too many automobiles and not enough climate change regulation. This is happening. I mean, there's lots of people who are going to propose an answer. This is happening because we've invaded the forest and somebody ate a funky bat. Um, this is happening because, you know, Trump didn't close the borders fast enough or Trump is too much of a racist or I mean, the why question, back to the why question. What does the Bible say about plagues? You know, there are an awful lot of plagues. Bible says this is happening because human beings rebelled against God and nature said, I'll do you one better, bucko. In the Bible. Um, and there's an awful lot of, of attempts by Christians to understand why plagues happen and what people should do in plagues. And this seems to me, you know, an incredibly valuable resource. And he mentions the book of Job. And again, we talked about the book of Job in our men's group. And what's amazing about the book of Job is that, of course, we're given the vision of the heavenly court and Satan coming and, and, and it's amazing that God in a sense banks his reputation and says, I'll allow my, I'll allow Job to carry my reputation for me. Wow. That's, that's, that's pretty bold there, Lord. Um, you're going to let a man, you're going to bank your, you're going to bank on a man. Yeah, I'm going to bank on a man. And then, you know, of course, Job has his ups and downs and his friends are after him. And then God says, all right, Job, you want your day in court? Try me on for size. When were you? When I laid out the heavens and I put my hand over my mouth and never at the end. Again, this is, I told the men's group, I'm just so captivated by this character that is the God of the Bible, captivated by that character because, you know, it's all by the way, I had a little wager going on in the heavenly court and I, I, I, I bet on you, Job, not on your wife, curse God and die. I bet on you, Job. And you did good. I did good. I spent just how many chapters, you know, pissing and moaning and arguing and, and yeah, it's okay, Job. It's okay, Job. And your friends, they didn't go so good. It's, it's not, it's not mere karma. The world is too complex for that. And something, you know, I'd much rather hear a bishop talk about that than, than, than kind of tell me to wash my hands. I mean, I know that washing hands is important, but I don't want to hear it from. You're a church, damn it. Be a church. And this, gosh, this has been something that I've heard again and again and again. And I remember when, you know, new sounds and drums and all, you know, Protestant churches were going all modern and, you know, we're, we're doing this to attract those younger people. The younger people would come in. If I want to hear that stuff, you don't, you certainly don't do it well. You know, there are professional magicians who do it well. I go to church, I want to hear a hymn. And so, but then church people are like, well, I kind of like these new songs and I want to sing them too. And so it's, it's all a bit of a mess from people who I would want to hear more from. I mean, they may have been doing this. And also, I mean, I, I, I had this odd kind of, during the lockdown, I read the Canterbury Tales and the great opening to the Canterbury Tales when Chaucer goes to a pub in April and he meets with all kinds of different people and he doesn't socially distance and he heads off on pilgrimage to Canterbury to the shrine of St. Thomas who heals the sick. And I've read it loads and loads of times before. And this time around, it moved me and struck me in ways that it had never done before because I suddenly realised that, of course, when Chaucer was writing that plague was endemic in London and much worse during the winter months as we're finding out now, you know, you kind of, you know, when plague is endemic, you, you dread the winter. And then when April comes, suddenly plague retreats and you can start meeting strangers in pubs again and then you go out, the joy of heading out, going to a shrine where God's power to cure and heal is manifest, you know, in a miraculous way. Bethel Redding, I mean, Benny Hinn, I mean, what's so, what's so funny in some of this is that, you know, T.H. Thurman's, when God speaks back, you know, a world-class anthropologist moves into a vineyard community. Stuff is accessible. It's been around. And if you're in the right Christian circles, you live in the midst of it. And it kind of inspired me to set off on a pilgrimage. So I'm midway through a pilgrimage to Canterbury. I'm not going there because I think that, you know, the shrine of St. Thomas is gone and Canterbury is now an Anglican cathedral, Protestant cathedral. You never know, Tom. I've seen miracles. I've seen miracles capture the most reluctant people's unawares. So the idea that you pray to saints for miracles is obviously not part of the fabric. But I think the kind of the impulse to, and I'm really in thinking of this now, to kind of take, to take a route along a route that other people have taken, to feel that you share in the experiences of people who have gone through something similar. The elephant is looking for his herd. And who have explained it in a certain way. And to do as they have done and to see whether you can find the source of comfort in the way that they did. I found very powerful. And I think that that's something. In some ways, Tom Holland finds what history is really for in this. That sense of communion with people in the past is something that Christianity perhaps better than any other framework for making sense of what's going on provides. Because it does, you know, it goes back before Christianity. That thread goes all the way back to the experience in the Hebrew scriptures of play. It's this vast kind of continuum, this consolation, this resource. And I didn't get the feeling that that, I think that that is something that the churches could provide or could draw attention to or could structure and haven't done. But then maybe they have been and I've missed it. I mean, I'm aware that it's kind of all slipped. I've been too busy living in the classical world and playing cricket all summer. Sounds nice. Glenn's thinking, how could I have gotten so lucky to get an interview like this? Good job, Glenn. You haven't been engaging with church politics, but you have been playing cricket. Dear me. Yeah, yeah. On the Sabbath too. Uh oh. Yeah, yeah. Well, these are prophetic words to finish with, Tom. And I do take, yeah, I do take them to heart and hope that many more Christians do. Especially us clergy folks. I've taken up so much of your time. You've been very generous with it. But I do hope that people will go out and get Dominion. Let's sell the book. Nobody's tried harder than me to sell this book, I'll tell you. The making of the Western Minds and put the thesis to the test. Figure out where this inheritance has come from and trace it back to its roots. I think you do a terrific job, Tom. And just personally, as a Christian, my heart was warmed, especially as you speak of the cross. And I think seeing the cross at the heart of all things, including human history, has done my faith a world of good. So I know that wasn't the intention to have Anglican ministers be warmed in the cockles of their hearts. That's never a bad thing. But it certainly has helped me. You made a quip about my church clothes the other day. I recommend it hardly to many people. But Tom Holland, thank you so much for joining us on Reset. Thanks very much for having me. All right, I'm going to be on Reset. I don't know if that's my video is not going to get anywhere as much attention as Tom's, and I'm sure my interview is not anything as good as Tom's. I just found this whole interview amazing. I got through it. So I got this over with, and now I get to watch the video that Jordan Peterson just put out. And someone just texted me and said, there's going to be another biblical series and my mind is blowing. And I want to do a video on the Brett and Heather thing. And I've got two Rando's conversations coming up this week and maybe an Esther conversation coming up this week. And I did a conversation with Joe, but I have a Gen Z video from last week. And I've got a question and answer video from last week, only an hour though. And, and, and, and, and life is good. So thank you for your time and attention.