https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=aFNvGb93-mQ

 Hi, this is Paul. Just today, Tom Holland, an interview with Tom Holland from Lockdown TV from Unheard dropped and it's a terrific interview and I want to do some commentary on it, so let's go. Now, with my last video when I did a commentary, and I've always had issues with sound with commentary, so I've had to do editing and things like that, hopefully to get the sound better than I have been, so hopefully this won't be an issue here. Tom Holland's been sort of on a Christmas roll. He has a podcast, which I think is very interesting. Tom Holland is in some ways the historian, however you want to categorize the current wave needs, and he says some things in this video that are absolutely Jordan Peterson-esque, even though if you go back and look at my interview with Tom Holland, he barely knew who Jordan Peterson was when I talked to him. So let's jump into this. The whole video is outstanding. I'm going to play most of it and comment on most of it probably. Hopefully no technical glitches. Right away it doesn't start. Here we go. Is this sort of Christian festival in Western democracies like the one we're living in? Do you sense that? Well, I mean, I think that anxiety about that is in itself a very Christian tradition. So it essentially, I mean, interestingly, in the early centuries, so early medieval period, scholars like B, great Anglo-Saxon scholar, is completely unconcerned by the echoes of the pagan. Now this is something really interesting for me because when he said this, I've read some of the Venerable B and he's a very interesting writer. And when he said this, I thought, wow, has Tom read much C.S. Lewis? Because this is, C.S. Lewis is in some ways the strangest saint for a lot of evangelical Christians, because evangelicals can tend to be really hyper about paganism. And C.S. Lewis was and he wasn't. And the way he was and he wasn't revealed sort of a high resolution view on, Lewis was of course a medievalist. And the large work he did, what he called the OHAL, the English, this English work on medieval literature from the 16th century, I mean, that's what Lewis did. And so Tom Holland is picking this up, but he's not getting it from Lewis. He's getting it from reading the primary sources where of course Lewis got it from. And so to sort of get, and this I think is a, this is why this current movement is in many ways a continuation of the process that got started in the Protestant Reformation. And we're working through, sort of in the words of Jordan Hall, we're working through some of the deep code here to figure out, okay, how does this world work? And the Protestant Reformation, the Enlightenment grab at certain answers. And now we're in a position where some of those institutions and answers are weaker. And so we take a step back and say, okay, how does the Christian and the classical and the pre-Christian really relate? Again, if you do any reading in the Protestant period, so much of that is trying to get an assessment because the Renaissance, in so many ways, the Renaissance sets the table for the Protestant Reformation. And it's all this grappling with these sorts of things. In Christian celebrations, so not just Christmas, but also Easter, which Bede says is named after a pagan goddess. He's not worried about this because it proves the triumph of Christianity over this pagan dispensation. There is no issue with the fact for Bede that Christmas is celebrated in the depths of winter as pagans have celebrated it because for Bede, the pagan celebrations in winter are just a kind of pallid foreshadowing of the truth of Christ's birth. And so therefore echoes of pagan, you know, it wasn't. That is so C.S. Lewis. That is C.S. Lewis. That is Tolkien. That's how they dealt with this question of Christian versus the classical period. And again, this is how Tom Holland has come into this. So in many ways, he's sort of following in Lewis's footsteps. An echo so much as a sort of advance. Yes, a kind of foreshadowing. But by the time you get to the Reformation in England, and you get Puritans in particular are very, very anxious about the way in which they see the Roman church as having failed to root up the brambles and nettles of paganism. And worse, in many ways, they think that... So they think it's... So they see all of the sort of angels and the Virgin Mary and all of these kind of other seeming deities, or complexify the sort of relationship between individual and... Now, Tom is about to correct him here. But the fact that he went there is completely indicative of where the enlightenment went. Because notice that the questioner here cut the line at, let's say, the natural supernatural boundary where secularism reaches it. But notice that Holland won't. And so this working through the boundaries and divisions of things is... What exactly does the Protestant Reformation complain about? Now, obviously, it sort of hems in the... Hems in the canon back to Scripture, and of course, a tiny little bit smaller Scripture. But it's so fascinating that the questioner here drew the line where he did, and now Holland's going to come in and correct. God, is that what they're upset about? They're not worried about the angels, and they're not worried about the Virgin Mary, because that's in Scripture. And Protestants are very keen on Scripture. You go to Scripture, basically, to know what's proper. It's all the other ecclesiastical things that they're upset about. It's all the other accretions. So it's the... Yeah, saints certainly, but also the general sense that at Christmas, the tradition of open house, of offering hospitality to people, of giving presents, all of which it seems to me clearly derived, and you can see this in the kind of early medieval traditions. So there's this tradition of generosity at Christmas that absolutely arises from the kind of imperatives of the way that Christians understand their duty to the poor. Puritans didn't like it. Now, again, it is so interesting because the questioner here is... He's doing what a good questioner should do. He is voicing the... He is anticipating the questions on the minds of the audience. And so notice it's the natural supernatural line. It's the sort of the hot take on what a Protestant is. Now, again, I really recommend the podcast on Christmas, and that's going to be an equal opportunity offender with some of my audience here. And this will get into where Tom Holland will go later in the video when the interviewer decides to pursue the question of Tom Holland's personal faith. This interview is so interesting on so many different levels. This is now my new favorite interview, at least since the Deling pod interview. But I think by the time you get to the 17th century, this sense has been blurred, and Puritans read about the way that the Romans celebrated their gods. Because now remember, the Protestant Reformation gets up to speed on the heels of the Renaissance, and Erasmus and others drag out ancient texts, at least the ones available to them, and the printing presses making more and more texts available. And they start to compare the Vulgate with the Greek texts that they have at hand. Again, you can read a lot of this in the wonderful book Fatal Discord. And so in a sense, Erasmus sets the table for Luther, and Luther takes it to places that Erasmus never wants to go. So that's all, of course, in the 16th century. Now you get into the 17th century, and so much more stuff has been on the move, and that's going to set up the 18th century, of course. So things are really getting up to speed in the 17th century, and you're going to get the someone, someone yesterday asked me about the Heideberg Catechism and the Belgian Confession and the Canons of Dort. And I noted how, you know, the difference between the Canons of Dort and the Heideberg Catechism and the Belgian Confession are quite crucial. They're coming, the Canons of Dort are coming at a very different time, and the kinds of issues that the Canons of Dort is preoccupied about is very different from the kinds of issues that you find, you know, that Guido de Bre and the preoccupation in the Belgian Confession is, you know, are Protestants Christians? And would the Emperor please relent in killing us? No, he will not. If we make a claim, a theological claim for Christianity, and of course the Heideberg Catechism is set there to replace the Roman Catholic Catechism as the main instrument for catechizing Christian youth and bringing people into the church. And so the, you know, what gets going now in the 17th century with the Protestants is there's a, many of the anxieties of the reformers are still there because the reformers and the Reformation is still a live cause, but, and the anti-Catholicism is obviously a live cause, and in many ways in England this stuff gets cooked up hotter than it does in, let's say, the Netherlands or Switzerland, and, yeah. And they draw the analogies, and they're nervous that actually these celebrations are being held not for Christian reasons, but for pagan reasons, and it's the Puritans really who are the first people to draw up this thesis that Christian celebrations derive from the pagan. Now, this is fascinating because video after video on YouTube in terms of the sport between atheists and Christians, that's the charge made by the atheist. Your Christian celebrations are just remanufactured pagan holidays, and notice how C.S. Lewis sort of, you know, takes all the energy of that and turns it around in his book, Miracles, for example, says, yes, of course they are. That is exactly what they are. They're just higher resolution. All of those were dreams of the world, and I think about Jordan Peterson in his first biblical series trying to describe what is it that's bubbling up from the poets and the artists? They're sort of dreams, and what comes in Christ is the myth made true, the myth made flesh. They're not much fun, these Puritans of the 17th century. How close to cancelling Christmas did they get? Well, okay, I mean, I think, I mean, that is the stereotype, and although Cromwell didn't cancel Christmas, this was the prohibition against Christmas festivities long preceded him in the kind of the early days of the Civil War from Parliament. The idea that Cromwell and the protectorate consisted of people rushing around, you know, stopping people having fun, cancelling everything, is absolutely a stereotype that continues to have enormous play, and I think has a kind of political resonance even to this day, because I think that, I think a huge reason why the government is so determined not to cancel Christmas, to allow people to have this kind of brief window of fun, is that they don't want to be cast as Cromwell, they don't want to be kind of cast as finger-wagging Purit. I think this is, this is, when I talked to Tom Holland in my interview, he talked about the fact that he had a number of projects he was working on, but one of the things he really wanted to work on is the history of the 60s, and if you listen to his podcast, he does his podcast with a historian who does some very interesting work in the history of the 60s, and so now we have these governments that, whereas let's say before the 60s, governments didn't mind embodying the authority, the old, the father authority, now we want our presidents to go on late night TV and yuck it up, and no, we don't, governments are all about fun because fun is good for, just amazing to watch these things come and go and go back and forth and stopping people having fun, but I think equally one of the fascinations of this strangest of Christmases is that actually it does bring you quite close to what the Puritans are worried about because just as people now who want to really rein in Christmas are doing it for the best of reasons, they were doing it because they think that it will save lives and it will be for the good of society as a whole, that's exactly the motivation of the Puritans. Puritans want to cancel Christmas not because they, you know, they want to have fun. Cromwell was a great enthusiast for music and for dancing, I mean, he was aware that the good things in life are good, but he was, Puritans were anxious that celebrating Christmas as they saw it in a pagan way would doom those who did it to eternal death, and so they were worried. Now this is where secularity gets very interesting because of course the Puritans are painting on a far larger canvas and once you restrict the canvas within sort of the iron box of the secular where, you know, we have no knowledge outside of the, you know, before conception or birth or after death and there's no heaven and so now all this must be confined here and this is why I've talked about before about the fact when you try to bring down heaven you pull up hell, the secular frame intensifies and of course Miroslav Volf writes about that in his experiences in the deconstruction of Yugoslavia after the fall of communism where now in, if you have sort of an afterlife and a god who judges perfectly in all of this, your enemies will face the judgment of god and of course this judgment also says, vengeance is mine, saith the lord, I will repay, and so okay, let god repay. I don't have to, I don't have to get blood on my hands, but if you no longer have that broader canvas in order to paint the story upon, what we see in the secular frame is an intensification because all condemnation and all reward and pleasure must fit into this little frame of a biologically limited human life and so in this way you get strange heirs of the Puritans whereas the Puritans are very concerned about the eternal damnation and the souls of the people, well now you know we must preserve all of these lives at all cost and obviously the cost of that is going to put pressure and might even be the thing that finally exhausts humanism where life once again as it did in the ancient world gets very cheap. For their spiritual health rather than their physical health. But it's about health in both cases, it's about a desire to you know not needlessly see people lost to death and I think that the experience of this Christmas perhaps enables us to have a kind of sense of where the Puritans were coming from in a kind of a more emotive way than perhaps we've had for centuries. I mean it's an amazing parallel, you know the Puritans didn't have social media but had they one can sort of imagine that they would have been quite militant on social media and quite quick to judge and to prosecute virtue in the kind of public square. Now if you listen to Holland I think it was on his podcast where he talks about Luther. Luther killed it in his social media of his day because of course the printing press was new and it's the pamphlets and it's the woodcuts and those were the social media and Luther just say I'm getting Holland confused with this book that Holland mentioned in one of his I think it was in his podcast a book on or maybe it was on his Twitter stream I don't know but this the book on the reformations I mean Luther was just Luther would have killed it on Twitter. Should we look at those people who are most sort of censorious and moral high groundish today, most clear most black and white about what is right and wrong and most kind of comfortable judging others as today's Puritans? Well you say that the Puritans didn't have social media but particularly after the outbreak of the Civil War and then even more with the English Civil War, not the American Civil War but even so if you read Neil Postman or you look at the struggles in the run-up to the American Civil War, if you look at Kansas bleeding Kansas, smashing printing presses was what you wanted to do to silence your adversaries and Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin was sort of this weapon of mass slavery destruction in the American culture war of the middle of the 19th century surrounding slavery. The abolition of the monarchy you do have a kind of liberation of the printing presses and so pamphlets do absolutely churn out so kind of you know I mean it's kind of the 17th century equivalent of social media suddenly all kinds of people are able to communicate and have expressed their views in ways that they were not able to previously and I guess that as today on Twitter or Facebook of course it's the people who feel strongest about issues who tend to be most active and it's those whose views perhaps are the starkest are the most sharply defined that are able to express themselves with the most. But do you think do you think the Puritan comparison is fair? I mean it sort of feels like there's always been some type of personality that is that quite almost enjoys a kind of clarity of purpose that comes with moral condemnation. Now part of what makes this interview really fun is the interviewer is so voicing the zeitgeist. No isn't it isn't it psychology isn't it personality spectrum and of course it is but but would we really want to compare today's anxious Christmas cancellers with the with the Puritans and I think I think Colin nails it here. Yes yes. Were they were they the same people in Cromwell's day do you think that now they're just wearing different clothes and worrying about different issues? I think so I mean I. And that observation too the same people now we're into identity now we're into what am I they're the same people today well what on earth do you mean by that they're not the same biological organisms it's the same spirit that moves them but well there's a world of difference between the 17th century and the 21st century but it's the same spirit that moves them or it's an analogous spirit or it's fascinating. I think that to the degree that a feeling of moral superiority can be a source of pleasure that's clearly that's clearly true but I think that in both cases it's reductive to assume that that is all it's about because just as today lots of people are motivated to take a moral stand on social media by deeply held principles the same is absolutely true of of Puritans who in many ways are the the kind of the most I find them kind of very moving most movingly introspective of people because to be a Puritan is constantly to look into your soul and to ask yourself you know am I measuring up am I fallen am I redeemed have I received grace and you kind of have to unless you know you can judge others and you can judge society but you can only do that if you're also judging yourself constantly. It takes a lot to be a good Puritan yes it does absolutely it does and I think that at its most admirable you see the same thing on social media today that that there are of course all kinds of blowhards there are all kinds of hypocrites there are all kinds of people who enjoy the sound of their own voice and I'm sure that that is true now as it was in the 17th century but but equally there are people who um examine themselves with great care and kind of are concerned to do the best that they can and I think that that is also a part of it and I think that just as in the 17th century if you take it seriously if you take these anxieties seriously then actually it's you can gain a great deal from it. Same is true today I mean you know you've just got to at what point does that same instinct it's interesting that the video was edited there because we're going to we're going to transition to the woke now and and you know you can you know Antifa and some of the wokesters go off one edge but some of the anti-woke they go off another edge and you know your your your mother who's reading Facebook and your cousin and and these people in your family who are who are just trying to be better people by not being racist or sexist or or or mean to people with different sexual orientations there's there's a good thing down there at heart and they're trying and they might not have a lot of experience with people different from themselves and so they they they hear the chatter and they want to sort of line up on the right side of history and do the right thing and and that in and of itself is not a bad thing and just like with with Tom Holland's observation here and and again back when I started paying attention to the the rise of the ascendant morality it's a you know there's some good motivations at heart you just have to begin to ask some much more nuanced and deeper questions in terms of well well what exactly do a little bit of theological reflection well what exactly is the method of salvation here does does this in fact become sort of a self-salvationism that that sets in with this and what is the telos what is the goal that this new morality is heading towards and but I think I think Tom Holland's perspective here is is exactly right which is a virtuous one and can be an incredibly rewarding one for for society flip into becoming a point does that same instinct which is a virtuous one and can be an incredibly rewarding one for for society flip into becoming a tyrannical instinct I mean if we look at you know the protectorate ended and life came back with with double vigor you know the prohibition era of the 20s was was followed by a you know partying and everybody celebrating this year at least more than any time in my lifetime has felt a little bit like that that suddenly the whole of society is gripped by rules and fears and moral judgment is everywhere and I wonder whether there's a sort of coiled spring effect that when it's finally over life will come back double I'm sure there is I mean I'm sure that the vast majority of people must be yearning to get back to normality and I would have thought that purely looking at it economically there must be vast amounts of cash kind of frozen in accounts that people who've kept their jobs haven't been able to spend this might sound like a reach now and you can stop me if you think I'm trying to make two grand sweeps of history here but your your book dominion is all about the Christian inheritance and how the final chapter it is called woke you know you point that this these kind of instincts have sort of morphed in through liberalism and secularism through to where we are today and it just seems almost ironic that the voices now who are most vociferously in favour of cancelling christmas literally I mean that's been a phrase that everyone's tabloid newspapers have been putting on their front pages for decades and has never actually been true but this year it sort of is true those voices are perhaps animated by some a spirit that derives from Christianity I think so um and I think it kind of comes in various traditions I think there is a kind of puritan strain kind of Protestantism that um and and I think again this is where we get into the Christendom civil war has in many ways been bled of of God but retains the sense of moral earnestness um and I think a lot of uh particularly on the left um that that strain of moral puritanism and I use puritanism you know not as a pejorative I think absolutely animates it but I think also another strain is the way in which a concern for the sick has been an enduring Christian tradition and it's Christians really who who established the idea that you should have the kind of mass health care the you know hospitals that are in which people care for the sick no matter how rich or poor they are is an inheritance that we in the modern welfare state have received from Christianity and in fact there's a sense in which the welfare state and particularly the the national health service is a nationalization of responsibilities that the church is previously exercised and I think in the video the commentary and again I'm you'll notice some of the things that I'm working on here I'm doing things a little bit differently because I'm trying to get the sound right and so sorry about the volumes up and down but hopefully over time I'll get better at this I try not to spend too much time having to learn all the technical things but notice the the video that I did about Jordan Hall's deep code you know the state in many ways that one of the interesting themes if you look through the history of the west is the the the constant the constant dance between church and state and as institutions and of course Holland has done more work on this than most because the the you know again at the point the point I made before Pontus well this is a title of a Roman emperor and then it becomes the title of the Christian pope so so what is the relationship between prophet priest and king and and one way to understand the history of the west now what why did I mention prophet priest and king well that comes up in the hyper catechism well those are the three offices of christ and a conversation broke out in the discord as to well what about the separation of church and state and it's it's very interesting watching the new rise of interest in orthodoxy and watching people begin to critique this separation of church and state that has been a a hallmark of Protestantism and again reading this book that I should probably put the link to the book in the comments that I'm reading about reformations if there's if there's one thing that happens in the reformation that happens around Luther it's the continued working through of these questions of the boundaries between church and state and and you know one of Holland's themes and one of the things that he notices is that in many ways states have taken over things from churches now though do they better belong to state or do they better belong to church and and and how do you make those how do you figure out how that dance should be should come about I think that is why one of the things that I've noticed over the course of this year is actually how absent the churches have been in previous experiences of pandemic you know they played very very central roles now he tom holland did an a a conversation on unbelievable Justin Briarley and another person about this and and this has fascinated holland for a while and he's going to talk about a little bit here and repeat some of the stuff that he said there but to me he's part of what he's doing he's right on that question and this question gets into the meaning crisis and all of these other conversations that we're having about agency because well why churches in modernity have sort of been pushed into a corner and there's there's sort of a split that happens that physical things the state will be in charge of and spiritual things the church will be in charge of and this the separation again this this separation and addressing the separation was so the intuitive side of me when I first started listening to Jordan Peterson noticed that separation and and and and my pastoral side knew that this separation was deeply involved in people's transformations as Christians or their lack of fruit in transformation as Christians and and we're always we're always dealing with it because people go to the doctor to deal with what they can and they go to the pastor to deal with what they can't with the doctor now again I just in fact got off the phone praying for a woman who is going into surgery tomorrow and and I'm you know pre-COVID visiting members of my church when they go into the hospital and and I pray for their healing but but all of these issues they just we just revolve around them in modernity around and around and so it's fascinating that that this is what clearly sticks in Holland's intuitive mind and in successive interviews now he's been talking about this for a little while he's written about it you can this is what he's working on okay this is he's he's working on all of this same stuff that we've been working on in the meaning crisis and Jordan Peterson and John Vervecky and Jonathan Peugeot and and and Sevilla King and her her her work on Pirsig and Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance it's all this question of how do heaven and earth connect and and again like Jordan Peterson he looks at the church and finds it wanting but he also looks at other institutions and finds them wanting and and it's again it's right here in the middle that Holland intuitively focuses on and I think that's you know that's what drew me to him in these conversations that role over the course of this pandemic has essentially been played by the health service churches literally closed their doors out of interest is that the first time that's happened I think since the interdict to be honest the interdict is John King John he's bussed up with with Innocent the third in the first half first part of the 13th century a long time ago a long time ago when the pope closed stopped services going on so I think yeah so so I think that that's been a real feature of this is that the churches have basically been kind of absent from the from the discourse and and now here in America where you've got all kinds of crazy politics going on about this because of course even though America got rid of the king okay and that's that's important in this because well the queen she's the head of the church of England and so at least formally in many ways England is a Christian country even though there's religious liberty England is a Christian country and there's a state church and of course all of these things there's been modulations over these things for a very long time now in America right from the states had their churches but the federal government the United States didn't have their church and now here in California for example some judge ruled that strip clubs could stay open as an essential service and the churches were like hey and of course the Babylon be at a field day with that and hey if you're going to let strip clubs open you have to let the church be open if you're going to let the churches be open you have to let the restaurants be open and and suddenly the whole line between essential services well you know the the the government said churches were non-essential and and some churches sort of laid down like nice little lap dogs and say oh whatever you say and other churches said hey wait a minute we're we're the most essential and everybody looks at them like they're an anachronism but again right here is where this is going on and and Holland just goes right there and that that to me is is so instructive and so public devotion you might even call it superstition has been focused on the National Health Service so as you walk around London I've seen in windows right the National Health Service becomes the church that is that is and the doctors are the ones and this gets back to my my conversation about miracles and placebo is placebo of miracle and someone wrote in that comment on on vervecky's posting of that conversation placebos even work in pets and I thought now that's interesting if it's true I don't know but this these are these folds these nexus points where we're we're trying to really get at okay what is what is real and what what is reality made of you know all the kind of the rainbow drawings um the the slogans the expressions of gratitude to the National Health Service um you know we've had our rituals going out and applauding and the evenings and so on um and in in another century that might have been they might have been saints in the windows and they might have been songs on but also but also the role played by people who were who were motivated by overtly Christian instincts and so the sense of a gratitude that we feel now for um health service workers was kind of bound up with a sense of gratitude towards representatives of the church who were doing the same um and so I think that that in a sense um because those responsibilities have been siphoned off from the churches they've come to seem less relevant in this experience of pandemic perhaps not just because they were siphoned off but what is relevance relevance realization what is what is relevant is the is the medical relevant or the prayer relevant is the the the the hospitals are essential services they're going to get the vaccines our pastors essential services schools they're essential but but are you know is this religious stuff essential no because again this is implicitly materialist it's from the ground up and and this is this is the basis of reality all this church stuff well that's sort of basically I when we first started doing YouTube um the the default listing on YouTube for for we were streaming and Rick who I was streaming with it just left the default which was entertainment I said well let's let's let's make it at least education and not entertainment but entertainment is in fact where religion is relegated and and apparently slightly less essential than your your sex workers they did in previous ones and without wishing to draw you into a kind of hot water politically the the arch bishop Justin Welby is actually quite a neat exemplar of the kind of modern um Christian in that respect because his impulse has been to be sort of maximally obedient to those concerns to police almost the the safety requirements keep a low profile it's a it's a denominational bureaucrats are often just like that sort almost a stepping back a self-abasement instinct I don't know if it what how should we interpret his role and and the kind of church of England more specifically well I I think that um he's very politically correct I think the risk for the churches and particularly the church of England because you know it's the established church is that um with so many of its traditional responsibilities and roles taken over by various aspects of the state the risk for the churches is that they come to seem like a kind of eccentric and not very important um sub department of the welfare state bingo no and um I agree I think that the the role played by archbishops and bishops in particular the messages that they were giving were basically public health messages so that's what they were doing but actually um you know if the church is to play a distinctive role that's inadequate because and again this is a this is a Jordan Peterson moment because he who is well to the degree that when we're going to get a little bit later where Tom Holland you know to the to the degree that he is or isn't inside or outside the church here he's critiquing the church and he's seeing the church clearly he's seeing the the impotence of the church the irrelevance of the church how the church is sort of pushed over to the side again I think about Andrew Root's excellent books where he sort of gives us Charles Taylor you know pre-chewed Charles Taylor and applies it to pastors and churches and this this is this is where the conversation is so we've got we've got professors of public health we've got epidemiologists we've got doctors we've got endless people yeah of course you know as you know better than anyone you know there are so many people who are kind of better qualified to talk about this than bishops that really it's it's a kind of you know what's the point of them if that's what they're going to do and the point of them exactly what's the point of them what's the point of the bishop what's the what's the point of any of this and why do churches die because people basically say what's the point I had a conversation you know this is where conservative churches have a little bit of an advantage because they continue to at least make the point that there is a point whereas increasingly the the churches that align themselves with with secularity and and the government well there is no point and maybe church is sort of a social club where we go and do fun things but the the hospital that's where the real action is must be if you're a christian that that they're there to ultimately in a state where you don't have anything else to do to talk about all the kind of weird stuff that christians believe you know the idea that there is a kind of purpose to this that there's a dimension that lies beyond the merely physical that all kinds all the stuff that traditionally the churches have talked about but which now they all seem slightly embarrassed about which and and again he just nails it he just nails it and this again I think is the so why tom and jordan peterson have been so helpful to me because they're they're just saying what everyone has been thinking and churches haven't been able to or pastors haven't been able to articulate well what exactly is it that we do we're still doing it and we go through the motions but does it really matter does it really count and then of course you know you've you've got you've got churches come in here frank pareti with this present darkness comes in with a whole new story that now now gives it and we're going to get into a story now in in just a minute here so important because i've certainly felt that this year that the the one kind of universally agreed upon moral has been life or death and all of our public decisions have been structured around that physical life and death okay material this is this is this is the playing out of naturalism this is where this is the telos this is where naturalism leads what what is most important is life or death now we still again as tom holland noted well we've got humanism which is sort of christianity light floating around and so well we should really kind of keep people alive lives and death are at stake but then when it comes to rationing well then we're going to probably start getting pragmatic and say well these lives are worth more than these other lives over here and it's a pretty good one i think you know most people would sign up to that i would rather people survived than didn't it just really laid bare to me how there aren't very many other virtues that are publicly sayable or that people widely agree on anymore that are publicly sayable this video it nails so much and i you know what is the value of what kind of life people are living what is the value of beauty of togetherness of relationships of you know if the meaning crisis is all over this little speech he's giving if someone who is in their 80s lives for nine months but is able to be with their family and have a beautiful spiritual life versus there's the word spiritual it's it's all right here living for 12 months being stuck on their own in an elderly care home without being able to see anyone how should we judge those two scenarios and it's been amazingly absent and civillus wades in and says value there it is perseg value yeah maybe that's something that yeah i could have done a better job well i mean i i wonder whether um maybe something maybe maybe the christians sort of from the aisles would say we've got an idea you you have an idea yeah we've got an idea and then they say something every man that doesn't sound very good you know paul describes um christians as being like athletes he just says paul he doesn't say the apostle paul he doesn't locate paul um he just he's talking to i mean holland has been reading so much and doing so much he just comes right out with paul paul of tarsus apostle paul no just just paul first name basis here that you have to compete you have to train like an athlete and i wonder whether the the the mere fact over the past few decades that life in the west has been so easy that you know we haven't kind of really faced massive existential crises in the way that we have this year whether um the the church is like so many you know like like all the rest of us in a sense of kind of become unprepared for these kinds of christ afluencia we're fat and lazy because ultimately um you know whether you're a christian or not whether you admire christianity or not the simple historical fact is that um of all the um now he's about to lip sync jordan peterson the ways that humanity over the course of its history has devised to explain why we're here what what humanity is for how we relate to the cosmos beyond of all those attempts to explain christianity is historically the most successful and that success must be founded in an ability to provide satisfying answers to the profoundest questions you know why are we here why do we die why do we suffer um is there life in death um you know is there light in darkness is there redemption um from suffering all these kind of questions are fundamental to the christian message and i would have thought that there is an opportunity there for the churches to kind of examine these questions and we didn't and we stumbled and we failed why because we didn't know the answers ourselves we didn't live out those answers and and right at the beginning of the pandemic people like oh christians christians didn't flee the plagues oh okay well there's a factoid well what does that mean because the world has changed and well we've got tools about the plagues we've got germ theories and so on and so forth but it it just so shows the the general fumbling with respect to the times we live in now that that little speech right there it's we got to play it again the course of its history has devised to massive existential crises in the way that we have this year whether um the the church is like so many you know like all the rest of us in a sense of kind of become unprepared for these kinds of crisis because ultimately um you know whether you're a christian or not whether you admire christianity or not the simple historical fact is that um of all the um the ways that humanity over the course of its history has devised to explain why we're here what you know what humanity is for how we relate to the cosmos beyond of all those attempts to explain christianity is historically the most successful and that success must be founded in an ability to provide satisfying answers to the profoundest questions you know why are we here why do we die why do we suffer um is there life in death um you know is there light in darkness is there redemption redemption from suffering all these kind of questions are fundamental to the christian message and i would have thought that there is an opportunity there for the churches to kind of examine these questions perhaps in a more public and effective manner than um bang right there right there right there i i i'm aware that i may well be being very unfair here because i know that there are plenty of um plenty of people in in in all of the churches who have um spoke and and now not just answer because that's it's very protestant of us but live out incarnate to to to manifest it in our lives to a degree now the manifestation of that lives and he's right it's people who are doing this they're just not necessarily on the news they just not necessarily gotten around or or people don't see them because we're all looking at well what are we looking at we're all looking at what is relevant to us you can very powerfully about precisely these questions and issues but they don't it doesn't seem to have been people that uh the leaders of the church they don't seem to have seized whatever platforms they might have it's not the leaders of the church the shepherds read read jeremiah or ezekiel about the shepherds this the shepherds who fail the sheep they they feed off the sheep but they don't lead the sheep have been given and in fact um the the the the exception that proves the rule to that for me is um the pope back in april um celebrating a mass in a kind of mc mary cohen's video about the new nativity scene at the vatican t socially distanced st peters square against a backdrop of the sirens of people taking people to hospital um clanging of bells and he he stopped and prayed before an icon that had come to rome from constantinople it it kind of opened up i think a sense of the the the richness and the depth of this christian tradition you know just how much wealth spiritual wealth emotional wealth moral wealth there is in this incredible tradition of people trying to make sense of these questions um you know and it's it's a kind of continuum for 20 centuries but but this does not seem to have to me to have been um perhaps the uh in which the moment of apocalypse came and the church revealed nothing it hasn't been hasn't come to the fore yeah are you you're a christian i wrote dominion basically because um i lost my faith quite early um and essentially became a convert to the greek gods probably um and essentially um over the past 20 years while writing about um particularly the pre-christian world of greece and rome i came to feel more and more that morally and ethically i was in fact incredibly christian um and that's really what i i wanted to explore in it was the degree to which um almost you know and almost paradoxically in a way that um that the loss of faith in god is itself expressed kind of in christian terms that the absence that you have is shaped by christianity the loss of faith in god is expressed in christian terms now there's some renee gerard in there especially when you think okay what is he what do you what do you mean by god what do you mean by faith in god and and what holland brings out i was i was um i was chatting on on twitter with someone who i've had on the channel before and he made the point after reading bishop he made the point to me we were discussing bishop barron's critique of dominion he made the point to me that well there's there's a lot of paul in in tom holland you know is there does does jesus shine through and and i think that's a i think that's a good question but what what tom holland really gets at is the movement within the barfieldian polarities boy if you're not listening to my videos you're not going to understand what i just said there but but this movement where where jesus basically continues to move up and down between heaven and earth and he says radical things like it's it's not what you put in your mouth that makes you holy or unholy it's it's it's what comes out of your heart boy that sounds very protestant but but jesus also says things like you know i'm not here to get away you know to destroy moses but to fulfill moses and and so jesus sort of perfectly straddles straddles heaven and earth and brings heaven and earth together and again listening to mary i just listened to this morning i just listened to mary cohen's video about the vatican nativity and tom bombadil and and i think you know what mary is really teaching me she's really teaching me catholicism what mary is really teaching me about you know some of the rich traditions within the church of of how the world is knit together and and it makes me reflect on why the protestant reformation arose in the way that it did and of course you know lewis's critique is right this is probably something that should have happened you know among good friends over pints and and smoke-filled room to sort of discuss the philosophies of this but but to push back on lewis it it it must be prosecuted in the world in a sense because because we all live out the the elements of these spirits and and we work them out together and so but again right here tom holland sort of gets right here in the crease between protest right here in the crease of the protest and reformation and he sees he knows where the line is and so he watches the going back and forth over the line constantly and and the pauline way in which paul does this to talk about the life of the spirit and and the the vibrations between heaven and earth where we're always trying to get that balance just right which which of course comes in christ who is is right there it's the word made flesh and dwelt among us and of course the the reason the bible just keeps pointing to him is because there it is there it is it's the um you know mary said in that video how it quotes gk chesterton that man you know the man is feminine and mary in a sense in terms of the incarnation is is exactly the meeting of heaven and earth and the product of that is christ so we're you know we're focusing in on on right there the inflection points um and that if that um if that lack of belief in god is transmuted into something in which you as a positive then you know richard dawkins is is always described as kind of an evangelical atheist and evangelism I don't feel that at this point I can't not share this meme with you that came up in the bridges of memeing discord server uh someone named the prophet zecharias continues to just put out memes like crazy and so here we have richard dawkins you know playing the flute as the elves leave middle earth and arwen looks at him and of course if you watch the movie of course you know that arwen will turn around and go back and live with aragorn and the little quip and the meme is the elves it is said have the most beautiful music but again tom holland here simply nails what's going on with richard dawkins he's a protestant evangelist of this certain form of extreme protestantism that is atheism where god sort of floats up and and leaves you know deism is sort of halfway there and well let's you know if he if he if if god isn't doing anything down here below let's just get rid of the fella is um you know it you angaleon it's good news that's what what paul and the apostles preached um and dawkins essentially is is you know he's a good guy dawkins essentially is is you know in that sense he is an evangelist he's saying that that if you topple idols if you um purge yourself of superstition if you come out of the darkness into the light then you will you will gain salvation you will gain redemption and this is a message that clearly you know dawkins seems to be a very protestant figure this is very much in the mainstream of protestantism but protestantism in turn is part of um the broader christian tradition which goes back to you know you get these same ideas in the way that the missionaries um in the early medieval period are going into the dripping forests of saxony to spread the word and ultimately it goes back to um the hebrew prophets and their condemnation of the idols of babalon in egypt well not just the condemnation of the idols in babalon not not just the iconoclasm of the hebrew prophets but it's the broadening of the covenant it's its obedience not sacrifices the prophets say and and so when jesus comes fulfilling remember prophet priest and king jesus comes as king um and and in you know so he's a little bit of christian pastor here um he enters jerusalem as king you know hosanna son of david and he's lifted up on the cross in the priestly role as sacrifice but his teaching is in the prophetic office and and so the hebrew prophets the hebrew prophets do this and say okay you have to understand what the temple is for and jeremiah of course says the temple can't save you you cannot you cannot wield the the material things of god and have leverage over him and in some ways deep in the protestant reformation that's what they're saying you cannot simply wield the sacrament and and put god in your debt and force god into this or that and and so in in that sense there's a deeply prophetic element to the protestant reformation and and and what we see in some ways with the new atheist is in continuity with that but all the way to the extreme where well they're marching the elves out of middle earth because there's no reason to be here as um as uh you know stock and stone but you're not quite a dorkens figure here no i'm not a dorkens figure so so so are you a you know as you as you celebrate christmas this year do you do so in a believing christian right so so so i came to realize basically that my atheism was a kind of subsection of christianity that it was it kind of related to christianity perhaps in the way that um you know a thrush relates to the dinosaurs of the mesozoic that's a great illustration get my preacher i rip these things off gotta hear that again you know it's part of it kind of related to christianity perhaps in the way that um you know a thrush relates to the dinosaurs of the mesozoic that is you know it's part of a kind of evolutionary continuum um and i guess that my experience of writing dominion and reflecting on it thinking about it over the years since is that um i've basically come to realize that all the things that i believe in so human rights the essential quality of human beings the fact that there is a nobility in being human that these are beliefs uh it requires a leap of faith to believe in them there's nothing kind of scientific or objective about any of these beliefs um and that i believe them because they stand in a line of inheritance from the christian myth which is ultimately jewish myth that god created men and women equally in his own image and that therefore they human beings possess a particular dignity and essentially my feeling is is that if i'm going to believe in um human dignity then i might as well go full-blown and believe the whole you know all the stories and i believe in it as a myth i can't i don't really believe in god i don't really he is just peterson all over the place but again i it's not just peterson and tom holland i mean these are the people i've been talking to it these are the people on bridges of meaning the thing is this this living straddling these two things like this is hard to maintain and you know rationality rules let's give them us do that one video we had like you bring in people all the way up and then folks are like no i really want to inhabit it fully and there's reasons and so this is why if you listen to tom holland's christmas podcast you know some evangelicals and boy that gets back into a video that i've been trying to make and haven't really succeeded in terms of it's this it's this it's this challenge for us because of our cultural pay loot well what where is the crease sort of between the bible and history well well when tom holland talks about history that thing that tom holland does happened long after the bible was written well he said well didn't the people of the bible know what happens in the physical world yeah and and i think this is this is exactly where c.s lewis puts his finger on it in his book miracles in the chapter horrid red things and you know i started making videos because i listened to jordan peterson and i thought he needs to read c.s lewis's book miracles and i thought okay i can fire on amazon and somehow figure out a way to get this ship to university of toronto and get get c.s lewis to to read miracles but now having you know even just a tiny little following people send me books it's like i tend to read the books that come up on my salience hierarchy not that that that your gifts are unappreciated but that tends to be where i put my time just like i'm constantly bombarded with video recommendations and in fact i found this video from a video recommendation from a woman that's visited my church a number of times and sort of found me on youtube and you know that's how she kind of got connected with our church to the degree that she is she's also a member of another church but anyway so but but c.s lewis c.s lewis has walked all through this and so tom holland starts lip syncing c.s lewis and then he he starts lip syncing jordan peterson and i'm thinking i'm thinking there's a pattern here and so right here in horrid red things that's really where this question of history and belief and so when tom holland says well i don't really believe and he's going to say more about that in a minute well well now we're back to jordan peterson well what do you mean by believe i mean i find it if i think of it in those terms if i sit down and think do i believe you know that they got and i think of the icy amenities of space and i think of the icy amenities of time i find it very difficult but if i think you know christmas and easter basically space and time now again if you talk to richard dawkins and steven woodford and sam harris and their imagination god is a super thing it's something within space and time and again if we go back to to our friend brett sockeld and and and the jews and this is if you gosh there there are a number of reasons why my conversation with tom holland failed part of it was my earnest desire to get certain books into his head my earnest desire to colonize him and that's that's almost always the reason someone's earnest desire to colonize someone else is almost always the reason a conversation fails but to get kaufman and and basically this hebraic conception of god because holland is sort of right there again on that crease and and so many of you are on that crease i mean poe poe is on that crease poe the person and my conversation with her and well and i know esther has a problem with me using the larping metaphor but that's basically what holland is doing and i would argue that belief follows practice not the other way around at the times where i do really believe it i because i can believe in it as a story i can believe in it as i can believe in it as a kind of poem i suppose and i realize that uh and and now the irony of that perspective is well that's sort of the perspective of what churches are doing as entertainment of non-essential services and and again one of the things one of the things that each of us have to come to terms with is that we are not driving our boats we are not in charge of ourselves our beliefs are not primary you know are not primarily volitional we are the the chattering rider on top of the elephant and the elephant believes what it believes and so you know another another fun i'll have to pull up another meme that came up on the bridges of memeing discord server and then you know this one was made of this one was made of jobe who's been on the channel of course you can find jobe's story on my channel and jobe jobe did not intend to believe any of these things and so just walking with jobe on his journey and someone memefied it on the bridges of meaning begins with jordan peterson hey kids want to buy some meaning that's a meaning and then jobe looking up um no such thing as meaning i like math and six months later i'm addicted to christ and and pretty soon you're gonna find yourself believing it's the way this thing goes and so when i look at tom holland i think you're not safe from him and again read read c.s lewis's um oh why can't i think of it joy you know um his his little auto his little autobiography his his little spiritual memoir which is which has the dates horribly wrong if you look at al surprised by joy if he has the dates horribly wrong because lewis was terrible with dates but you know tom holland is the is the 21st century c.s lewis he's but but we're getting to watch it in video and and he didn't have tolkien at his shoulder kind of and eric dyson sort of bringing him along but it's it's happening um that in a sense i'm culturally attuned to read it and believe in it if i if i operate on the level of the story if that makes sense it's kind of complex and he doesn't have owen barfield and and having the great war with owen barfield and in figuring out what this what this protestant hebrew prophet impulse is going back and forth okay what what is a sacrament and again the sacraments are right there on the line and and we can't get them right but as we up with revolute resolution we go a little bit to the left or a little bit to the right we we can't let nail it because it's it's a thing too big for us to hold okay and so and that's in a sense what the protestant reformation gets right it's that no you can't wield the sacrament it's all gift as his belief as his trust as his faith that's all gift you don't wield it you don't create it it's given to you you say well i don't like the sound of that well the rest of your life is that way too you didn't ask to be born you didn't ask for your genetic material you didn't ask for the time and space that you live and you didn't ask for any of that it's all gift it's all gift to explain but but that's why i think that um in a sense dwelling on um you know do you believe in god or do you think this or do you think that um kind of misses the point because i think the whole way through uh the the 2000 years of christianity actually it's it's kind of replicated itself as memes if you want to put it in those terms that it's the stories that have been the key to its success that even now in a kind of a europe where um you know fewer and fewer people are going to church or even have any particular familiarity with the bible stories nevertheless they have an incredibly potent ability to change the way that um that history operates so um why did why did angela merkel let in a million people into into germany who were not christian who were not you know who from a very different cultural background and i'm sure that the reason for that is the kind of the um the heft that the parable of the good samaritan has in you know in in in the makeup of the of merkel's protestantism i'm sure that um the the the openness of people to refugees in christian societies is is crucially influenced by people's reflections on the christmas story the idea of of mary and joseph having nowhere no no room at the inn um and and i think that so there's almost a kind of um victory whether or not you believe it you have you're you're sort of christian whether you want to be or not and i it sounds like you're sort of yeah i think uh-oh that me that calls for the other one of the other memes that came through cord put this one together and shared it with me of course jordan peterson quite famously says to sam harris you can't not be a christian sam because you're still acting it out and and then eric weinstein just on his most recent portal that was that was quite an episode that was quite a that was that was one of my favorite portal episodes where where where eric weinstein lays some things out but then at the end he's he addresses some of his idw stuff and says basically about sam you can't not be idw sam because you're still acting it out and and and poor sam harris thinks well with i've got rationality and autonomy and i'm in charge of me and it's like that's a failure of category to understand what a human being is i think that bowing to it it's a question of whether you go with the the grain of these stories and i find actually going with the grain of them have it makes me happier i've i've i feel kind of more stable in what i believe by doing that um and and actually that you know it's so much for new atheism it's kind of more it's more poetic it's more beautiful it in a way it's kind of um more exciting to believe in things that are grounded in these kind of stories and in the sense of of of poetry and um of uh kind of theological grandeur and mythology than it is just to believe in a set of abstract principles so this christmas this is my last question for you tom this christmas after such a weird year and it's going to be a weird christmas do you feel you'll be thinking differently in any way than you did last christmas or in previous times i mean has have the events of this year made you realize things of course he's talking covet uh we'll see what tom answers that you didn't before i feel certain fundamental things more powerfully so of course you know i will not be celebrating christmas with my parents as i've been planning to um and so you know there are reflections on um you know death and potential bereavement that have been sharpened for me um but also my my wife is a midwife um and i've always been incredibly proud of of what she does and the role that she plays um uh bringing life into the world but of course against um you know the backdrop of this year where there's been so much death the the sense of what she is doing has been heightened and sharpened and particularly at at christmas of course you know so she'll be working on on christmas day thinking about um the story of the of the nativity thinking about life and death thinking about um birth and um the role that that she plays in that i i feel that my appreciation for her is definitely sharpened it has a kind of an enhanced spiritual quality and if she gets to see this i'm really sorry she'll be embarrassed by by saying that but um i know that that on christmas when she goes out that is definitely what i will be thinking tom holland thank you so much and happy christmas thank you my new favorite tom holland interview this one was astounding just terrific can't wait to share my commentary with you all