https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4pLxriW_wpw

 Hi, this is Paul. This week, this last week, Friday on the Bridges Meaning Discord server, we did atheist questions only, and so I asked Christians to hold back and just let atheists do their questions. A number of the atheists who came on had been raised Christian, and part of what this channel has grown, part of from whom this channel has grown, have been a lot of Christians who are sort of teetering on the edge, post-Christians who have given up on Christianity, Christians who have changed denominations, people who weren't raised Christians at all. Part of why I'm glad I have a large record of conversations with people who watch my channel instead of a whole lot of conversations with famous people is because it gives me a better sense of what's going on in the culture, at least the little eddies and backwaters of the culture that I tend to stream in. And when I think about where a lot of this line between belief and unbelief lies and where the conversation is going now, a lot of it seems to swirl around the question, is God's saving power available to me? Now, in the wake of an atheist-only week on the question and answer on the Bridges of Meaning Discord, that might seem strange because belief in a God is a lot of what this sort of focuses around in our culture. And on a lot of my other videos, I've talked a lot about that. Why is it important, for example, with Jordan Peterson, that everybody wanted to ask him, do you believe in God? And he would refuse to answer the question. I don't know that we'll agree on what believe means, and I don't know that we'll agree on what we mean by God. And then I made a video a couple of weeks ago, was Jordan Peterson's meaning strategy insufficient to save himself? And a lot of people did to me what I've done to so many, which I really enjoyed. Oh, what do you mean by saved? Because Jordan Peterson's, when this came through and that taped, part of me is glad that the article went so badly because what that did was release the recording of that conversation between the reporter and Jordan and Michaela. And that was so full of revelation in and of itself. I'm so glad it came out to the world because in a way it gave Jordan and Michaela a chance to tell their own stories. But I think it really demonstrated Jordan and Michaela's good faith and good will towards that reporter, which wound up being undeserving. But as I was riffing off the rebel wisdom video, which is that what that video of mine deals with. Well, should Jordan have gotten if Jordan's, if, if taking responsibility for your life is such a powerful thing, why isn't it more powerful than Benzo's or SSRIs? And it's, it's exactly these kinds of comparisons that Christianity and the church has been wrestling with because we'd have to ask the question, is God saving power available to me when it seems to be medical technology that is making all the difference? And that's exactly what will lead to, well, no, church is okay, but church is a private thing. Church is an emotional thing. But when I get sick, I really should go to the doctor and hey, I'm there too. If someone gets sick and they're in my congregation, I'll ask, have you seen the doctor? Have you talked to the doctor? And so often they'll come to me and want prayer with me because well, it's medical, medical technology has failed them. And so now we're going to look to God and then maybe travel up north to Redding, California, to the very famous Bethel church where they're doing all the healing or, you know, go on. I saw a video the other day of Benny Hinn doing Zoom healings and I just had the smile. But for many, whether it's healing or a difficult thing in their life or God's hiddenness or unresponsiveness or the just plain failure of prayer to work and to save that leads people, well, why would I believe in that if it doesn't work? Well, that's and that's, you know, sort of, and you know, some people got a little, well, Jordan, in fact, I love the comments to that video. And I, part of the reason I read the comments is because you all are so helpful to me. I mean, and not please, not just positive comments either. I grow much more from the negative comments than I do from the positive often. You know, Jordan managed to write a book in that whole business. Well, that's more than I can say for myself. It's pretty impressive thing. And so, yeah, in some ways his, his, his bearing down because he's responsible to his family and his fans. So he didn't succumb to the despair and the, and the, and the temptation to just give up in the midst of everything that he was suffering. Do we constitute that as saved? Fair enough. And, you know, it's, it's really remarkable and a welcome sight to see Jordan being his own self again in interviews with people. And we'll see how strong he gets and how much he can do and where this all goes. But this, this is, you know, these are the questions that, that, that people boil down to in their lives. And I don't mean famous people way on top of a hierarchy. I mean, regular people who, who, who have to deal with cancer and marital failure and bankruptcy and car accidents and growing old and all of the things that happens is God saving power available to, to save me, to save me from what? To save me from old age, to save me from death, to save me from bankruptcy, to save me from cancer or heart disease or mental illness. And, and it's right there in that struggle that we see people, well, take sides and you'll find people who, who write down all of the answers to prayer in church and bring it out to the pastor and say, see, God answers prayer. And you'll find others that said, Hey, I prayed a prayer and nobody answered. So, so these questions are real and they're powerful and, and they're very, very difficult. I know many spiritual people who gave up on, on the church and, and passed it by because they believed they found something better that works for them. Some other, some other God or some other practice or some other community or some other something that, that works, that saves. But this, this business about God and meaning and, and story is not so easily put off just because you bowed your head and asked that your mother would live. This is C.S. Lewis's story, of course, you know, little six year old boy and his mother is dying and God doesn't save his mother. So enough of use little C.S. Lewis says, and goes off to become an angry atheist only of course to come back. Is God saving power available to me? What do I mean by believe in God? What do I mean by, well, it really means is God's power available. And even, even this, you know, the fool says in his heart, there is no God in any competent biblical interpreter would say, we're not really talking about an atheist per se. And Alex Ryrie, Glenn Scribner pointed me to a bunch of his videos and I really have to figure out a way to get them into the mix too, because he tracks atheism going way back and it's, it's a really good video series. So, but there's so many videos that are competing to colonize me right now that, that's, you know, hierarchies bind and blind. So I want to get into a bunch of different things in this question. And in some ways, the first stop is Tom Holland, because Tom Holland sort of like Jordan Peterson is one of these figures that is transparently and honestly wrestling with the pertinent issues. Now, again, one of the, I don't think, I don't think I handled my conversation with Tom Holland particularly well. Someone pointed that out in a recent comment and I thought, yeah, touche. But one of the big takeaways from that conversation for me was, you know, Tom, Tom's openness and transparency. And it was quite a surprise to me that he didn't barely knew who Jordan Peterson was, which I found fascinating because I very much see them in unparalleled tracks and parallel. So they're coming at it from different places. Of course, Tom Holland coming at it. Well, I'll let him tell his story. Hasn't come to the fore. Yeah. Are you, you're a Christian? I wrote Dominion basically because I lost my faith quite early and essentially became a convert to the Greek gods, probably what I was about. And essentially over the past 20 years while writing about particularly the pre-Christian world of Greece and Rome, I came to feel more and more that morally and ethically I was in fact incredibly Christian. And that's really what I wanted to explore in it, was the degree to which almost, you know, and almost paradoxically in a way that the loss of faith in God is itself expressed kind of in Christian terms, that the absence that you have is shaped by Christianity and that if that. Now, right there, that's a very interesting observation that the loss in God is shaped by Christianity. And, you know, we're dealing, you know, we're getting higher and higher resolution here and we're dealing with, okay, what do we mean by believing God? And Tom really wrestles with this. And I think again, he's one of the better people. When I talk to a lot of randos like I do and a lot of ordinary people and what I feel in my own consciousness, Congress, these are the issues that we're dealing with. And so this is the strange aspect in which Judaism and Christianity are in some ways irreligious or anti-religious as compared to sort of common religiosity and pagan. And there's always this dynamic in Christianity one way or another that, okay, now it's certainly, you know, nothing atheistic about Jesus claimed to be God. Yet there's some undermining that the Hebrew prophets do and that Jesus himself does in terms of ancient practices of religiosity. So, you get with Jesus both saying things like to his adversaries, well, if you knew Moses you'd recognize me. And at the same time saying, it's not what you put into your mouth that makes you unclean. Jesus is walking this line that is extremely hard to sort of tease out. And we're continuing to work on this now, now 2000 years later. In Christian terms, that the absence that you have is shaped by Christianity and that if that lack of belief in God is transmuted into something in which you, as a positive, then Richard Dawkins is always described as kind of an evangelical atheist and evangelism is, you know, a eunangelion, it's good news. That's what Paul and the apostles preached. And Dawkins essentially is, you know, in that sense, he is an evangelist. He's saying that if you topple idols, if you purge yourself of superstition, if you cut yourself off from the darkness, if you purge yourself of superstition, if you come out of the darkness into the light, then you will gain salvation, you will gain redemption. And this is a message that clearly, Dawkins seems to me, very Protestant figure. This is very much in the mainstream of Protestantism. But Protestantism in turn is part of the broader Christian tradition which goes back to, you know, the early medieval period, going into the dripping forests of Saxony to spread the word. And ultimately it goes back to the Hebrew prophets and their condemnation of the idols of Babylon in Egypt as, you know, stock and stone. But you're not quite a Dawkins figure here. No, I'm not a Dawkins figure. So, you know, as you celebrate Christmas this year, do you do so in a believing Christian? Right. So I came to realize basically that my atheism was a kind of subsection of Christianity, that it kind of related to Christianity, perhaps in the way that, you know, a thrush relates the dinosaurs of the Mesozoic. Did you get it? That's really clever. I mean, the dripping forests of Saxony, he's such a good writer. But then, you know, I listen to these in preparation for these videos. I listen to these things often three, four, five, six times. And each time you listen to them, more things come out. And, you know, I want to emphasize that is, you know, what he just says here. Christianity, that it was, it kind of related to Christianity, perhaps in the way that, you know, a thrush relates the dinosaurs of the Mesozoic. Relates to his? So I came to realize basically that my atheism was a kind of subsection of Christianity, that it kind of related to Christianity, perhaps in the way that, you know, a thrush relates the dinosaurs of the Mesozoic. His atheism relates to Christianity, the way a thrush relates to the dinosaurs of the Mesozoic. But now what's interesting is in the section before this, he's talking about the pandemic and he's talking about the weak need. I don't want to pick on the Anglicans too bad here. But the weak need, although I know a lot of Anglicans that'll say, yeah, you go after, you go after those Anglicans for me. The weak need church in the face of this pandemic and Tom Holland just desiring a dinosaur, desiring the real thing. And that came out fairly soon after I started doing my videos, because of course when I started doing my videos, Peterson was sort of new on the scene and people were trying to get a sense of who he is and what was going on with him. And it seemed to matter to people that I was, you know, a real kind of Christian, more of a dinosaur Christian, rather than the thrushes and the finches and the blue jays that you see sort of inhabiting a lot of the mainline churches. And so just that little turn that Tom makes there, I think again, that's why he's such a potent figure in this. You know, why do I do these videos like I do? These people out in public are in some ways a little ahead and representing and sort of demonstrating what I'm seeing again in all of the Randall's conversations. And I think that's what I'm seeing in the world, in the public and in private and in regular people's lives out there in the world. It's part of a kind of evolutionary continuum. And I guess that my experience of writing Dominion and reflecting on it, thinking about it over the years since, is that So human rights, essential quality of human beings, the fact that there is a nobility in being human, that these are beliefs. It requires a leap of faith to believe in them. There's nothing kind of scientific or objective about any of these beliefs. And okay, there's nothing scientific or objective about any of these beliefs. And this is what we're going to get to in this video because you know what I do. I've done it to Peterson. I'm doing it to Holland. Once I sort of get a bead on one of these people who are pursuing this stuff with enough determination to get real and to get serious about these questions, I'm going to keep my eye on them and I'm going to do a deep dive. And so we're going to get into Tom Holland's podcast and some of what he says about Arthur and Jesus. And because, you know, he's voicing what's in the culture. But of course, and this was, I think, part of the what went wrong in terms of my conversation with Holland. And I still have to learn how to. I mean, part of the reason I don't do high, a lot of high profile talks is because at least if I'm talking to randos, they already have a sense of who I am. And so then I can spend the first half hour getting a sense of who they are. And at that time, maybe we can find each other to have a better, a better quality conversation. Whereas when you're talking to high status people, we're dealing with so much projection that it takes a long time to sort of work through the projection and try and get at who they are and what their beliefs are. And so it's interesting that it's sort of in these classical liberals, these modernists that we're following, that they're trying to figure out who they are and what they're really thinking. But but Tom Holland so nicely there simply recaptures the dominant, prominent public posture of secularity that we have this natural, supernatural divide, this objective, subjective divide. All of these assumptions. Now, again, all of these assumptions are going away. Classical liberals, these modernists that we're finding enough of that enough of that dinosaur nature. So there's there ardently sticking to it. But yet still the transformation is happening within them. They might not be fully conscious of it. But and of course, where Tom goes in this conversation is, I think, where a lot of people are and where a lot of people are going. That these are beliefs. It requires a leap of faith to believe in them. There's nothing kind of scientific or objective about any of these beliefs. And that I believe them because they stand in a line of inheritance from the Christian myth, which is ultimately Jewish myth, that God created men and women equally in his own image and that therefore they human beings possess a particular dignity. And essentially, my feeling is, is that if I'm going to believe in human dignity, then I might as well go full blown and believe the whole, you know, all the stories. And I believe in it as a myth. I can't I don't really believe in God. I don't really I mean, I find it if I think of it in those terms, if I sit down and think, do I believe, you know, God? And I think of the icy, immense fees of space and I think of the icy, immense fees of time. I find it very difficult. But if I think, you know, Christmas and Easter, basically the times where I do really believe it, because I can believe in it as a story, I can believe in it as a kind of poem, I suppose. And I realize that that in a sense, I'm culturally attuned to read it and believe in it. If I if I operate on the level of the story, if that makes sense, it's kind of complex to explain. But but that's why I think that in a sense, dwelling on, you know, do you believe in God or do you think this or do you think that kind of misses the point, because I think the whole way through the 2000 years of Christianity, actually, it's it's kind of replicated itself as memes. If you want to put it in those terms, the memes versus genes, who said that? Oh, it was I was so I'm talking a little bit later. I'm going to have to I never I usually do these videos in one sitting and this one. I'm not going to have time just because I've got I've got I've got some people in the church that can't handle PCs because they're senior citizens. And so I set up a bunch of PCs in different rooms so that they can safely zoom and have Bible study. I'm hosting Bible study at my church and with different senior citizens in front of them in front of PCs. And so I have to set up those PCs and get them all going. So I have to keep an ear attending to them. But you know what? What he just said there right there, memes versus genes, that's what that's what Kale Zeldin had said. And I'm having my conversation with Kale and and and Brett a little bit later this morning. Right there, memes versus genes. And so here basically, Holland says, I'm so steeped in the memes, I can't live into the mean I can't get rid of the memes and and others. People are just in in denial about the memes. And so I have to live into the story. But when you say believe in God like that, well, no. But OK, so what are the two pictures in his mind? Because they're both in his mind. But I can't believe in a God. And I think I think I don't know. I think that's very much I can't believe in a God as a thing in the world. And that's right. That's right. And again, back to how many other videos? Well, God isn't a thing in the world. So what are we talking about when we're doing this? I want to I want to play that again. But it's the whole culturally attuned to read it and believe in it. If I if I operate on the level of the story, if that makes sense, it's kind of complex to explain. But but that's why I think that in a sense, dwelling on, you know, do you believe in God or do you think this or do you think that kind of misses the point? Because I think the whole way through the 2000 years of Christianity, actually, it's it's kind of replicated itself as memes. If you want to put it in those terms, that it's the stories that have been the key to its success, that even now in a kind of a Europe where, you know, fewer and fewer people are going to church or even have any particular familiarity with Bible stories. Nevertheless, they have an incredibly potent ability to change the way that that history operates. So why did why did Angela Merkel let in a million people into into Germany who were not Christian, who were not, you know, who from a very different cultural background? And I'm sure that the reason for that is the kind of the the heft that the parable of the Good Samaritan has in, you know, in in in the makeup of the Merkel's Protestantism. I'm sure that the the the openness of people to refugees in Christian societies is crucially influenced by people's reflections on the Christmas story. The idea of of Mary and Joseph having nowhere no no room at the end. And I think that. So there's almost a kind of victory, whether or not you believe it. You have your your sort of Christian with what kind of victory, though, you know, what what kind of it? Well, it's a mental victory. It's a meme victory. It's a story victory. And I would imagine I don't know who this interviewer is, but I mean, what Tom just laid out in front of him is is in some ways again, it's it's not exactly what Jordan has been doing, but in many ways it's it's parallel and analogous. And. And I think that. So there's almost a kind of victory, whether or not you believe it. You have your your sort of Christian whether you want to be or not. And it sounds like you're sort of. Yeah, I think I think that. Bowing to it. It's a question of whether you go with the grain of these stories. And I find actually going with the grain of them have it makes me happier. I feel kind of more stable in what I believe by doing that. And actually, you know, it's it's kind of more it's more poetic. It's more beautiful. In a way, it's kind of more exciting to believe in things that are grounded in these kind of stories and in the sense of of of. Dare we say it's more meaningful. Poetry, the way it's kind of more exciting to believe in things that are grounded in these kind of stories and in the sense of of of poetry and. He's re-enchanted his world. He's he's escaped his meaning crisis of kind of theological grandeur and mythology than it is just to believe in a set of abstract principles. So this Christmas, this is my last question for you, Tom. This Christmas, after such a weird year and it's going to be a weird Christmas. Now that we talked about some personal things, that's that's as much as this video that I wanted to play. And I think Tom perfectly articulates where a growing number of people that I'm talking to are at. It makes him happier. It gives him meaning. But there's a there's a lament and a longing because this question, did it really happen now that did it really happen question has everything to do with. The the initial question we talked about is God saving power available to me. I might enjoy the stories I read in the Bible of God parting the clouds and coming down and, you know, taking on the Philistines and and, you know, God through David knocking him down, knocking down Goliath. And, you know, that's that's what we're looking for. But poetry. Yeah, yeah, I love poetry. But we're all sort of but but but that is in some ways the the faith of the thrush, not the not the not the power of the T. Rex. And well, it's sort of the it's sort of the basement dwellers dilemma that they can be a they can be a boss on Fortnite or World of Warcraft. But out in the book, they're an ins out in the real world. They're an incel. And so, you know, it affords a sense of everyday meaning. But there is an atheist lament or sadness like the boy who says, I want to be a real Jedi or or I really want to live in Harry Potter's world. And, you know, so when you get into Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris's talk, and again, I think that first Vancouver talk was, you know, was really important. This is where the physical resurrection of Jesus sort of weighs in with the the almost certainly not question. Look, there's a lot of languages, lots of languages. Look at how different they are. It's like, yeah, at some levels of analysis, they're fundamentally different. And at other levels of analysis, they're fundamentally the same, which is how we know that their languages and you could say, well, there's a very large number of stories. It's like, yes, there are. But the fact that there's enough commonality across the class of stories, the set of all possible stories so that we can identify what constitutes a story. And I would say that there's enough commonality across the set of all possible good stories that we can say, well, here's a canonical good story, which is, by the way, what you do at the beginning of the moral landscape, because you say this is horrible. This is good. We should move from what's horrible to what's good. So, yes, you're you've you've taken a fragment of the universal story and you've made it the axiom of your moral system, which is what you should do. But but the claim that I think is not helpful, even though I understand it, is that that's purely a claim of like of unmediated fact. It's like, no, there is no one. And again, to go back to Tom Holland, I'm living into it, into the story. It's the memes, not the genes. It's it's and it's basically what Peterson calls Harris on here is the switch. You're taking you're like fact, fact, fact, fact, fact, fact, fact, fact, fact, and then story, the story is fact. Now, someone you know, I've been pointing a lot to George Marsden's Fundamentalism in American Culture. And then one of you or at least some of you have started reading that book and you're starting to see how Sam Harris is a descendant of certain kinds of fundamentalist Christians. And it's exactly in this because basically you had the modernist fundamentalist fight and the modernist says, oh, it's by facts. Now that we have the world of object, now we have all these facts. Now we can get a handle on the world and the fundamentalist watch what's happening and like, no, we're losing the plot. We're losing a plot. Let's let's take the Bible and say, OK, here's the book full of facts. Let's take all of these facts and use them as facts. And that's exactly the move that Peterson calls Harris on doing right there. There is, yes, even facts aren't unmediated facts. I mean, you can't you can't you can't judge something to be factual without presupposing the validity of certain intuitions like right that causes precede events. You know, so our causes precede their effects. And those intuitions could be wrong. I mean, we could live in a teleological universe where everything is getting pulled into the future by some kind of attractor. Right. And our notion of. Which is essentially Christian eschatology. I as a preacher, I couldn't I couldn't articulate Christian eschatology better than he just did there. The strange thing in Christianity is that that thing in the future that's pulling history through is, in fact, the resurrection of Jesus Christ, which happens in the middle, which is why in the New Testament they keep talking about the latter days and the last times and all of that. Because, of course, if you read NT right on this, the resurrection is supposed to happen, the general resurrection is supposed to happen at the end of time. And here Jesus is raised in the middle of time. And that then sets up. We have the present age and the age to come. That sets up this this weird now and not yet dynamic in Christianity where, well, the resurrection has begun, but our resurrection hasn't arrived. And so you have this tractor pulling history forward in a teleological way. Causation is totally backwards. That remains to be discovered. OK. And again, it's a well, that's causation is backwards because, again, he's Sam Harris is a very. It's funny because he almost takes on a Thomas Reed common sense philosophy, but he doesn't know it because in some ways he's echoing the height of modernity and his approach to the world. And again, in huge depths of irony, Jordan Peterson is much more postmodern. And I know if Carl was still watching my videos, he'd freak out at this point. And those of you who follow the comments section know exactly who I'm talking about. And I mean, this in all tenderness, because I don't, you know, Carl has one of the things you learn as a preacher is that if someone comes in you into your church and after one Sunday is praising you dramatically, there's a good possibility that weeks or months from now they will leave slamming the door, cursing you with just as much drama. That's just the fact of how human beings are. So anyway, too many side, too many side notes. We have we would use other intuitions to make that discovery. And right there you do pull yourself up by your bootstraps, right? Right there is the. Is there a God that I can cry out and he will save me? No. You have only yourself to trust and to believe in. Branch of science or mathematics or anything fundamental logic that can get away from that. Right. Right. Well, that's another place. But given that picture, that doesn't render all intuitions equally respectable. Absolutely. Someone says, well, I happen to have an intuition that Joseph Smith saw those golden tablets and they were, you know, you know, and Mormonism is true. That's not the sort of intuition we're talking about here. Your intuition doesn't look well, but notice now for his illustration, Harris goes back to this historical question that we're going to deal with, especially towards the end of this video, which is where Tom Holland's really going to where I'm going to play some clips from his podcast. The question, did it really happen? Now, am I, I'm not going to say that that question isn't important because that's usually one way out of this trap. It's not important whether or not it really happened. And I say, no, that is important. But my question is, why is that important? And to get back to the original question, is God available to save? What do you mean by God? What do you mean by available? What do you mean by save? But, you know, what about Joseph Smith and those golden tablets? Me, myself, I'm a skeptic. I don't think I, I don't have a lot of confidence in the Mormon, in the Mormon, in the Mormon origin story. And of course, in some ways, Tom Holland really gets into this mix when he writes a book, writes history about the the Muslim origin story and looks at it and says, and actually when I look at Christianity and Islam or Mormonism, Latter-day Saints and Islam, there's a lot of commonality between those two things. And, you know, I think about what C.S. Lewis wrote to Sheldon Van Auken. I think in some ways the LDS faith and the Islamic faith is sort of going over the top too far. And it's they've sort of lost the balance that that you need to keep in order to to deal with these questions. What we could say, and this would be an elaboration of Brett's point, is that moral intuitions of the sort that you're describing have different zones of relevance. So there's some things that would only work as an intuition in very delimited areas of time and space, let's say. There's a hierarchy of moral intuitions and the more profound the intuition, the more it works as a universal truth across contexts, just like in a scientific truth. So scientific truth is more profound. This is why the postmodernist readings of Thomas Kuhn are wrong, is that the idea that protons are real is really fundamental because no matter what span of time and space that you pick, you're going to encounter protons. Now, this is key in terms in terms of this question that we're pursuing, because we're always looking at limits here and framing and Peterson notes that as far as we can tell, he doesn't actually say that, but you have to put that caveat in there. As far as we can tell, these processes, these laws of physics, the reality, now, I want us to divorce when I use that word, I want to divorce the implicit physicality and materiality in there. It's deep in there, but the reality of the protons, the degree to which they govern is set in terms of how far they go out and they go out a long ways. We tend to find that this, you know, now quantum theory and physics, physics seems to work way out there in space and it works right here. And that was, of course, the the the difficulty with Newtonian mechanics, because Newtonian mechanics worked really well. I mean, when I studied physics in college, we studied Newtonian mechanics and because Newtonian mechanics works really well for this world of objects. But these other physical systems and models worked better for the very large and the very small. And so what we're trying to do with these models is to get further out. And what Peterson notes here is that the power of this is because it sort of scales where you are. Works in a idea that protons are real is really fundamental because no matter what span of time and space that you pick, you're going to encounter protons. It works everywhere. And then with moral intuitions, let's say, or morally priorities, you have the same issue is some of them are so delimited that they only work here and now. And those are sort of impulsive, low level intuitions, a whim, even. But some of them are really, really deep. The ones, for example, the one that orients you to make the claim that you made in the moral landscape. Now, he uses that word orient. And that's so fundamental in this. Remember, Jonathan Peugeot's conversation with Stephen Woodford rationality rules. Peugeot keeps going back to say Peterson to say Peugeot. Peugeot keeps going back to and same with Adam Friended. It depends where you are, where you stand. And now again, Peterson is using oriented now. Now, why are we why all this exaptation? Why all this physicality? Because that's we have to think in terms of these concepts because that's what our brains are set to do. That's what we are built for. That's the CPU and the GPU working together. And and so now Peterson is saying, OK, it depends. The scale here is is vital and important. The world intuitions a whim, even. But some of them are really, really deep. The ones, for example, the one that orients you to make the claim that you made in the moral landscape that the hellish story is bad and the heavenly story is good. I would say that's one of the deepest, most context independent moral intuitions, which is kind of the claim. Now, that context independence is crucial there because that's kind of what we're dealing with in terms of the spatial metaphors. This has to work not only on planet Earth, it has to work on the moon. This this model needs to work on the sun, needs to work on the stars, needs to work on the black holes, needs to work in all these different levels. You make except you claim that and again, back to my fundamental concern here in the difference with respect to the difference with how we talk. OK. What is this fundamental concern? Well, if we and this is why at the end of this conversation, they'll get into prayer. Well, if I close my eyes and pray and it's interesting that I'm going to I'm going to end here when when Harris kind of backs Peterson into a corner. But even though it didn't get the cheers from the crowd as much, Peterson back Sam Harris into a corner when he says when you close your eyes and pray, you don't know what's going to happen and you don't know why it works. None of us do. And Harris agrees with that. These things to call that thing God is fine. That's a God I have no problem with. Right. But that's not how most people most of the time are using the word. And there's something misleading about that. And that's right here. You know, when it's when Harris says that, that's when it occurs to me. OK, Harris and Peterson are talking about two different gods. What do you mean by God? And that is what we're talking about. And that question, that framing of the question puts us back with everyone in the ancient world with respect to this entire project, because the prior projects is there or isn't there a God? That's really a kind of a crappy question. As as the Tom Holland conversation pointed out, the far better question is what on earth do we mean by that word? Because we're not going to give up using the word. And even if we decide to force where the word out of social cultural pressure, we're not going to give up the concepts because it's just way too powerful an idea for us to live without. That worries me. Yeah. Well, if the claim if if the claim that you're making is that we're all deeply confused about the nature of divinity and ultimate reality, it's like, yeah, yes. Clearly, another thing we agree on. I also don't disagree. I don't disagree. Look, I've never said I've never made the claim that what I'm talking about is like what other people are talking about. I mean, it is in some ways, but here Peterson gets a little defensive and I can certainly understand why, but I don't think it's helping his cause right now. I've not made that claim, so I don't see why that's a justifiable criticism. It's like, no, it's a it's a criticism in the with respect to the very likely effects of communicating in that way, because I see the results of that communication. It's a little bit. I mean, this is going to sound more invidious than it is, but this is the kind of thing that I get into with Deepak Chopra. Yeah, Deepak and I agree about a lot. I think it's more invidious than it sounds, actually. Yeah. And now this is where OK, so this is if, say, Sam Harris were to sit down with Tom Holland. Well, they probably wouldn't have much of it. Sam Harris wouldn't be a whole wouldn't be very upset with Tom Holland because, well, Tom Holland doesn't seem to be making people into Christians and eating into his audience. But this question of OK, so then the New Agers, the spiritual, but not religion people, the well, when the when the story verse just kind of goes on its own and becomes untethered from from the material physical world, problems start to happen and and we quite rightly sort of lose respect to these people, lose status in our eyes. Well, you're not wearing rhinestone glasses. If you if you graduate to that, we'll have more of a problem. But it's Deepak clearly wants to let his audience believe that everything they're into is on some level justifiable by justifiable. You can find this word justifiable by whom? This is really interesting because Sam Harris's worldview depends to a degree on authority. And, you know, I really like what Machu Pajos says about. Matter being dark, because not only is there no meaning, there's no authority, there's no authority comes from the other side. OK, and authority comes from from authors, comes from sub creators, comes from agents, comes from persons. And there's no authority in this. It's dark. It's meaningless. And what you see Sam Harris do right now, once you use that word justifiable, well, he may and he certainly means it just in an Ecclesiastes sense that which is under the sun. But he's he's he's now leveraging an argument on authority. His reading of quantum spookiness. So again, spookiness. It's a very interesting word that he doesn't very rationally or consciously select necessarily. But now we're getting into spooky stuff. We're getting into the woo. We're getting into the mysterious. And there's a lot of bullshit or that goes on there. Absolutely granted. I mean, and this is where Tom Holland goes back to talk about the Protestant Reformation because a big deal in the Protestant Reformation is to call bullshit on a lot of stuff that they see happening in the church. And and so, yeah. But in this way, just as Tom Holland says, Richard Dawkins is Sam Harris is deeply, deeply Protestant. You know, if you want to go out and just buy a lot of crystals and think they're going to heal you, it has something to do with quantum quantum nature of reality. Nothing like me. No, no. But I'm but I think Deepak could say if I if I got his back to the wall, Deepak could say honestly say, listen, I've never said anything about crystals. Right. I'm not selling crystals. I've never said they work. But it's it's the way in which he's failing to make the clear differentiation. The fact that the fact that it takes you to. OK, there's a line here that must be maintained between the story verse and the matter verse. And if you fudge that line. Now, what Peterson and Tom Holland are pointing to is that that line might not be exactly what you think it is or necessarily where you think it is. 20 minutes and and well, maybe I'll just interrupt for a for a meme that I saw on the bridges of memeing that I think that I think really shows this. This showed up on the bridges of memeing discourse on the bridges of meaning discord server and the bridges of memeing channel. All animals want to live. Where do you draw the line? And vegan billboard dot com. Where do you draw the line? Now, maybe you're saying, well, I'm going to draw the line at animal versus plant. OK, where's that line? And OK, so so this person draws the line between dog and bunny. They'll eat bunnies, they'll eat horses, they'll eat chickens, they'll eat cows, they'll eat pigs, they'll eat bulls, they'll eat ducks. All right. And that's where they draw the line. But that line, you know, between pet and food. Now, another person I saw drew the line between the horse and the chicken. They'll eat chickens and cows, but they won't eat horses and bunnies. Where do we draw the line and where does that line come from? That line doesn't come from genetics. And, you know, you what it would have been very interesting is you put a human being in that little picture and say, where do you draw the line? Because according to Sam Harris, well, human beings have flesh and genetics and, you know, all right there, too. We could throw guinea pigs up on that list. Because right there, well, there's the issue, isn't it? Where do we draw that line? So I just finished my conversation with Brett Sockhold and and Kale Zeldin, and it did not disappoint. It was a tremendous conversation. I finally had to call him off that after two hours. But I have the feeling we could have gone another two, which would have been great. But I'll probably post that before I post this and that hence the introduction, the interruption in flow. And I just posted the animal. Where do you draw the line? In other words, back to Peterson's point, what do you call pet? What do you call food? Where do you draw the line? You don't get the line from biology. You get the line from the story verse. That's where the line comes from. So when Tom Holland says, you know, he's talking about real. I got to fix the sound. Zoom always monkeys with the sound and I have to reset it in some deep settings in the computer. But when Tom Holland talks about believe and whether he believes. And what is real again, the the deep assumptions of materialist physicalist. So when we get into Tom Holland's podcast and and he has to deal with the question, did it really happen? Well, we're looking at the word really there. And well, where is the line really between child, pet and food? Religions have long dealt with eating prohibitions. Today is Fat Tuesday. Tomorrow is Ash Wednesday. The beginning event that played in beginning of lent that played into our conversation. But Sam Harris wants to say, well, Sam, where is that line? And it's a human line. And I was just reading the comments from someone brought up again, John Gray. That's that's all downstream of Christianity, which which Tom Holland sees clearly. And Sam doesn't doesn't play into his view here. All right, let's see if all the settings are still good. Crystals, I've never said they work, but it's it's the way in which he's failing to make the clear differentiation. The fact that the fact that it takes you 20 minutes to admit and applause that there that a lot of the Bible is filled with barbaric nonsense. I don't think it took me 20 minutes to admit. Yeah, we'll go to the tape on that. These things matter. These things matter. And I'm just saying it's like you own it. If you're in a parish of one or in a parish of one thousand or a parish of one hundred thousand, but not in the parish that has anything in common with the with the Bible thumpers in my country who think that Jesus is very likely coming back in their lifetime because he never died. Now we're going to pay attention to this coming back business because I didn't know that was integral to the art to Arthur and that mythology. And we're going to go there. He's going to judge the living and the dead and there will be a resurrection and hellfire and all the rest. And again, when Sam Harris says they'll there will be the assumption, he's presuming underneath that he's talking physical material. And of course, Jordan Peterson sort of goes there mythological symbolic. And that's where we're going to go with this, because, well, the question can is God available to save me? Is God willing to save me? And all of the all of the miracles you find in the Gospels, people coming up to Jesus, can you can you heal people? People aren't stupid. They paid attention to the physical. But again, as as as mature pageau says, I don't know if I said his name right. That's that's part of what that layer is for. That's not the game you're playing at all. Own it. It's one of my favorite points in all of these talks. And we talked about Jordan Peterson, his father figure in the if if you're listening to this and you first haven't listened to Brett Sockel and and Kale Zeldin and the conversation we had. I know some of you don't listen to any of the conversations you want to listen to that conversation. That conversation was astounding. Why why are you why are you why are you all applauding about that? It's like what what do you mean own it? It's like I already made my claim. It's like I'm not playing a religious fundamentalist game. So what's all the applause about? So I don't understand that. And own it. It's like I was as listen, I was as clear as I possibly could be when I delineated my answer to the question. People say, well, what do you mean by God? Someone wants to ask you if Jesus was one second answer. But no. I think we can actually. This is a complicated. No, I don't want to end on it. I don't want to end on a. And again, we're to the resurrection. Why? What? Why does the resurrection matter? Is God available to save me? Who is me? Me? This this story that has been embodied for 57 years. Me? This this story that is embodied and has a zip code and a place and space and time. Me, this story that is the father of five children. Me, this on and on and on and on. Note of acrimony. But someone once asked you whether you thought Jesus was literally resurrected and you said. And again, literally is the worst used to word physically. That's what you want. That's far more precise physically. And it would take me 40 hours to answer that question. OK, that's that's that's the kind of thing I'm responding to here. You don't need to do that if you have a clear cut answer to that question. I don't have a clear answer. And if you don't and if you don't, that that connects with many other things that we still have to talk about. If you don't have a clear cut answer to that question, this is where I want to. I hope it doesn't get crowded out by all the other interesting conversations that I'm having. This is where I want to get into this Avi Loeb UFO video because we're dealing now. I mean, the epistemology takes all this attention. We're dealing now in terms of epistemology. And well, if you can't say he didn't rise from the dead, well, that puts you in a tribe. Is that a physical thing at an autopsy? Can you see whether or not the person believed in the Resort, the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ? Can you figure that out in an autopsy? No. You might take guesses of it. Maybe they're buried in a churchyard and maybe yes. But, you know, this question and how it boils down here. If you don't, that that connects with many other things that we still have to talk about. Yes, definitely. Because that. It isn't obvious in the biblical account that Christ was literally resurrected. It is. He ate a fish. So it's not simple. This is not simple. No, but if the question is, do you think he. Well, let's put it probabilistically. I mean, anything's possible. I'll tell you that it's possible that. Oh, this is where we get interesting. He was. Well, let's put it probabilistically. I mean, anything's possible. I'll tell you that it's possible that he was physically resurrected. I mean, it's it's not it's even possible. Wait a second. I didn't respect the quantum mechanics. The point is. I said it would take me 40 hours to answer the question. I didn't say that he was. Well, how's this for an answer? Almost certainly not. Pressure pressure. What kind of pressure is it? Is it is it factual? Is it reasonable or is it status? Is it tribal? What's what's what's wrong with that answer? You want I think I know you want it. He almost you won. But Sam, is that a reasonable argument? Is that a reasonable argument you're making? Is that rationality? What is that you're you're leaning on Jordan with right there? I think I know what's wrong with that answer. It's a it's a fine answer. And people have been giving that answer for a very long period of time. But the idea doesn't seem to go away. But that's evidence of what exactly? I don't know. Well, I can tell you one thing it's an evidence of. All right. And hats off to Brett. Brett Weinstein, who did a terrific job at that because when to jump in, when to not jump in. Good on you, Brett. Doorway to our next three hour conversation. Sure, sure, sure. We have we have 10 minutes left. And then they're going to get into a video that I have played many, many, many times. But the physicality matters. Did it happen? Did it not happen? The physical resurrection of Jesus Christ. Almost certainly not. Should these stories govern? Is it justifiable to believe them in a public way or must we put social pressure and status pressure on someone to back down? Is God saving available to me if if it's true that I have only one life? That isn't inconsequential in terms of how I decide to spend this one life. So off we go then at this point into metaphorical truth. But I don't want to be merely metaphor metaphorically cured from cancer or heart disease or a bullet. I you know, we don't want a metaphorical drug or a metaphorical army. What is matter for? It is dark. But what is it for? A while ago now, and you can still find this on Amazon, I hope becoming truly human was Nathan Jacobs movie that he did. And he's doing movie making. And I should probably try and reconnect with him at some point, because I'd be really curious to see what's going on with him. But he it's a it's a really interesting movie. And he had a couple of really good lectures that he gave to the Orthodox priests in America. But in that story, there's a very moving story of and I told it in the in the questions for atheists where part of what why a woman left the church is God's agency. She had an uncle who a beloved uncle who died seemingly easily avoidable by smoking in bed. And if if God, you know, just watch 1980s touched by an angel or or just troll the Internet for for examples of. You know, angelic sightings, why couldn't God just send an angel to take the cigarette out of his mouth and place it in the ashtray? Would that be too much for a God? Is God available to save? And then suddenly, and this is a point I think about often. Well, if God can do anything, why didn't he send my save my uncle? And then then we get to the whole Calvinism thing, which, of course, Calvinism for many is a shorthand for double predestination. Maybe God chose to not save him. Why did God choose to save this person over here and not my uncle? Is God making choices? Well, that's that's sort of the job of God. But then we have this question. Well, I don't like others making choices for me. And I think that's part of the reason that people go to the impersonal, because part of the reason we love the impersonal is because we get to choose because personal agency trumps impersonal. Impersonal is always available, and it leaves us the person in our imagination at the point of control. So this is a very hard thing. And again, I talked about it in that video. But now. It gets down to, again, this question of action and what really happened. And so people, this is where sort of the the historical personal God you meet in the Bible who chooses and makes choices and then is incarnated via Christianity into Jesus Christ. And he makes choices and he's there limited on the spot by space and time. The God they like to think of is all impersonal and wouldn't hurt or kill anyone because that God doesn't actually do anything. And C.S. Lewis actually talks about this in in his book. And so do I believe in God? Do I believe that I can pray and my prayers will be heard and answered? And so swing back to Tom Holland, who believe in God per se, just tipping point of that. A God who acts, a God who decides, a God who listens, a God. But the story, I find the world more meaningful. I find the world happier. I find the world more exciting. And again, in contrast to the other woman who found the world less happy to imagine that that God did nothing. And so this is where I'm into Tom Holland's new podcast. And I really also enjoy his his collaborative partner, Dominic Sandbrook, in the podcast. These two have a wonderful relationship back and forth. And I I heartily endorse this podcast. It is it is tremendously fun. You can learn a ton from it. But but listen to I'm probably going to check the sound here to listen to this episode on Christmas. So I think I'm right in saying you'll know more about this than me because you never miss an opportunity to plug your book about Christianity. Dominion available from all the book shops. Christmas coming up. Rush out and buy it, folks. Well, people are people are missed it. I mean, people have done their Christmas shopping. They don't want to. I mean, maybe it's it'll be in the sales. Isn't there a difference? Some gospels say he was born. Jesus was born in Bethlehem and some say Nazareth. Is that right? But there's and this, of course, questions like this. OK, so if if God is just the force and may be available to people with midi-chlorians or if God is impersonal and and just and again, Nathan Jacobs brings up the movie Life itself, which is fascinating in here. And how are we to think about this God and all these naughty little questions about if the Bible were true and Sam Harris. So if the Bible were true, surely the maker of the universe would get the details right on the story of his son and insist on that. They both say no. So there are four gospels and there are only two that give us accounts of the nativity. Both of them have him being born in Bethlehem. One of them, St. Matthew's Gospel gives us the account of the three wise men coming and the the master of the innocence and the other one, Luke, gives us a story about the shepherds. Right. And so the Christmas story is a fusion of the two. So there's no story about the two. No, no. And there are huge issues with it as history. OK, as history. OK, well, what do we mean by history? Well, we mean what do we mean? Well, the physical occurrences. Is that what we mean by history? Well, that's certainly a part of the story. But if you got my BA in history, if you pay attention to history, what are you paying attention to? Is it just these things happened? And again, happened, we mean physically. No, it's the what was on their minds. What was their motivation? We see history as you know, if science is looking at, well, water, plants, plants, and so on, and so forth, then we see that. So what do we mean by history? We see history as you know, if science is looking at, well, water plus electricity makes hydrology, you know, so then we have hydrogen and oxygen come out of water. Well, you have the First World War and you have the Second World War and the First World War causes causes like like hydrology. Cause not hydrology. It's hydrology. I can't remember. Like like a chemical reaction. The First World War causes a chemical reaction like pouring things in a in a in a laboratory. But that's history. So what do we mean by this? And because this is in fact well, and why does this connect with God who is able to save the obvious? So the Christmas story is a fusion of the two. So there's no story in which you get both the shepherds and the wise men. No, no. And there are huge issues with it as history. Issues. The obvious one would be that the dates are all over the place. So obviously we you know, we date our years from the birth of Christ, but we've got no idea really when the birth of Christ is because in one of them we've got King Herod is alive. And Herod dies in 4 BC. And then in the other one, we've got a decree going for from Caesar Augustus. And we're told that this is when Sirenius was governor of Syria. And Sirenius is holding his census in 86. So you can't. And if you're curious about these things, any good commentary on the New Testament on Matthew or Luke will go into exhaustive details about this. And this then is going to spur a very big fight because well, even though these things had been discussed for a very long time, what happens in our zeitgeist, in our collective imaginary that somehow makes these issues vitally important as to a person's faith? You can't square the two. Okay, that's a pretty big question. Well, there was a kind of census, but it certainly was. And again, if you go into a there are a lot you could go and you can find this on YouTube. There's lots of discussion about these kinds of things. Did that census actually happen, Tom? Is that a real thing? Well, there was a kind of census, but it certainly wasn't. Again, if you go into... you can find this on YouTube. There's lots of discussion about these kinds of things. ...and Sirenius is holding his census in AD 6, so you can't square the two. Okay, that's a pretty big range. And did that census actually happen, Tom? Is that a real thing? Well, there was a kind of census, but it... Is that a real thing? What do we mean by real? It certainly wasn't a census in the way that it gets described in the New Testament. And what's absolutely certain is that Joseph would not have been required to go to Bethlehem. What's absolutely certain... And it's pretty clear that... At least Joseph is alive. That whole story is an attempt to get Jesus to Bethlehem and try to be born, because our prophecy says that the Messiah will be born in... So we're gonna write this, and this is a lot of... I got a lot of commentaries behind me. So we have to write this in order to get Jesus there, and so we've got what we understand to be prophecy. So let's write the story to make sure it fits, and we just look... Boy, that sure looks like fudging to me. In Bethlehem. So they've retrofitted the story, basically. They've retrofitted the story. I mean, I think it's pretty clear that Jesus was born in Nazareth. But having said that, I think that you can see that there are kind of enduring themes that will run through probably over the 2000 years that have followed, and which are part of the Christian tradition to this day. One is the idea that Jesus, Son of God, the Messiah, is essentially... I mean, he's the son of travelers who can't find room in the inn, famously. He's laid in a manger. And the contrast is something that is fundamental to the Christian story, that God himself has become this tiny baby laid in a stable. So that's crucial, the contrast between greatness and smallness. And that's, I think, why the references to Caesar Augustus and to the Roman governorship and everything, and to Herod, is so important because you're counterpointing that. Counterpointing the Christ child to the apparatus of state power. Now, the whole episode is great, and you should watch it. But I play this part to illuminate what's going on in our minds. And when Tom Holland says, I can't believe... Now, Tom Holland is well acquainted with living with the paucity of physical evidence to collaborate stories from the ancient world. And the amount of difficulty one might have finding sources compared to sources we have today. And so he's sort of... You know, it really isn't demythologizing. It's sort of dehistoricizing the text that we have. And then looking at it as mythology, remythologizing, looking at it as mythology, and then the point of the story isn't what happened. Now, again, my point is this is not to fight this battle, because this battle has been fought for over 100 years now, and far longer than that in many respects. But I want to point to this battle and look at sort of the underpinnings beneath it. How these particular things work within this battle. Now, I'm going to pick on Lydia McGrew a little bit, because Lydia has just come onto the YouTube scene, and Lydia is a very interesting figure. I should probably have her on my channel. I think she'd probably agree to it. She is making YouTube videos basically saying... Okay, let me lay the landscape here. And I was just, again, relistening to my first conversation with Cale Zeldin that we had on my channel. We were talking about Fuller Seminary. And so there's sort of hardline fundamentalists that in the wake of the modernist fundamentalist theory wanted to say, everything happened in the Bible just like that. Everything happened in the Bible just like that. Then they have to deal with some awkward details that are sometimes a little hard to sort of piece together between the Gospels. It's often called the synoptic problem. And so there are plenty of texts that do just that, that will explain away all of these problems. Now, I remember starting my first course in the Gospels at Calvin Seminary, and David Holwerda was our professor. Now, the Christian Forum Church is sort of middle of the road here. And David Holwerda explained to us how he started out as a New Testament scholar doing just that, explaining how all of the pieces fit together. And there are no historical issues. And they basically said, I got tired of it. And I wondered whether that was really the point of all of this. And so, you know, a lot of whereas he was quite conservative, the other voice comes out and says, well, some of the differences in the Gospels are not necessarily simply attributable to different perspectives of eyewitnesses. And again, you know, people like Sam Harris could easily wade in and say, well, wouldn't it be convenient for the Almighty to at least get the story straight before he delivers it to us in the authorized book? It's a powerful argument. And then people will come back and say, well, you know, in my tradition, blunt it with organic inspiration rather than mechanical, because again, Mormons and Muslims both have mechanical inspiration. No, this is organic inspiration. And others will come and say, well, sort of what we have in the four canonical Gospels, the questions between them have very long been known. In fact, very early on, there was the attempt to harmonize these Gospels, and the Church resisted that attempt. The Church wanted to keep these Gospels as, and if you think about it this way, it's rather a powerful argument. The Church wanted to keep these Gospels as eyewitness testimony. And so in a court of law, let's say, if you have four witnesses to, let's say, the storming of the Capitol in Washington, D.C., rather than the court sitting down in a back room with all of these witnesses and trying to get their story straight and trotting out someone with the organized story, you let all of the witnesses speak. And then they said, well, how are these eyewitnesses? And then you look at Bauckham's book about the eyewitnesses and the Gospels, and you can pull that out. So someone like Lydia McGrew is sort of on the conservative end of this, and she's not way at the edge, but she is more on the conservative end than others who want to say, no, what's clearly important from the Gospels is the symbolism and the mythology. And so Jordan Peterson says, I didn't say Jordan Peterson says I didn't say he physically rose from the dead. Okay. And Sam Harris wants to have him pressure him and bully him into almost certainly not. And you again, you almost I don't know if you won. Is that and I wish Jordan had come out in that moment, recognize the peer pressure. Now, again, if you look at my conversation with Brett and Kale, there's a power to standing up to that kind of pressure and say, no, you're not going to get me to say that. Now, all of this has been worked through for a very long time. And that's where George Marsden's book Fundamental of an American Culture is really helpful because what happened in the fight was, well, it's polarization. It's one or the other. Either these books are mythology or these books are a particular kind of record. Especially a particular kind of record that that you and I would embody. And it was noteworthy in my conversation with John Sooke that this was sort of true in the Christian Reformed Church. And it's really quite true of my position. I often say, well, do you have evidence that it didn't happen this way? And what you discover is that the skeptics sort of lean on David Hume and say, well, and it's exactly what Sam Harris does. Well, in all probability, CS Lewis comes in there and says, you know, probability is kind of a funny thing because history is full of enormously improbable things. Just look at the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand. I mean, talk about a story of enormous improbabilities that launched the First World War. And there we are. And so again, my point, you can go on the internet and find this historicity question struggled over. And it comes through again and again and again in conversations that I have with people who are demythologizing and struggling with those questions. So it's a valid question. And I'm not trying to either sidestep the question or say it's invalid, but I think it bears looking underneath the question and saying, well, why do we feel this way about history? And that is exactly the kinds of transcending I think we're seeing in the likes of Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson right now. And it's sort of tentative moving towards it. Why does history matter so much? I don't hear this question asked. It's sort of assumed. But it's and so that's what drove me to make this video because I had to sit down and say, why does history in this way, physical history matter the way it does? It seems to matter greatly to us. And I think good reason. And I think it should. But how and why? Especially because, again, reading the ancients, did it matter to them the way it mattered to us? And it certainly it certainly mattered to them. C.S. Lewis makes this point again with respect to, let's say, the virgin birth. Joseph knew very well how babies came into the world, according to the story. And when Mary shows up pregnant, Joseph is ready to dismiss her quietly. That's a very rational response to a set of circumstances. So what's happening in that story? Joseph is not irrational. And then why? Why wouldn't? And this is a question that that to me speaks to the validity, the historical validity, or lest we use another freighted word, the authenticity of the Gospels. And the Gospels don't seem to take everything into the back room and fix it up pretty to bring it out front. You can leave that to modern people to do if they wish. And the church resisted this as well. Why? And it seems to me there is beneath that an ancient assumption within the church and understanding that and understanding that all of this stuff is fretted and freighted. But that the it's the cover up that gets you in trouble, which you learn from from the Nixon administration. So we have to ask this question. Why does history matter so much? You know, we are small, short term creatures constantly recalibrating our plausibility structures. That's who we are and what we do. And so we're always so physicality, materiality, what physically happened matters whether or not Jesus rose from the dead physically matters. And we're doing this all the time individually. We're always recalibrating. We know that there's plenty of bullshittery all around the world. And so we've got a nose for it because when you get enough of it, it stinks and you try and smell it out. And but we're also doing it as tribes and as groups. And so the deconstructions and the conversions and Sam Harris leaning on Jordan Peterson with almost certainly not at all of this. This is always in play. And the past is what happened physically in the past is vitally important for us to recalibrate what can happen in the future. And so let me know. Let's give due respect to David Hume and probability. We're working on those probabilities. But now to bring in C.S. Lewis, who leans against it in his book on miracles and says, but what is the statistical reality of the history we have? Isn't it infinitesimal? You know, it's the whole question about how many monkeys on a typewriter do you need to yield and how much time do you need to yield the works of William Shakespeare? Can you get that into your 16 billion year story of this? Or do you have to smuggle stuff through some other windows? And that's where, you know, a whole group of people in in who are skeptics about lots of things that we have contemporary unanimity surrounding evolution or all sorts of other things. That's where these skeptics play a role. And they say, hey, wait a minute. And I, you know, I listen to James Tour and some of the stuff he makes and he's like, oh, you all say that you just have soups and volcanic fissures and out comes life. He's like, we he's a, you know, he's a world class scientist. He says, we don't really know. Can we be honest with that? Surely we should be honest. And again, this is where that video about the the Harvard physicist who was basically chiding his colleagues saying, you're sort of not being good scientists when it comes to this strange thing that we saw out in space and we couldn't really explain it. Shouldn't we be open minded? I mean, who really? Almost certainly not. Okay. Improbable. Absolutely. But the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand was enormously improbable. Yet it happened. You know, our imagination and conviction of what really happened again, it's so often governed by our imagination. And I'll point again to that great video of Dallas Willard, the nature necessity of worldviews on the Veritas forum, where he talks about the young man on the university. How you have all this social pressure to, well, here's the little box that we believe in. You better not stray from that box. We're going to tag you in terms of your, you're going to be Sam Harris said it so well, you're going to be part of those people. You don't want to be part of those people, Jordan. Well, if you've learned anything about Jordan, you start bullying him. It doesn't go well with Jordan B. Peterson. He's not a man to be bullied or to try and push into a corner. And, you know, what happened there with Sam was about the most I've seen done to Jordan. Other than that, you'll fester on it. It'll stir on it and he'll come back at you. And he's pretty darn sharp and he's pretty darn articulate. So, so our imagination and conviction about what really happened. What we anticipate the future by, by looking at the past. And it's why the miracles debate won't go away. And it's why the story of Jesus physical resurrection won't go away. Because these laws of physics weren't found in the ground like golden plates in upstate New York. In all fairness, they're deduced. And, you know, Rupert Sheldrake comes along and says, well, if the constants are so constant, why do we have an office that has to track them? And when I heard that, it was like, wow. Well, they, they move around. Well, why would they move around? What does that say about these, these laws of physics? And again, Jordan Peterson, you know, very rightly said, but these particles scale out. So we can look at physics and we have this lesson between Newtonian mechanics and, and, and quantum mechanics. And then wherever physics is going from there, the world is a very strange place. And so when you're messing around with probability, you're messing around with certain groups and tribes of probability. And many people have rationally again, rationality is sort of a, a coherence device between things. And if you have experiences different from others, well, they're not going to see probability anyway, the way you do. And I've had a lot of experience with that. I've seen things I can't under under explain or understand, and maybe the amazing Randy will come in and maybe offer a million or maybe he won't pay out. But I've seen strange things by very credible people. And I just simply don't believe the little iron box that some of these people put the world in. Call me a dupe. You know, here's the thing about not having much status. I don't got much to lose. Call me what you want. I don't care. It's status. So, so there's this gatekeeping that goes on and you gain or lose status in your group based on how you posture yourself with respect to these and against Dallas Willard tells a story in that video. That's just absolutely perfect. You know, someone at church will say he believes, but go on to the university and you have all of these. Why did you build those buildings so dramatic? Stanford University and Yale. Why all the monumentality? Why don't you build your university high status universities to look like some lousy strip mall like some crappy junior college and butt stink nowhere? No, you're Yale. You're Stanford. You build impressive monumentality. What is that about? Where's that line? It's Sam. Can you really tell me the shape of the building has has nothing to do with reinforcing the social imaginary that that the owners of the buildings have constructed? That's the whole point of status and image and symbolism. And what happens when our incredibly impressive, incredibly powerful, incredibly effective medical establishment can't heal you? There's only one you talking. Well, in 99.9% of the cases, this treatment worked. You are not a statistic. You are a statistic of one. And so, well, that's when people light out for the territory, the nonconformist territory. And of course, Michaela Peterson lived in that. And, you know, when when Sam's talking about crystals and Jordan's like, that's not me. What happens when when it's Benzo withdrawal and no place in Canada or the United States can really quite know how to treat Jordan? And so Michaela takes a chance and takes him to Russia and it works. What do you do with that? And, you know, this goes on for the spiritualist people. I mean, eat, pray, love, you know, high status journalist, you know, gets a divorce and, oh, what am I going to do with my life? I'm going to go to India and look at crystals and up. I'm going to meet a man and just just follow, just follow Gilbert's novel about, you know, saying goodbye to marriage. But, oh, my new hubby needs to needs a needs a visa. So I guess I guess I'll say hello to marriage again. You know, status be damned. Lion diet to treat your arthritis. Going to Moscow to get dad off Benzo's. Start listening to Benny Hinn or make a pilgrimage to Bethel Redding if your life isn't working and it gives you personal option financial social constraints. The guru, the healer, the preacher is all you can really afford. You know, it's so funny. I listen to all of these high status people about people of color. And then I turn onto YouTube and the first Church of Truth of God broadcast. I caught Rick watching it on Sunday. Rick's like, I showed I showed Rick the a live stream from an Orthodox church and and said, you know. And Rick's like, I like I like listening to this guy. He's entertaining and we're we're dancing in church and we're getting healed and we're saying amen and we're we're we're we're pounding on the Bible and you got the dude behind him reading the Bible. And it's like, you know, the thing about status is most people don't have it. That's how status works. And so you're going to talk probability and all of this stuff. Fine. And yeah, when when it's my turn for the vaccine, stick it in my arm. I'm not a skeptic and I've I've been one who have leaned on so many people when they they become YouTube doctors and Facebook doctors. And and I look at that and I think that's the thing. I look at that and I think that I'll still go with the science. But you are not a statistic. You are. You are a sample of one. And when it comes to your life and death, you make choices on it. And when and when the medical establishment and all of the high static stuff, status stuff doesn't seem to work with you. What does it say that the Petersons who had money and status light out for the Russian territory and get get the fix in Russia? And I love the story when Jordan wakes up and looks at Michaela and says, you're in big trouble. And what's the probability of this? But it's real. And as a pastor, I see it all the time. The strangest things happen in this world all the time. And that's why I do. I love doing conversations with randos. You want to know why they don't have any status. And so all of this socio-cultural probability that is that is taking the grime and the high resolution out and it's cutting the stories down. And I'm not going to tell the story on YouTube because I'm going to lose status. Well, if they don't have any status, they'll tell me. And are they wrong? Is there bullshittery around? There absolutely is. But it's real. And you know it. And they might be wrong. And and and it I see I see it all the time. People believing bad information and it costs them plenty on and on. And I watch people getting taken in by Nigerian email schemes. I watch people making bad medical decisions, bad financial decisions, bad relational decisions. If you're a pastor of a local church with with with a whole variety of low status people, you're going to see it all the time. You're going to watch pastors give bad advice on and on and on and on and on. But again, we are a statistic of one. And part of what agency means you get to decide and roll the dice and take your chances and take your risk. So I listen to Christmas and Tom. Well, and of course, I talked to Esther O'Reilly about that. And Esther, because Esther is following Esther's following Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson like I am and, you know, show up on my channel sometimes. But blog and, you know, rest. Esther is a terrific writer. And so. But then he makes. It's all true. Or it ought to be. So said Winston Churchill of the Legend of King Arthur. Romantic historical story, or just an invented. Well, I think it's kind of a or it ought to be. So said Winston Churchill of the legend of King Arthur. Romantic historical story or just an invented myth? Well, welcome to the rest is history with me, Dominic Samurok, and my very own Mordred, Tom Holland. Now again, why this little area? Because that's what this video is about. Why does it matter whether it's history? What about King Arthur? Now part of what's fun about looking at someone like King Arthur, if we're looking at the dynamic, let's look at Arthur because, well, what are the stakes on this? What does it mean for someone to be a historical figure? And of course, this is where the either-or of modernity and fundamentalism sort of gets at play. I should say that in the script, in the script Dominic, it says my very own Galahad. So I know, but I was never going to read that out. Very subtly done. Yeah, I was hoping you wouldn't notice. So let's kick off. This is a great subject. King Arthur was my very first historical enthusiasm. So I read the Lady Bird King Arthur books. I read Antonia Fraser's book about the Knights of the Round Table. And I think I read those before I read anything about real kings. I missed... What's happening here? What's happening in his childhood? What is this line? And how, for what I know, Dominic Sandbrook is not a member of the royal family. He will never be King of England. Why look at Arthur? And again, Jordan Peterson stuff just flows in naturally. These are archetypal stories. These are idealized. Jesus Christ is the idealized man. He is the archetype of the good man, of the right man. And so as you feed your children these things, and again, instead of giving a child a list of... This is why our Sunday school materials go so wrong. Give children lists of this is good and this is bad. No, that's law. That comes later. And even so, it's got plenty of tricky things about it. This is how people are formed through story. That was probably true. It was a great subject. King Arthur was my very first historical enthusiasm. So I read the Lady Bird King Arthur books. I read Antonia Fraser's book about the Knights of the Round Table. And I think I read those before I read anything about real kings. That was probably true of lots of people who get into history, isn't it? You start with King Arthur and Robin Hood and then you get into the enclosures and dissolution of the monasteries and all the really exciting, glamorous subjects. Yes. There's always the vague feeling, attaching to reading about the enclosures. The knights with penance are just a lot more fun. And I suppose hanging over this entire theme is the obvious one, which summed up very effectively by Tom Tate, the UK correspondent for the Atlantic, who asks Arthur who, what, why, how? I guess you could express that as basically did he exist? Yeah. Why do we want to know this? Because people on one hand will say, well, it doesn't matter whether he really existed. It's just how the story inspires us. Yeah. But if he didn't really exist, it isn't such an inspiration, is it? What do we lose? And again, we started out this video, Tom Holland talking, you know, he was wooed by the Greeks and the Romans. He was wooed by the classical period. He wanted to live into it. But first he was wooed by dinosaurs. And then to learn he's just a thrush. Don't you want to be a dinosaur? Don't you want to be a real Jedi? Don't you want to have a real lightsaber? Don't you want to have a real one? Don't you want to really face a Balrog and have real magic? I mean, this is, this is, you know, this is where we're going with this. So Dominic, are you a skeptic or a believer? Well, that's it. To my mind, I guess if I like to believe that Arthur existed, of course, because I'm a romantic. But ultimately, I suppose my instinct is that- Become a romantic. But even there, you've just sort of cut the legs. I'm a romantic. I like to, I like to think about it. But that's not like saying I'm a Jordan Peterson basement dweller covered in Cheetos just playing video games all the time while my mom goes to work every day to keep the lights on and the broadband coming. There were multiple authors, right? That probably there were multiple warlords and generals, some of them Roman leftovers, some of them Celtic. And again, if you look at biblical studies, all of these options are put on the table again and again. Well, this is a, this is a composite. And again, composites are all over the place in literature or an exemplar, someone who sort of comes in to stand for the composites and, and biblical storytelling uses that. Why all the stories around Elijah and, and King Ahab and Jezebel? Was it just about Elijah and Jezebel? No, because the whole, the whole way this thing works is it's not just about them. That's sort of the point of an archetype and an archetypal story that, that again, the one great line, the great line Jordan Peterson has when someone says, why can't we tell the archetypal story? No, because stories, archetypal stories are, have to be enfleshed in reality in context. And so story goes, these things go both ways. Some of them may be, I like to believe that Arthur existed, of course, because I'm a romantic, but ultimately I suppose my, my instinct is that there were multiple authors, right? That probably there were multiple warlords and generals, some of them Roman leftovers, some of them Celtic, some of them maybe even Germanic, who sort of fed into the, the Arthur legend at the end of Roman Britain in that sort of period that we think of as the Dark Ages and that, you know, it wasn't completely invented that there must have been grains of truth as there always are in historical myths. But anyway, Tom, this is your, this is your field, you're on home turf, you should be answering this question. I don't think he existed. He's a trained historian. That's, this is, this is the skepticism that we build into the system. And again, it's, we're back to the virus that gets out of the lab. This is the virus that we use in science, this skepticism. And again, to Avi Loeb's conversation with Lex Friedman, it gets out of the lab and it's, it's all over the place. It's the skepticism. You know, I just finished this conversation with, with Brett and Cale and it's, once you start learning that deconstruction is a powerful tool, we're just going to deconstruct everything. And then once, once you've deconstructed everything, then suddenly this, this beautiful vision in Syria of, of, of Al-Qaeda and of, of the Islamic state and, you know, people will leave North America and Europe to fight under a banner. But they kind of got bullshitted from it. And, and, and now they say, well, that's the Muslim and how, how fair of you, how fair is that for you to pick on them? There's plenty of that going on with Christianity. I see it all the time. It's like, oh, everything's, everything's going on in Bethel Redding. I've got to get up there. I've got to be a part of it and go. You know, the old saying, beware of people when they meet their heroes, because, and again, we talked a lot about that with, with Cale and, and Brett, but it's the, it's the beautiful vision. You know, that this word, you hemorrh, there must have been grains of truth as there always are in historical myths. But anyway, Tommy, this is your, this is your field, John Home Turf. You should be answering this question. I don't think he existed. You know, this word, you hemorrhism. I didn't know that word. And so I had to look up that word. And I was really glad I looked up the word. It's a very interesting word. You hemorrhism is an approach to the interpretation of mythology in which mythological accounts are presumed to have originated from real historical events or personages. You hemorrhism supposes that historical accounts become myths as they are exaggerated in the retelling, accumulating elaborations and alterations that reflect cultural mores. This is very true. I listen to say, yeah, this is quiz. Yeah. It was called for the Greek myth, mythographer, you hemorrhous, who lived in the late fourth century BC in a more recent literature of myths, such as both Finch's mythology. You hemorrhism is termed historical theory of mythology. You hemorrhous was not the first to attempt to rationalize funny choice of words, mythology and historical turns. You hemorrhous, of course, you know, this gets into another great episode, two episodes actually in, in this podcast is on Troy because of course, well, we're skeptical about Troy and this is a made up story. And then, you know, there's the great search for the historical Troy. And, and this is, this is part of the, see, we look at this in terms of history and we look at these issues that are things way, way back where we have very, very little access to, but America can't come to terms with what happened in the Trump administration. Are we lacking evidence? Do we not have dates? Do we not, is it the search for the, the real historical Trump? Who is Donald Trump? Can we agree on that? No. Why? You know, and so we, we look at, okay, you want skepticism? We look back and we say, oh, we should be skeptical. Well, maybe we should be a little skeptical about ourselves and all of this. Now, this you hemorrhous goes back a long ways and you find it in, in, with Socrates and Plato's Phaedrus and, you know, the tomb of Zeus and Christians. And this was very hostile to paganism. The early Christians, such as the church fathers, embraced you hemorrhous and attempt to undermine the validity of the pagan gods. And, and one of, one thing that Tom Holland brings up again and again and again, and you know, I don't know, there's not as much of a cult following for Tom Holland as there is Jordan Peterson. I mean, if there is a cult following of Tom Holland, I'm probably it, but yeah, I'll be, I'll be skeptical and critical of, of people I like. I don't know how you could be married and not be skeptical and critical of people you like or have family or children. That's part of what it means to like and love someone. You know, if, if you're, let's not have idols here. Okay. So the Protestants did this and everybody's trying to recalibrate all the time. The early Christian apologists deployed you hemorrhistic arguments to support their position that pagan mythology was merely an aggregate of fables of human intervention. Cyprian and North African convert to Christianity wrote a short story on the vanity of idols in AD 247 that assumed the hew hemorrhistic rationale as though it needed no demonstration. Cyprian begins that those are no gods whom the common people worship is known from this. They were formerly kings who on account of their royal memory subsequently began to be adored by their people, even in death. Thence temples were founded to them. Thence images were sculptured to retain the countenances of the, of the deceased by likeness. The men sacrificed victims and celebrated festival days by way of giving them honor. Thence to prosperity, these rights became sacred, which at first had been adopted as, as a consolation. Now go all the way back to the first Tom Holland video I played and right there you see, well he's talking about atheism and Christianity is like, I kind of come to my atheism through Christianity. I kind of come to my skepticism through Christianity. Richard Dawkins and Sam Harris are just, you know, far advanced over the hill Protestants of a kind. And you know, Cyprian proceeds directly to two examples. The apotheosis of Melisertes and Laothea. The casters, castor and pollux die by turns that they may live, a reference to the daily sharing back and forth of their immortality by the heavenly twins. The cave of Jupiter is seen in Crete and his sepulchre shown. Cyprus says, co-founding Zeus and Dionysus by showing that the Minoan cave cult is still alive in Crete in the third century AD. In his exposition, it is Cyprian's argument to marginalize the syncretism of pagan belief in order to emphasize the individual varieties, a variety of local beliefs. From this religion of the gods is variously changed among individual nations and provinces in as much as no one God is worshiped by all, but by each one of the worship of its own ancestors is kept peculiar, Eusebius and so on and on and on and on and middle ages, the Christ myth theory, what Christians sort of spin out is brought back and on and on and on. So lots of good footnotes and the Wikipedia reference on this. Okay, back to the podcast. Right. Yes. But in the distant past, Tommy, this is your, this is your field, John Home Turf, you should be answering this question. I don't think he existed. You know this word, euhemerism, the idea that in the distant past, you have mortals, kings, powerful figures who go on over the course of time, become elevated and end up as gods. But I think that Arthur is a kind of interesting example of something going the opposite way that I think he's essentially a kind of mythical figure, a figure of folklore who gets attached to a specific historical narrative. And the reason that that can work is that as you said, the setting for Arthur are the century, maybe two centuries after the collapse of Roman Britain, which is the two century period that really we struggled to fit a narrative onto it. We have so few written sources and the evidence from archaeology, from genetics, everything is contradictory and so complex that in a sense, if you wanted to slot a mythical figure and pretend, imagine, cast him, construct him as someone who had actually existed, that's the period that you would do it. But I think that, I guess. Now what's interesting is whether someone just does this and it gets carried on because the sort of the sociology is ready for it. Did someone make up a story and it just gets passed on? Does this come up sort of subconsciously and it's an archetype gets attached and nobody pays attention to it? And how do we know? How does this thing work? And that gets back to this question. Well, why does the past matter to us? So I want to make a few observations. These are some thoughts that I had when I was thinking about this. Power and validation in our communal imagination because this is really a communal thing because this is something, it impacts us, but it impacts our status. So it's in our social imaginary because elements of our social imaginary deeply impact status. So there's power and validation in our communal imaginary. This is real enough to get people into the streets. Oh, there's a piece of that Arthur thing I wanted to play. But I think that, I guess there are two problems really. One is that the sources that mention Arthur are incredibly late. Right. So they're well after the event. Yes, almost. So there's a description of a raid that was launched by some Welsh-speaking Britons from the region of Edinburgh against what's thought to be the Roman fort of Catterick. And this is set about, well, about 600. And the guy who is describing it claims at the beginning of the poem, a guy called a Nerein says, I am narrating it. And he's supposed to have lived around 600. And in that poem, there is a phrase that this warlord pulls off great feats, but he was not Arthur is the phrase. If we can identify that at 600, then that is evidence for it being very early. And you see here how, what is an Arthur? In the gospels, Jesus asks, I just read this last Sunday, who do people say that I am? You're Elijah. Well, what does that mean? Is there a historical Elijah? You're Elijah because of what Elijah is doing, because of what Elijah has done. After being somebody that people will know and that people will say, is he an Arthur? Isn't he? So that's pretty big, isn't it? I mean, doesn't that suggest? Except that, except that this is a poem that was first written down in the ninth century. And the earliest manuscript we have of it is, is the 13th century. So there's a lot of potential for Chinese whispers there. And even if it was written in 600, he was no Arthur. I mean, Arthur could still be a mythical figure. Yes, like you'd say he was no Heracles or yeah. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. And then what about these people like Gildas? So Gildas is somebody who writes about Arthur, isn't he? Tell me about Gildas. Right, so Gildas is probably, again, difficult to pin him down exactly, but he's probably writing about 500. And he does give a kind of garbled narrative of what's going on, even though it's completely shot through with all kinds of Old Testament imagery. So he's not writing a kind of straight history. And he does give us, he gives us a portrait of a haughty tyrant who subsequently gets identified with a guy called Vortigern inviting Saxon mercenaries in. Then you have Britain imploding, you have state of warfare. And this conventionally is the period that you associate with Arthur, but it's not Arthur who is mentioned. It's a guy called Ambrosius Aurelianus, who is described as the last of the Romans. And Arthur isn't there. Right. It's a yawning gap. So why does Gildas not mention Arthur? I guess there are various. But hold on, don't people think that Ambrosius Aurelianus is Arthur? That's a lot of the stuff that I've read. People say, well, this is obviously Arthur. That was his real name. Is that just Baltitas? It's kind of quite desperate because he's not called Arthur. I mean, he's called Ambrosius Aurelianus. So why is Gildas not mentioning Arthur? It could be because he hasn't heard of him. So Arthur is operating in some other area of the country that Gildas hasn't heard. Or it could be that Gildas has a problem with Arthur. So in a lot of the early saints' lives that you get in Wales and other Celtic areas, Arthur is often cast as a kind of problematic figure who preys on the church. So perhaps that's the reason. So he's been cancelled. Gildas is cancelled. Yeah, or perhaps he just doesn't exist. He's an imaginary figure. And I think that that's the likeliest explanation. Where Arthur does appear in what seems to be a historical record is in a Welsh series of texts, of chronicles and so on, that is attached to the name of a Welsh writer called Nennius. But again, it's all very confusing. And this is the one that gives a famous list of 12 battles that Arthur is supposed to have won, culminating in the Battle of Badon, which we can be fairly confident is a battle that was fought because Gildas mentions it. But he doesn't associate it with Arthur. He doesn't even specifically say that it's Ambrosius or Rhaelianus who won the Battle of Badon. He doesn't say who the Battle of Badon was against. He doesn't really provide a solid date for it. So the whole thing is a kind of, it's a mess. And I think that that being so, you've got to ask, well, why and how would the legend of Arthur emerge? And I think that it's pretty clear that what's going on is that you have a Welsh speaking tradition that is very hostile to what it sees as a takeover of its lands by. Now we have a two level theory. That's there's, there's all of this stuff underneath and it gets expressed as a story. And again, that's, you don't have to be skeptical about that thing. That's what we do. Inherit the Wind, the movie about the Scopes trial, the Scopes Monkey trial, expresses their feelings about the, the maker's feelings about McCarthyism. We do this kind of thing all the time. Saxons. And likewise in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, you have a very similar account of Saxons and Angles sweeping westwards, conquering the homelands of the Britons, pushing them into Wales, seen from the other side. And traditionally this has been understood to be a historical narrative that the Romans withdraw, that the Britons invite in the Saxons, the Saxons then conquer what becomes England. Arthur supposedly wins the Battle of Badon, keeps the Saxons at bay for a few decades. The Saxons then come back in. And that's a kind of narrative that has been repeated and repeated and is still kind of widely held to. But I think it's a fantastical one. That's not what actually the archaeological evidence shows and it's not what the genetic evidence shows. Let me interrupt you. So modern sort of academic historians, very recently, especially if they're sort of quite, sort of quite woke, shall we say, they think that this is the wrong narrative because it presents immigration as kind of contested and it's all done with fire and sword. And they sort of argue, oh no, it was much more gradual and there was an assimilation that the idea that the Saxons came in and they drove Arthur and the Britons all into Wales is all bulldozed ash and it was this sort of multicultural process and all the rest of it. Do you buy all that? Is that your take on it all? I don't think it's about woke anxieties about immigration. I think it's about the fact that all the evidence on the ground, the archaeological evidence shows very little sign and the genetic evidence shows very little sign of a kind of mass invasion. Basically, the Angles and the Saxons, like the Welsh, are, they're all descended from the people who lived in Roman Britain. And so here you have the question about the historicity of the Joshua invasion. I mean, these kinds of questions emerge, you look for evidence, you do all of this kind of thing. And it's especially important when you get to the end there where they're talking history is always relevance realization with respect to what we decide to pay attention to, what we decide to write about, has everything to do with us. And anyone who looks at the historicity of, not just the history, but who looks at the writing of history as it goes back, people are writing history concerned about the things that are going on in their present time. And the question we're looking at here is, well, why does history matter? Why does history matter? Again, the big question we started out with is God available to save? Is God available to save me from these, this invasion? How are we to think about these, this invasion with respect to morality? So you've got power and validation in our communal imaginary. This is real enough to get people in the streets, to get them to topple governments, to inspire armies, to conquer, to move people, to kill or to risk their lives for the sake of hopes and dreams. This stuff is real. And it's the present and the past that are always in this tension. And we see the present through the eyes of the past. We constantly do that. Again, we've talked quite a bit about projection, point to Jordan Peterson's great conversation with Roger Scrutin in terms of we sort of see low resolution cartoons. And when we see someone, we see that person through the eyes of what has been in the past. The dog who is afraid of men with beards because the first owner of that dog who had a beard beat that dog. The woman who is afraid of a certain kind of man because the man who looked that way physically did something to, you know, one spit, twice shy, you know, power recalibration of human beings. All of this stuff is at play. And so part of what happens about the, our relationship with history is a validation of historical claims. And you see this at play. This is our land and you have ethnicity and tribal identity at play there. You, a collective group identity, did us another group identity. You did us wrong. And now you, the heirs of that identity must pay us the heirs of another identity for the sake of justice. And again, you don't find justice in that hole in the ground where you find the, the golden plates and upstate New York and the laws of physics. What is justice? It's deeply contingent upon a narrative integrity. And we see that at play currently in all of our politics. And so this question about what really happened, what really happened in 1619, what really happened in 1492, what really happened on January 6th, what really happened on election day 2016 and 2020, what really happened has everything to look at through the history of it. The lion, the lion ate the lamb. Therefore all lions are killers and all, and all flocks of sheep. This is the way we work. We look at validation of inheritance claims through history. That's why history and what really happened matters. We look at validations of inheritance, inspiration and potentialities. Is this Elijah or John the Baptist risen from the dead? It's interesting if you listen later on. And again, the whole podcast is great. I mean, all of those, I really enjoy all of, all of those podcasts, you know, Arthur will return. What does that mean? Are we talking a physical resurrection of King Arthur or he was no Arthur because he was unable to take the castle when Donald Trump wins the election? Is he a new Andrew Jackson for better or for worse? Is Joe Biden a new Barack Obama? Arthur will return, but he was no Arthur. He was no Heracles or Hercules. He's not the man his father was. Why is Jesus the son of God? What does that mean? All of this stuff, he is the coming of the Lord. He is the coming of the Lord to Israel. Why is Jesus considered you know, part of a Trinity? What is the spirit of the Lord? All of this stuff is at play. If Jesus and Peter could walk on water, why not me here and now? What enabled them? What is preventing them? Now, I spoke in a previous video about implicit historicity causality. You know, even deeply conservative people see historical causality and its consequences. And so a lot of what we do is retracing the steps of a historical narrative in order to get back on track to the eschaton or to show where your rivals got it wrong, thus invalidating the morality of their present stance. I haven't delved into this book too deeply yet, but Carl Truman recently wrote The Rise and Triumph of the Modern Self, and a number of you have recommended that book to me. But this is a deeply Protestant move. And it was interesting again talking to Cale and Brett. These moves are being made in terms of the Roman Catholic Church. In my first conversation with Cale where he talks about, you know, when Pope John Paul II and Cardinal Ratzinger becomes Pope Benedict, the conservatives imagined, we've won it forever. We've turned the tide. Well, progressives in America, when, you know, with Barack Obama's presidency, we've won it together, we've turned the tide. And then Donald Trump is elected. And I always forget that guy, I should put it in the slides. But, you know, was it Sorkin? You know, writes a letter to his daughter that, you know, this will never happen again. Really? The Republicans are never again going to control the White House or the Congress. I expect they'll likely control the Congress come 2022. Americans seem to like divided government. That's sort of how the government was designed to operate. So, but all this implicit historical causality, we use this and we look to the past to find our lessons to validate, to promote, to navigate, to calibrate. That's why we care if it really happened. And in fact, the Apostle Paul in 1 Corinthians 1 and 15 says, well, if Jesus didn't rise from the dead, then our hope is in vain because everything for Paul rests on the physical resurrection of Jesus, which is why he goes to Jerusalem and looks up James and looks up Peter and looks up eyewitnesses because, well, he's not a scientist, but he understands how history works. And if Jesus rose from the dead, it means something. Well, what does it mean? And, you know, even if you can say, I mean, a few hundred years ago, yeah, Jesus rose from the dead, but so what? I mean, this doesn't, people aren't calculating machines. Just because something flips in our mind, it doesn't mean that everything's going to flip. But again, the dominant question is God saving power available to me when I get in a fix and when I cry out to God, does it matter if Jesus did have the power to remap matter to still a storm or raise the dead or heal the sick or multiply loaves and fishes or change water into wine? It matters because that says something about him. Now, what exactly does it say about him? And what exactly does it say about reality? You know, if Jesus did have the power to remap matter with a word, how might that impinge on me going about my little life? Now, my dog doesn't feel any compulsion. If I would sit down with my little dog and explain how Jesus rose from the dead, it wouldn't change him a bit. Now, if I sit down and explain it to someone else, they might not believe me because all of this is playing on it. You know, does it matter if I masturbate or steal or waste my life playing video games or doing drugs? And I'm speaking about what comes in the conversation with metaphorical truth and Brett Weinstein trying to bridge the gap between Jordan Peterson and Sam Harris. It does matter because we're looking to recalibrate and sort of what we're doing with all of these talks is saying, I won't recalibrate and I, because this is what I think. This little box about what can and can't happen is all that ever happened and all that ever will happen. And even Sam Harris will back off a little bit from that, but say almost certainly not. But when I find, well, what is the difference between Christians and non-Christians? Not even that. Atheists, where is the line? Well, it seems to be, if I call on him, will he answer? Can he change my life? And now again, back to Tom Holland and well, you know, Cyprian, they were dealing with this stuff. Well, what does the world, how does the world really work? Really work? That's the question we're trying to answer. And well, one might have an open mind, but keep looking at the past and keep looking at the present. I got a lot in there. It was divided by another conversation that I had. I have to figure out when, where, how I'm going to post all these, but it's coming. So I hope this was helpful. Leave a comment, like and subscribe. And I've just kind of sort of figured out, you know, if, if most of the people who watch my videos like the videos, that helps the YouTube. If you want other people to find my videos, just hit the like button with a degree of regularity. And that will help other people find my videos. So, but whether or not other people should find my videos, I'm still conflicted and you can see my conversation with Brett and Cale on that. So thanks for watching.