https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=69DKkL3on58

 All right. All right. I'm recording. Do you want to record on your end too or? No, I wouldn't know how to if I... Okay. Well, we won't worry about that. But no, I don't care. I guess I should give some introduction. This is Topher. This is our round two. We had a conversation. I thought it was great. He's unprepared to release it. It doesn't meet his high standards. So I can't wait to see what these high standards are really like because I thought it was really good. But anyway, what are we going to do now? So lead us. So the reason why I didn't think it was very good was there's a bunch of reasons. One of the ones that you might not, I guess, might not be as obvious to someone on the outside of my head is as someone who works with adhesives and potentially neurotoxic chemicals on a constant basis for a decade, any signs of neurological impediment, I'm very sensitive to. And so one of the things that happened in the last recording is that I kind of scared myself because I was kind of grasping for words so much and stuff like that. And in a couple of times, I wasn't able to kind of hold all the different threads of the conversation together as well as I'm used to. And like I say, it scared me. And I've talked to some friends and family about it, and they're fairly confident that I'm probably overreacting and that it's probably more to do with the fact that that was the first time I've done something like this. And so deep breath, just relax. But that's one reason. Other reasons why I didn't kind of like it, you know, another one is that in this kind of a setting, I mean, the time just flies by. I couldn't believe how fast we got to 45 minutes that I was crazy. I mean, you're maybe at this point, you're used to it. I couldn't believe that, you know, I looked at the clock 15 minutes past, half an hour, 45, and then, you know, the battery died. But anyway, another thing I was noticing about it is kind of an inappropriate version of myself. And by that, I mean, you know, I was just focused on being relaxed on kind of not being flustered and nervous, you know, in a first conversation. And I think I did that okay. But I kind of fell into kind of discord mode of conversation where you're mostly, I tend to kind of sit back and listen more and kind of be more reactive to the conversation as opposed to trying to kind of steer it myself. And, you know, there's a time and a place and I think on discord, it's a great it's a great mode. But, you know, maybe maybe for a, you know, recorded conversation that might wind up on YouTube that you kind of need to be a little bit more assertive, a little bit, you know, a little bit less passive. And that is a that's like an opportunity I would I just wanted to broach a quick little model that I we were having some fun with on the discord last year, which is this idea of kind of the particle in the wave as a way of thinking about personality, where, you know, we kind of are we are waves, right, that like, you know, on any given day, you know, depending on what we've eaten, depending on who we're talking to, depending on the subject, depending on how much sleep we got, etc. That we kind of fluctuate around in kind of a space of possibilities that like we're, you know, we're so analogous to kind of the waveform from quantum physics. And then, and then, you know, on in a particular conversation, or in a particular recording, you kind of collapse yourself into a particularity, you know, you collapse yourself into this version of me right now, as opposed to all the other versions of me that I could be. And so anyway, it was a fun, fun concept that we were playing around with last year, we actually came up with an idea for kind of doing an interview series that was trying to harness that, like, so as an example, right, like, just use Joe Rogan as an example, Joe Rogan's done 1500 episodes of his show, three hours each 4500 hours worth of conversation. And if you were to take every single one of those episodes, and kind of, you can just visualize it, if you were to condense them into like an image of Joe Rogan, and then you were to put all of those images on a pane of glass, and then stack all of those panes of glass together, and then look at it, what you would get is this kind of composite image of Joe across time, where you kind of simultaneously see all of the different strange places that he ever goes, but then also the core pieces of him that are always there, no matter how many times you come back and look at him. And so we were, anyway, like I said, we were thinking about doing a cool, like, a trying to come up with a style of interview that would capture that same thing. Anyway, so I thought that in the first episode, as much as it was fine, and it was okay, and I was okay, I was nice and calm, which I liked, I needed to, I think in this format, be a slightly different version of myself within my field of potential. Anyway, I also missed a few keynotes, and I wanted to do kind of a better job of introducing myself to the Discord and kind of to your community. You know, one of the things that I like about your videos is that, you know, whether it's Joe, whether it's Nick, whether it's Tim, whether it's whoever, when they appear in the conversation and Discord, there's some kind of preamble that's already covered, right? That like, you kind of know what they're interested in, what their bag is, like what kind of conversations they're interested in, what questions they're grappling with, and so that, you know, it's really efficient. Rather than Job having to come in and say, hi, I'm Job, a thousand times to a thousand different people in the Discord, you know, Job just shows up and you kind of know who Job is, and so I wanted to do a better job. I didn't think I did an adequate job of kind of covering those initial bases so that when someone sees me in the Discord, they can either run for the hills or, or, you know, come in and ask me an appropriate question. And the last, like another element of it was just that I actually, I'm kind of looking for help with something, and I was hoping that maybe this, you know, if this was seen by some eyeballs, that maybe the right people might show up to try to help me kind of with a thing I'm wrestling with. So anyway, so I should pause there. What do you think of all that? Well, you've pretty much made watching the first video a necessity at this point. Oh no. For understanding this video. Sure. I win! I, yeah, we'll see. I, and for those who are just watching this video fresh, Tofer fixes speakers. That's, and there's no heat in the shop where he works. That's why he's all bundled up. I am. In fact, I'm going to go turn the heater on. Okay. Okay. You'll see me do it. Okay. We're going to watch Tofer turn the heater on. He walks over there. Bang. There it is. Here we go. And he speaks, he fixes speakers for a living. And we talked about that a bit in the first conversation. Why don't we begin by you, I mean, you, you patch speakers that are blown. So why don't you patch the, why don't you patch the first video with some of the things that you thought, okay, not, not the big things. We'll get to the big things, but some of the, who you are and, and what elements you missed in that video that, that afterwards you looked at and said, no, I completely miss these things. What fix that speaker for us. Okay. It's a, it's a, it's a very blown speaker. So this is going to take some doing. So the, the, the first thing, I guess it's partially a way to kind of share something about myself. And that's also a way to talk about this, which is that after, after my battery died, right, I was crestfallen, honestly, I was so disappointed. You know, it had been a very long time leading up to having that conversation. And then the battery died after 45 minutes. And then I watched it and like the whole, the whole thing was very disappointing and frustrating. And that night I ended up spending, I stayed at the shop an extra like four hours to kind of punish myself for how disappointed I was in, in how things went anyway. And, but there's a, there's a, one of the way I chose to react to it is kind of as a positive that this was, you know, similar to how though the truth is, is that I have actually, I would have, if someone offered me a price to pay to have an hour of conversation with you, I would have paid a higher price two years ago. I would have paid a higher price last year than I would right now. You know, not that you have become a less amazing conversationalist or whatever, it's just that where I was in my life, that like, I was, I was hot to have a conversation with you two years ago and even last year. And so it's weird that, you know what I mean? That, that the universe, God serendipity has chosen to bring us here last week and now, as opposed to when I had all of this stuff kind of fresh in my head or when last year I had spent kind of all year building up my kind of conversational muscle to, to be able to lay myself out, to kind of get better at explaining the things that I'm trying to explain, et cetera. So it was odd, you know, it's odd that it's happening now as opposed to then, and then, and then some degree I, I chose to interpret last week as well as kind of a, you know, a it was a practice run, right? That like the universe, God is giving me a chance to, to kind of do it badly once and then come back to it again, fresh and kind of have a better go at it. And so the battery running out wasn't a catastrophe, it was actually an opportunity. And so that kind of gives you a hint about kind of, I guess, a little bit, a little window into my psychology as to how, you know, even though despite I'm somewhat someone who has been kind of out of, you know, outside of the church my whole life, et cetera, that kind of, you know, I'm vulnerable to synchronicity, let's say, or serendipity anyway. Why haven't, you know, why should we channel surfing? Well, let me, let me just say something about that too. I don't think it's a, in my experience, I like your Joe Rogan image with the layers of glass. And from the experience of another person, not you looking outside, but us looking at you. I loved once I heard, once I understood what Jordan Peterson was talking about in terms of high resolution, low resolution, I grabbed onto that immediately because it's so true. And part of the way that we, part of the way that we work as human beings is there's relevance realization. If I walk into, if I walk into my office this morning and there's a Bengal tiger or a coiled cobra in my office that immediately has resonance. But generally speaking, when we meet a person, there's a presentation of the person that's a lot of our projection. We notice the things that we care about, but in order for that person to slowly manifest themselves and for us to get past our projection and our filters, that usually takes time. And, and for that reason, I usually have the first conversations I have with people because, you know, now us having had that conversation we had before, I can, everything you just said has a lot more context than if this was video number one and we first met you now. You know, anybody listening to this video first would be like, what is he talking about? What happened in that first video? Maybe it's a great teaser, but I, you know, I, there's a, there's a, there's sort of a process by which people get to know other people. And I'm, you know, I'm comfortable with the way this has gone. So continue. And I agree. I think it's, whether you want to say it's the universe, it's serendipitous, it's, it's synchronous or it's, it's God. I'm, you know, I'm comfortable with the way things have rolled out. So keep going. Okay. So I thought a way to kind of just begin patching it up would be to, to start with just kind of where I am now, because there's a chance, like depending on how the rest of the conversation goes, there's a chance that it might get kind of ridiculously abstract, kind of potentially grandiose, et cetera. And so I see that danger. Yes. And so I want to, I want to just, I want to ground it all at the beginning with that, like, you know, I am, you know, a very, very simple guy, you know, who I am right now. So I'm, I'm 31. I live in an apartment with my wife and my daughter and my dog. This during COVID and even beforehand, I am daddy daycare. So I, in the mornings, every morning, including this morning, I was out walking around with my daughter. I do it almost every day. You know, it's me, me and all the nannies at the park. Like, so I'm hanging out with all the, you know, the grandmas and the nannies at the park. And I'm usually one of, if not the only father out there with their, with their kid. And, you know, I'm getting to know them all, getting to know all the, all the different kids and et cetera. You know, so I'm hanging out with my daughter a ton. Then I usually, I take her home, feed her lunch, and then, you know, singer, singer some songs, readers some books, and then put her down for a nap. And then I get ready and head off to work. And so then I come here to work and I work in a shop. You know, I sit here at this desk, I fix speakers all day, every day, you know, inhaling glue, as I already made a kind of a half joke about. And then as I do so, I watch, you know, I watch you, I watch lectures, I read audio books, not so much, not as much of the audio books anymore. But, you know, so I'm sitting here, you know, doing that, working in the afternoon. Yep. So I live here in the, so I mentioned in the last one, I live here in kind of the Southeast corner of Toronto. It's kind of like a little town in the city. All four of the grandparents are still alive. And they're in within this 10 block radius, like I walk past my my wife's parents, and then I walk past my parents to get here to work. So like, I'm only about 10 blocks from home right now, which is great, crazy and amazing. But the fact that so in the afternoons, we kind of so I do the mornings, grandparents do the afternoons, and, and my wife is at work all day, she's working from home now, because of COVID, she was working in an office now she's working at home, which is, you know, blessing and a curse. But so yeah, we living in a small little area, you know, working, working here. What else? You know, right now, because of COVID, our shop is in limp mode, like, you know, half of our like, the way speaker repair works is that speakers that are too inexpensive to be repaired, right? That they're, you know, made in China, disposable, you just buy a new one. And so our industry is is determined by what speakers are expensive enough to be fixed. And, and that's generally pro audio speakers are that are worth hundreds of dollars, right? So our biggest customers are DJs, theaters, you know, wedding, wedding stuff, like big concerts, etc. So, so our industry is devastated right now. And so we're kind of in limp, limp mode right now, just kind of battening the hatches and trying to get through on doing kind of home repairs and car audio stuff and stuff like that. So it's, it's, it's been a it's been a rough year. It's going to be another probably another rough year. You know, one of the one of the problems is our whole family, this is our kind of our whole family's thing. My dad works in the stage stage hand union, he does all the shows down and like the, you know, live theater downtown and the arenas and stuff like that. And so he's sitting on his hands too, and kind of, you know, trying to come up with different projects and stuff like that around his house in order to stay sane. Anyway, so, so, you know, COVID has hit my family quite hard, not as hard as many families, but you know, it's it's been it's been a rough, a rough year. I'm not going to talk about that yet. So I, you know, I'm not seeing my friends very much right now. I'm not playing any sports. You know, I was playing a few more video games kind of in the middle of COVID. I tried to resist kind of relapsing into my video game habit for the first stretch of COVID. And then I kind of gave in, in like June, kind of had a brief relapse there and yeah, not can't play any sports. This I managed to stop playing video games again. But now like without the video games and without, you know, I don't know, something else to do. Like recently, I've just been kind of going to sleep early and just kind of to be able to get up and early and have lots of energy for hanging out with the daughter again in the morning. And so right now, my life is like I said, just very simple. You know, nothing grandiose, etc. So just, just very plain, plain Jane right now. Let's see. Oh, yeah. The other thing I wanted to mention was, sorry, the other thing I wanted to mention was my place within your kind of community, right? So I've, when you first started talking about the Discord on your channel, I was one, I think I was one of the first people to join, like probably one of the first, I don't know, a couple hundred or something. And I've been on there, I was on it pretty steadily, like almost every day for about a year. There's a brief window where I kind of faded away a little bit. But for about a year there, like from like last summer till the spring, me and kind of a crew of people were hanging out in the voice chats, like all the time. You know, me, Nick B, Iron Root, Joe Lars, Sherry, the cast characters, like I made a list of names, I'm not going to go through them. But yeah, so I was part of that pool. Interestingly, we were, we were described by some of the people on the server who maybe are more on the text chat side as kind of being a gnostic cesspool in the voice chat. And I may have been a leading contributor to that dynamic in that I, me and Iron Root and a couple other people who were kind of, you know, more, let's say adjacent to, parallel to, or on the fringe of the Christian frame, kind of caused the conversation to kind of flow through a not explicitly Christian dynamic. And it was amazing how gracious all the Christians were to us to allow us to kind of have our voices heard or kind of our frame honored, which is very nice. But as a result, because I guess maybe the more explicitly or orthodox, smaller orthodox Christians, some of them were put off by it, which didn't even occur to me. And then after a while, I had a couple of conversations with people and it dawned on me that like, oh, there are a lot of Christians on the server who don't like how non-Christian the voice chat is sometimes. That's interesting. Okay. And so anyway, that was, that was, that's kind of where, you know, how I fit into your community is I've been, yeah, kind of following along. I mentioned at the beginning why I wanted to have this conversation so badly, like two years ago, and there's kind of two sides of it. One is that I kind of had the closest thing to an epiphany that I've ever had. And so that caused me to kind of reach out for people to help me with it and to explain it to, kind of practice laying it out and et cetera. And then the other thing was that you and I happened to be on a very strangely parallel kind of intellectual track for a few months there where we were both coming out of the Peterson thing. You had just read a couple of Heights books as well as I think, did you read Harari around that same time? A couple of Harari, one of it. I read Height and Harari even before I started doing YouTube. So, but I was talking about them for a while. Yeah. Yeah. And so you were, yeah, you were riffing on Harari, Height, Peterson and so, and you were kind of doing those and even the Weinstein's et cetera. And so, and the IDW in general. And so I was watching your lectures, Peterson, et cetera. And so you would have these ongoing conversations with voices that I was as, or almost as familiar as you with. And so I was tracking along with all your conversations and kept on feeling like, oh, it's like, oh, I could jump in here. I could jump like if I was able to be next to Paul, that I have notes to add here because I'm on the same kind of train of thought as him. And so it felt, you know, I don't know. And I'm sure you've had the same thing, right? Where you're watching, whether it's Peterson or whoever on YouTube and you're going like, oh, can I, can I just, and that's why I make videos. That's yeah, exactly. That's why you started your channel. And I, I guess just never had the, you know, the stones to do what you've done and kind of start up my own thing. So, and you moved on from there. I mean, and that, that is, I mean, anybody who watches my channel closely will notice that the monologue videos basically just roll along in terms of my own stream of consciousness, the things I'm reading, the things I'm thinking about, the problems I'm trying to do. It's part of the reason I like that there are conversations interspersed in them because the conversations break up the monotony of me and also bring freshness into the channel. So, well, well, okay. So you were kind of working on height and Harari and the IDW stuff. What did you resolve or didn't you resolve anything or what, what did you, did you come to a point of, you know, when myself, it comes to a point of at least satisfaction with a certain conclusion, perhaps. And then I move on. Did you want to say more about what was going on when you were working on that stuff? An incredible amount more, Paul, but, okay. Yeah, but, but maybe that's not what you want to talk about today because we talked about a lot of cool stuff and I'm really curious because my, you know, when I, where, where our last conversation left off when your computer died, you know, where you were really helping me, because it's obviously an ongoing, it's an ongoing interest of mine to better understand what non-Christian, non-practicing Christian people are thinking and the way they view the world and how they approach things. Because obviously I'm coming to it from a different place. And, and, and actually to me, the more, I like the fact that this, the discord community will be less, is less interesting to me, the more overtly Christian it becomes and the more Christians dominate it because, and not that, you know, again, not that I'm not interested in Christianity, obviously, but for me, my entire YouTube journey has been a learning experience and a way of, of, of, of resisting the insularity that churches and Christian communities naturally produce. And so what I, what I go to the discord community for is to meet people like you so that I can actually have hopefully greater insight into, you know, where you're coming from. Now, of course, someone might look at that and say, gosh, VanderKlay, that's terribly mercenary because you're just trying to trap non-Christian people and make them Christian. Well, yeah, I don't think I hide that, but it's also the case that I, I hope they learn that while I certainly might have an agenda for their life, I am not going to be, I am not going to be a jerk about it and I am going to love them. And when they take steps that they tell me have been truly helpful for their wellbeing. And even if those steps mean taking steps away from the church formally and in another direction, part of me is going to celebrate with them. And that's, I think that's foundational in terms of a vibrant relationship. And it also manifests and bears witness to a humility that Christian should have that all of our systems are limited. And that I have seen it, I have often seen it the case that some people before they become better Christian need to become less a kind of a Christian than they were before. I have seen that repeatedly in my ministry. And so that doesn't bother me. And I also have a theological filter that affords that. So that's sort of, you know, laying all my cards on the table and, and why to me it's a, a privilege and, and, and truly an exciting thing for me to actually be able to pastorally participate in the development of non-Christian people in terms of their agendas. And so that's, I mean, and apparently that, that seems to have come through in my channel sufficiently that, that people come to the Discord server and are willing to tolerate the rest of the Christians in order to find a space to work out some of their stuff, even though Discord is quite Christian. Briefly on that point. I wouldn't even like tolerate the, they are the easiest people to tolerate. That's true. I've been, I've been, you know, I've been on, I've been a creature of the internet for a long time, you know, through, through gaming and through, you know, the experience with your community and then kind of branching out over to the portal and Lexis and et cetera. And a thing that I repeatedly when I try to explain kind of what I'm up to, the people in my life, you know, many of whom are, you know, not people of, you know, of the faith in general. I always say like, you know, who would have thunk that kind of cruising around on the internet that the best people to find to have great conversations with would have been this kind of quirky, you know, kind of very, very specifically filtered, but Christians, right? That like, and, and so I don't, I don't want to, I don't want to put any emphasis almost at all on toleration because I, I feel like it's there, they are, like I said, your community is special and kind of the, the culture of conversation on there is, is unique amongst all the servers that I've been on and, and they are, you know, they are as far as I've been able to find kind of the best people to have interesting conversations with in the world. And that's amazing. And then there was a point I wanted to, oh yeah, about you were talking about estuary. So you weren't using explicitly talk about estuary, but I wanted, I wanted to point to it, which is that one of the interesting things. And so you may have, you have noticed that I use the suffix, the salty on this server. And that's an, actually that's an explicit acknowledgement of the estuary and kind of my place within that, within that dynamic. And, but it's also to highlight a slight problem, which is that, so from, from what I get the sense of in your Sacramento meetup, you actually have a fairly healthy contingent of people who are say fringe, right? That like, that, you know, are, are either explicitly non-Christian on the fringe of Christianity or most of the people who come to our meetup do not go to church, including do not go to Livingstone's church. So, so that, and so you, so that, that shapes your experience. Whereas the server, the, the Bridges of Meeting server, I think is the opposite where, especially given the fact that I think Job, I guess I don't quite know the status of Job. It seems like he's inching ever, ever closer to explicit Christianity. I think he does go to church now. And Iron Root's gone. You know, so there's now there's like a couple of Buddhists that I'm aware of, and then there's me. And then if you had, if you forced me to, you know, I don't know if I could point to another kind of either explicit agnostic, you know, fringy individual. Joey, Joey, Joey still holds his atheist card. Sure. So there you go. So, so it's like, it's a kind of like me and Joey and, and that's like, and one of the interesting things was that kind of, as you got, as you started talking about estuary, there was like a level of excitement that was new. It was like, there was, you know, everyone got like super excited because it's a beautiful metaphor. And I think it, I think it draws out a certain element of, let's say, Christian psychology, you know, and, and so everyone was super excited about it. And, but, and yet, so while the, the conscious conversation or the articulated conversation was explicitly about the integration of, you know, freshwater and saltwater, the, the saltwater seemed more dominant than ever. Right. And so there's kind of disconnect in between the, the conversation and the, you know, the mood or the, or the, just the balance of population on the server, which, you know, I don't know what you can really do about, but I guess what I, I'll give you, if, if anyone is out there who is, you know, a, you know, let's say Christian curious or agnostic or whatever. And if you're willing to kind of come into a space and listen and kind of just have great conversations, find a link to Paul's Bridges of Meaning Discord server, because it is the coolest place to have conversations, whether you're Christian or not. So there's- But it's not easy. It's, you know, I've known a lot of people who have sort of tried it and they sent me a little note and that wasn't really for me. And that, that's totally expected. Part of it is the medium. Part of it is it's not, in our culture, we have been so good at making things easy that what you, you know, so much of why the Discord has been so helpful to you also comes from you, that you digested the channel. You brought a lot of passion and power and your giftedness to the conversation. You were persistent. And, and this is true in church as well. Church, you know, consumerist church makes it very easy to come sit in a seat, you know, and especially big box church, probably the kinds of people who would use your services as a speaker repair person, you know, big stage, you know, great music, big performance. I mean, the Carl Lentz type church, the Hillsong type church, they make it very easy for people to come sit in a seat and say, Oh, I'm a Christian. And maybe they had a baptism and, you know, now they start identifying as Christian, a lot, a lot, a lot. But the, the leaning into things that you have done about what is the world? I mean, and, and let's be fair, that's going to be just a slice in a segment of the human population. And part of that's going to be intelligence. Part of that's going to be a whole bunch of other elements of a personality matrix. So the discord and, and one of the things that I as a pastor, by continuing to be a pastor and not just some YouTube personality, I'm forced to realize is that the number of people that are that get into all this nerdy stuff compared to the number of people that are living their lives, you know, that's, that's a big difference. So 90, 10 or something like that. Yeah, something like that, probably. So having said that the church needs to address that 10% because they're a really important population. Because I was listening to Tom Holland's recent podcast, where he's just, I didn't know about the guy he does the podcast with, you know, has this metaphor about cows and grasshoppers, because he wrote a history of the 60s. And he noted that in most of the in in the 60s, most people is writing in English history in the UK. Most people were just trying to, you know, work and have babies and maintain a marriage and, you know, have a vacation and maintain their house. That's most people. But the ones that make history are the that's right, the noisy ones, the ones that get irritated by by Black Lives Matter, get irritated by white supremacy or get irritated by philosophical incorrectness, you know, on the internet, those are the people that the tiny little grasshoppers in the meadow, the cows are ignored, the grasshoppers make history. So it's it's vitally important for for I believe the church to and maybe I desire to engage the kinds of people on the Discord server because they're like me. And that's why they've been drawn here. And that's why they watch my videos. And that's why we have a sort of a weird community, but it can never really be the same kind of community as a church, which is much more rounded. So I so I have a I have a way of framing that dynamic that kind of, you know, who who we small, you know, minority are and what we might be up to. Do you want do you want to do a brief, a brief fall into the story of my childhood and then my absolutely. Okay, so we'll come back around to that. I love those things. Okay. What about actually regular people? Yeah. Oh, you know, more people watch my monologues than my conversations, but more regular people prefer the conversations because they're filled with all of the stuff that you're about to lay out for us. And they're curious about that. And and I've I've noticed, like I've heard many times, so I you know, I get to sit on the server all day every day and listen to people come in and kind of either praise you or or complain about you. And I hear I hear a lot that people really like the conversations as well. So here we go. So I divided, you know, like the I've actually done the self authoring stuff, but I like it kind of suggest divided it up into kind of three stages. The first one is just like zero to eleven under the tag, the playful childhood. So my you know, my childhood was amazing, like just absolutely amazing. So we lived on a street where there was kind of a wave of young people kind of all who who were all the same age at the same time, you know, whether it was my older brothers, they had a kind of a crew of kids with them. Then there was a crew my age and there was even some kids my little brother's age. And so our street was just constantly a playground, like the whole street up and down. You know, we used so we were we were in our our backyard in particular, we had we had a huge backyard, we had two tree forts next to each other with ramps connecting them as well as ramps from those tree forts back onto the back fence, which then led up onto a a network of garage roofs and stuff like that. So and then so and we had, you know, a giant collection of toy guns, etc. So our our playground was like the urban warfare zone for young boys, you know, learning how to just, you know, just have fun and imagine. Right. And so, you know, me and my brothers used to play all the time. We used to have friends who came over on play all the time. I, I went to a particular kind of school, it was an alternative school. And one of the things that made that alternative school weird was that I was in the same class with the same group of people for like eight years. So from junior kindergarten till grade six, I had this cohesive group of classmates who, you know, at that point, you basically spend more time with them than your family, right. And so I had this small group of, you know, so again, so there's this cast of characters from my street, my brothers, then this cast of characters from my school, many of whom would kind of come home with us and play. And so our house was kind of the perpetual kind of, you know, neighborhood playground, which is just like I say, so cool. And then on top of that, we had a we had a cottage, my mom's family split a cottage a couple hours or a few hours north of the city. And we would spend virtually all of July every summer up at the cottage. And we would split our time with my aunt and uncle who have three little girls. And so we're this family of four boys, they're this family of three girls. And so then every summer we all went to the same school as well as these little girls. But so they became kind of our surrogate sisters. And so, you know, we again, we'd be, you know, playing at school playing up at the cottage, we had the last cottage on one side of a lake. And so the kind of going out to one side from our cottage was like this giant swamp and forest and etc. And so we had this, you know, beautiful extended playground for ourselves to kind of go and play imaginary games. And you know, whether it was Narnia, whether it was Red Wall, etc. Right, it was just kind of going and being little characters and stories and, you know, taking turns being a leader of kind of the imaginative game, etc. So, so, you know, that, you know, paints a picture to some degree of kind of I would say, in some in some ways, kind of an idyllic, very kind of playful, very imaginative, kind of very dirty, like, you know, like we we used to dig trenches, we had like, we turned our backyard into like a war zone, where we dig like six foot deep trenches that had little bunkers, like we'd take doors and lay them on top of the trench and then put dirt on top of them, so that there was like little underground areas within the trench, you know, system, etc. So just a super cool childhood, the one the one element, I mentioned this in the last one that I wanted to kind of highlight this, like this luckiness, right. And so, you know, here I am in this, this beautiful little area, I happened, our family happens to have been one of the least affluent of this of this neighborhood. So, you know, while I live in a very nice neighborhood and continue to live here, I actually defer for, I guess, a brief pause, I actually still live here. So the street that I'm talking about is 30 feet that way. And so, you know, I've been I've been in the same spot kind of for 31 years now, roughly. And and so it's this beautiful neighborhood, we're we're the relative, like we're probably, you know, the poorest and trashiest family on the on the block, but still, still super lucky to be here. And still, you know, lucky to have had the brothers that I had lucky to have had the friends on the street that I had lucky to have the cottage and my cousins to kind of add a kind of a, you know, an exposure to femininity and kind of a different style of play and stuff like that, which was great. But on the other hand, just as it as a, you know, a sliver of darkness in that in that light story, for whatever reason, the the men in my family, about half of us are very, very deep sleepers. And so we don't wake up in the middle of the night when our body tells us to. And so then that creates kind of awkwardness and, and stuff like that. And so, you know, I can remember, you know, a kind of a, you know, kind of a constant, I don't know, sense of like, just something like, like, being being different, kind of being unable to participate in sleepovers, like all the other kids were able to, you know, kind of, and kind of dealing with, you know, having having a secret that you're trying to shield other people from being, being embarrassed, being, you know, having shame, etc. And so just within within that kind of all, you know, that golden frame, there are still kind of elements of, I guess, misfortune, I don't know about that. What I was gonna say is that I actually don't see it as misfortune anymore. Like what I see it as actually is the kind of, you know, appropriate level of suffering, right? That like amidst all of this greatness, there was still a little bit of a little bit of suffering that was snuck into the picture. Yeah, it kind of that provides that little bit of growth that you kind of have to Yeah, you know, deal deal with some, like I say, shame, etc, kind of, and, and when you know, people finding out how embarrassed you are, and then realizing it's not that big of a deal. And so it just kind of the ingredients for a little bit of person, you know, personal growth, yeah, through through that, that dynamic. Anyway, I'll see if there's anything here that I'm missing. I guess the one, the one thing I just wanted to add there is a more explicit touching on who my brothers are, and, and how that shaped me. And so my eldest brother is the smartest brother. He's, you know, I would say, either a genius or borderline genius. And, and so, and I spent and I've, I have been fairly close with him kind of our whole lives. And when I was a kid, we used to play strategy games, we used to play board games, we used to play video games, you know, the beginnings of video games. And he used to kick my butt at everything. Like, like, so he's eight years older than me. And he's a genius, right? And so like, way more developed, way smarter. And, and so I never won anything. And, and like, and so, I guess, as a warning to people on the discord server, or even in this conversation, if it seems like I have a thing, a chip on my shoulder about seeming like I have an inferior intellect, there you go. That's, that's what next brother is. Second oldest brother, five years older than me, super athletic, like can just do whatever he wants. Like throughout our entire childhood, he was, he was always kind of the leader of the play. He was always the, you know, the best at this game, the best at that game, super agile, super athletic, you know, was setting records at the school around the corner for the number of push ups done in a minute or something like that. And, you know, has kind of jumped from extreme sport to extreme sport, excelling at them, etc. So, you know, smartest brother, check. Most athletic brother, check. All right. So then my little brother, my little brother is only two years younger than me. And so our relationship has been one of, you know, phases of peace and war throughout our childhood. And so, you know, we fought a lot. We also played a lot. So, you know, we played with each other the most, but then we also fought with each other the most because we were the closest. But he is the nicest. He is, right. So he's, he's, he's just, yeah, he's absolutely the nicest little kid or, and now he's, now he's a young man, but he, he remains just an absolutely, you know, wonderfully kind young man. And, and so as a result, what does Topher get to be? And so that, that leads us into phase chapter two, the dark ages. Because so I don't know, maybe, maybe this is predictable, maybe whatever, but I wound up being, you know, kind of a dark sheep, right? Like, so, so, you know, and, and that, that dynamic of, well, all the choices were precluded to me because I had, you know, the nicest, the smartest, the most athletic. So I had to come up with something is one that I've kind of retroactively framed on it. I don't think I ever kind of consciously made that decision, but, but that's, that's what ended up happening is that kind of, I wound up being the, the kind of the dark brooding and mysterious dysfunctional black sheet character. The emo brother. Yes, exactly. I had, I had, I had a, my neighbour who was a very attractive, like 19 year old, maybe 20 year old when I was like 14, you know, in the midst of the heart of puberty. And, you know, with my acne and my long dark hair, and I came out of my front porch and she was on her front porch and she said, Oh, Hey, you know, what's your name? I don't know. And I said, Wow, my name is Topher or Chris. What's going on? And, and she said, you're like, you're like the dark and mysterious one, right? And I just didn't know what to say. Like practically Medusa, like a word, a word from the gods. Froze, Froze didn't know what to say, but yeah, she, she literally, I mean, like, it's not just me looking back and projecting it. Like people would literally just say like, Oh, you're the, like, you're the dark sheep. You're the mysterious one. Oh, interesting. Anyway, so, so another, another kind of hint of, of kind of suffering added to the story, which I think again is, is I choose to now frame as luck, which is that coming out of elementary school with my classmates, we all applied to the same seven, eight school. And I think seven out of eight or nine out of 10 all made it into that same school. I was the one kid who didn't. Right. So like, you know, my, this, these, these, this cast of characters who I've kind of woven my identity kind of in and through and around, et cetera, right. They all go off together as this cohort. Now it turns out that, you know, as of, you know, they, they intermixed into that whole school. And then by high school, the group had fractured, fractured and spread out and gone its own way. But, and so it really wasn't that big of a deal to have been kind of been the first one to be kicked out a year early. Actually, there was two of us who didn't make it anyway. But, but so that, that set off what turns out to have been, I think, a pretty crazy, like a pretty seminal moment, I guess, in my life, looking back at it, which is that kind of, as, as soon as I would say like three quarters of the year into the next year, I was, you know, I was being a pretty shitty student. I was kind of intentionally lollygagging on my way to work, or sorry, on my way to school, like I intentionally missed street cars or intentionally missed buses in order to kind of be 45 minutes late or an hour and a half late. I was constantly reporting sicknesses. So I kept, you know, I kept on calling in sick and missing school, staying home for this reason or that reason. So kind of just almost, almost immediate kind of manifestations of, of pretty poor kind of dysfunctional behavior. And, you know, my mom tried, like, you know, she would drive, she would go and drop my brother off at work or grad school, then drive home to try to get me to get in the car to be dropped off at work or at school. And so, you know, my parents definitely tried really, really hard to kind of help me stay kind of in, you know, in and engaged in school. But I was pretty, you know, pretty adamant, pretty stubborn about, you know, that, that, you know, I was gonna, I was gonna, I was gonna, you know, you drag, they had to drag me with my nails across the floorboards kind of thing in order to kind of get me to go to school. Because it turns out that I, you know, I was probably deeply depressed and like, and heartbroken over having lost all of my friends in one fell swoop. And an interesting, so this interesting thing happened in grade seven, which is that after kind of all these shenanigans, they finally kind of cornered me and brought my parents into the school into the office. And they kind of, you know, they were talking to each other going like, Do you know, he's doing this? Do you know, he's doing this? And I kind of, you know, I had been, I had been, you know, playing them off against each other to some extent, like, you know, telling them like, oh, it's the it's, oh, it's that. And so then they finally got in room with each other and, and kind of squared the story between them and then kind of turned and looked at me and were like, Okay, like, you've been like, you're either dying, or you've been sick so much, you're either dying, or you've been lying a whole lot, like what's going on, kid. And I turned I turned to be like these people. And I said, you know, in this just kind of moment of kind of, I guess, attempting to explain like all of this misbehavior over the course of months, I just like, I feel like I have an empty, an empty space in my chest. Right? Like I have I have a hole in my chest, I have a void and you know, a cavity, where in the center of my of my of my chest. And, you know, looking back on it now, I, you could say that I was telling them like, I'm heartbroken. Right? Like, you know, I'm just, and what was what was, you know, is one of these examples of kind of honest speech, kind of transforming the world, because all of a sudden, as soon as I said that, right, like, the tension, the anger in the room, just right there, all the adults in the room are looking at this kid who just told them that he's heartbroken. Right. And all of these miss all this behavior is just a manifestation of, you know, kind of, of sadness. And, and to their credit, they all kind of instantly kind of change the tone of the room. And we're just kind of like, oh, okay, like, that's what's going on. Like, okay, he's not he's not sick. He's not, you know, he's not rebellious, rebellious, or whatever. He's just he's just heartbroken. And, and the real one of the reasons I wanted to make sure that I brought that up is because that that ties to kind of a longer, a larger conversation, like there's a macro micro cosmic macro cosmic thing there, right, which is kind of to the extent that we, maybe I should say on my side of the, you know, on my side of the culture, the nuns, right, that like, you could, you could say you could see that as kind of a, a, an accurate diagnosis of us in general, right, that we as a society, right, we have a hole in our chest that we have, we're heartbroken that we have, you know what I mean? That, you know, and so when you hear when you hear, you know, Douglas Murray talking about kind of the existential exhaustion of the West and kind of how, you know, we're, you know, men without chests, etc. I, I look back to, you know, me literally saying it as a child and going like, yeah, I know that feeling I've, you know, I lived with it for I don't know how long, the truth is, I don't know when or how I went from being that little kid telling his teachers and his parents that he was heartbroken to being who I am today. I don't know what exactly, you know, where that wound mended, but it did. And that's wonderful, but, but I don't know how. And so it's, you know, when I encounter other people who are dealing with similar things, I kind of wish that I had a better understanding of what exactly I did do in order to get over that, because I, you know, it'd be lovely to be able to offer them some help. But anyway, so let's see. And just as a note, as a as a parent now myself, and as a parent yourself, can you imagine being in a room with a 12 year old who says that? Yeah, I have a, I have a hole in my chest. I can understand how you just took, I mean, they're probably all looking at you, like, you know, you know, we're gonna, what do we get? What? How, how bad do we have to whip this kid to shape him up and everything just whoosh? Oh, yeah. And, and suddenly they, they all realized, you know, to a degree, their complicity in me, even though no one did anything wrong, you know, the systems were just functioning. But, oh, my, my, my kid was my kid, something died inside my kid, and I didn't see it. And I can imagine, probably at that point, things started going in a better direction in terms of what all they were bringing into your life. Yeah, exactly. It, it, the, like I say, the kind of the bubble was burst, that kind of the, the higher tension bubble was burst. And then from there, I did, I mean, it's been a while, so I don't have a very super clear memory of it. I think, I think that the, the rest of my stay at that school was probably healthier. Like, I probably did a better job of making it to school. And, and they probably relaxed on me a little bit, which was nice. Anyway, so the next, you know, the next, let's go here. The next, the next phase is, you know, off to high school. And as, as for many kids, high school was kind of, for me, you know, a, that's when I started to get into, you know, drugs and alcohol. I, I guess I, you know, looking back, you might say that, I don't know, like, I guess I, anyway, the, let me, okay, there's another note that I wanted to hit there in between. When I was choosing my high school, I specifically chose one that was farther away, quite a bit farther away, I would say about 10 times as far away. I chose a tech school over the school that is literally like, I could probably see the top of it from where I am right now. In fact, I could see it from, from the back windows of my house, I could see the high school next door, which was a more white collar, like this is, this is a very affluent neighborhood, neighborhood. And so all the kids who go to that school's, you know, parents are whether they're bankers, they're, you know, movie producers, whatever, and around here. And I kind of explicitly rejected that in order to go, you know, across town to the tech school, where I could, you know, I could be more, you know, every man be more blue collar, kind of learn how to, you know, build stuff, etc. And, and then that was probably a mistake. Maybe I don't know, I guess at this point, like, as I've been kind of saying, that, you know, nothing is a mistake, because here we are now, but why do you think it was a mistake? I had a really hard time getting to school and making it that much harder for myself, I have forcing myself to go 10 blocks away. And then it also, it turns out that school, like, I kind of probably romanticized it a little bit as like I say, like this blue collar thing, like this tech school, it was, it was a castle, it was, it wasn't actually a castle, but the school looked like a castle, it was, it was about twice as big as it needed to be. And so it was like empty all the time. And the or the the leadership of the school made at least me and I think many other kids feel like we were basically just the to the extent that they cared about us, they cared about the revenue that we represented from the government. Right, that as, as as a pupil in their in their school, we brought along, you know, a little bit of funding. And, and that they weren't too worried about us not attending, because that made their jobs easier, right? That like, to the extent that we skipped class, etc. That just meant that they kept on getting our money. I mean, this is this is projection on my part, I'm sure that if you went and talked to them, they wouldn't they wouldn't say that. But I remember distinctly having that feeling about the school when I was there. Is it like school spirit? Yeah, these these guys, this, this principal doesn't give a poop about us. This vice principal doesn't give a poop about us. And, and they're, you know, the extent that they did, to the extent to which that they tried to prevent us from skipping was negligible. And anyway, so, yeah, I went to the school, you know, started smoking quite a lot of marijuana. At the beginning of high school, by by farther along into high school, it turned into, you know, actually drinking quite a bit. You know, I was I was like, six feet tall, six foot two, with a beard. And so I was able to walk into the beer store across the street from the high school and buy alcohol for me and my friends. And so, you know, we would we would skip class and, and kind of drink in the park nearby. And I actually wound up I kind of remember distinctly as a kind of a specific example of that dynamic, I got arrested out in front of my school. On the front steps of my school, I got arrested because it was like my birthday or something like that. I don't remember. There's some reason why we're celebrating maybe it was like the last day of school or something like that. But it was like, you know, we made plans the previous week or the previous day to like, hey, like tomorrow's, you know, tomorrow's gonna be a good one. And so, you know, we're gonna we're gonna we'll start it. We'll start in the morning and, you know, make a day of it. And so I got busted at nine o'clock in the morning on the front steps of my school with five bottles of beer and my backpack in socks, which the cops thought was quite clever to reduce the clinking of the bottles. With a two a two piece bong that like split in half and had hoses that went to each other, as well as a few grams of marijuana in my bag. And this was that this yeah, like, you know, 16 or something like that. And that was probably you know, that was that was, you know, just a kind of a window into what my what my high school life was kind of like. Broken heart story didn't apparently work on them. On the cops. Interestingly, I mean, I was I actually, for what it's worth, I, I kind of, I tried to be super nice to the cops and kind of, you know, yeah, just be very kind of, I don't know, just nice. And they, I think, intentionally miswrote the ticket on a traffic ticket. Right? Like they, they gave me a ticket for drugs on a on a traffic court. Wow. Right. So just let's let's scare the kid. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. This this this punk, you know, he's he's not up to nothing really that bad. The system doesn't really need to focus on this one. Yeah, let's let's just you know, scare the scared the bejesus out of him, get him him and his parents to drive up to, you know, traffic court and then find out that, you know, it's going to get dismissed immediately. So that's what anyway. Yeah, so that was that was high school. And so to an extent, I mean, a thing that I've kind of been going through in my life is kind of having been a few years ahead of my cohort and a few in ways, right, that like, as I'm, I'm smoking weed, then then five years later, all my friends are smoking weed, and then I'm drinking and then five years like, you know, I'm going marching through this kind of progression of, you know, delinquency, delinquency and misbehavior. And then all of everyone else in my in my grade into my class, like they all did all of those things, too. They just did them three years later, five years later, six years later, etc. Like even even the preppy good kids who are all getting, you know, straight A's or whatever at high school, they all wound up doing the same thing as me. I was just done way before them. So I've been, you know, kind of at the head of the bell curve a bunch of different times. And so to an extent, you know, to your to your larger point about kind of having a read on the non generation, let's let's fingers crossed that kind of again, I'm I'm just, you know, a few months or a few years kind of ahead of the curve, and that there's there's going to be a wave of kids kind of figuring out that, you know, they've kind of they've got to figure something out that they've, you know, they've got to figure out, you know, what what they're what the top of their hierarchy is going to be, because they're going to have something there, no matter what. Yeah. So yeah. That was good. That was good. There's so much more, Paul. How are we doing for time? This is fine. I don't I don't I mean, before you just you you were able to get a rando slot. So those are usually about one hour, and they're one hour because they're rando slots. And some people can't do an hour. Some people can do five. And I never know who's who until I give them an hour. So I give my I gave everybody an hour. And, and I thought, no, after talking to you, I thought, no, tofer can go a while and, and then as long as you you're you're prolific, buddy, you I am I am amazed at how well especially on the q&a sections, you know, and I guess over the course of your monologues as well, but your your ability to kind of coherently profuse is is something. Well, but, but, and, you know, but you I also have a sense of, well, I have a sense of what I think is important. And so some of the people have on my channel, I think are important, even if they're not popular. But other people, I mean, I think people are going to benefit from your story, you tell your story, well, you're you're obviously whatever you think of your relative stance with respect to your brothers, you're obviously very sharp, you're obviously very articulate, you have a you have a good sense of what's going on. And, and again, just in a totally mercenary way, you're a good resource for me, because I can I can understand where you're coming from. I've seen you enough on the discord, I've heard you enough on the discord. You know, you get, there's always people always have cheap ways of dismissing other people. But you're not you're not going to be so easily dismissed, just in terms of how who you are and how you carry yourself. So yeah, no, that's good. Well, again, and I don't want to, you know, I do want to make a comment now that you're gonna after you, because I've got a sense of your perfectionism, which is not uncommon with tradespeople, in my experience, because the value of your of your craft is directly related to getting small things right. And I would imagine with speaker repair, that's, that's very true. Because I'm sure you can speak it fixes speaker just kind of to get it going again. But once you really start putting I don't know the terms you use, once you really start putting load on that speaker, the quality of the repair is going to be evident, I would imagine, it can rip itself apart pretty, pretty quickly, especially I do I do work on like, you know, 5000 watt speakers and stuff like that. And so when you're putting that amount of juice through something you have better have done a great job. Otherwise, it will very quickly, right, you know, catch fire or burst. And your client is going to come right back at you and say, you know, I trusted you, the speaker is important for my livelihood, etc, etc. So, um, well, well, where do you want to go next? Because I know you've got quite a list. And I saw your list that you gave me after the first one, and I really liked it. So I trust you. So, you know, I'm gonna keep letting you talk until there's something that sort of says to me, I want to really dig in over here. Okay, so I just want I guess, you know, since we started the story, I'll just I'll try to get through to young adulthood as quickly as I can here, which so a couple a couple of next pieces here are that are kind of real. And again, I'm trying to bring up stuff, like I was thinking about what aspects of my story to tell, like I'm leaving a lot out, I'm trying to unfortunately, I'm going to leave a bunch of stuff about like friendship out and stuff like that. But whatever. The one of the pieces that I think is relevant to the larger conversation is a moment and I don't actually know when this happened. But I can remember explicitly and Jordan Pearson brought this up, which is this idea of, you know, you have to be really careful about corrupting the the hierarchy in the minds of the young, right? That and especially young men, that if you if you tell men, young men, that to the extent that you succeed in this corrupted hierarchy, you are just manifesting and admitting your own corruption. That is a deeply poisonous idea. And it may be it might mean, it might be appropriate, like it might it might be true that the hierarchy is poisonous and is corrupt. And okay, well, then what are we going to do about that? But if it's not, then you know, be very careful with such an idea, because it is deeply corrosive to to young men's, you know, forthrightness, and they're kind of striving to compete in society. And so I can I can specifically remember having conversations at some point in this area, kind of as a young, you know, you know, just just entering puberty young man, you know, where people are telling, you know, I'm I'm misbehaving, you know, being dysfunctional, and people are saying, like, you got to get your act together. Like, you know, what are you going to do? And, you know, you know, aren't you going to want to have a job? Aren't you going to want to have a family? Aren't you, you know, aren't you going to want to kind of proceed down the the normal trajectory of a human, and kind of find the things that most people find rewarding, and kind of explicitly rejecting that, like and saying like, No, like, you and your value systems are, are, you know, are corrupt, like, you know, you know, money, money is in a reflection of success, like, I don't want, you know, I don't want to have a super lucrative job, you know, I'm gonna, I'm gonna do my own thing. And I'm not going to play by your rules kind of thing. Like, I'm gonna like, you know, screw you and your game. It's a corrupt, stupid game. And, and so I just like I say, that was it that was a thing that Peterson pointed to. And I hadn't thought about it in a long time. But when he said it, I was like, I can, I had that conversation. And that in a it did affect me, like I, I was that kid who, because of what you know, and I guess this has to do with be careful, be careful what you kind of explicitly say within your society and in your culture, because kids are super sensitive, and maybe even a subset of kids are super sensitive, and they will hear you, right? That if the culture is saying, the system is corrupt, the system is corrupt, you know, capitalism is etc, etc, there are going to be a subset of individuals who hear that and then react to it and will and will absent themselves from the game. And so I was one of those kids anyway. I think that's, I think that's really key. And it's true, that there's so many, there's so many pairs of things, you have to learn both sides of but you have to get the you have to get the measure of them correctly, you have to know that there's corruption. But you also have to know that there's the potential for something beyond corruption. In that sense, you know, I like Jonathan Peugeot's, you know, parasitic language that that cynicism, you know, cynicism, cynicism can be helpful. Like I'll grab that with CS Lewis's food medicine idea, cynicism can be okay medicine to moment, but it's bad food. And you get the sense in that that in order for you to actually be healthy, you need to know, you need to know that there is corruption. So you're not naive, but you need to know that there's something beyond corruption that you can, that you can shoot after and participate in and seek after. And, and, you know, I look at our, our present moment in, you know, American politics, for example, I mean, right now, we've got one group of people on the far left that are basically saying, everything is corrupt. It's, it's the patriarchy, it's white supremacy, it's, it's, everything is corrupt by, by people's, everything is corrupt by, all narratives are manipulated for the ends of particular powerful people, everything is corrupt. And on the right now with this election, you have a similar narrative that the election is completely corrupt. You know, you can't trust the election, but prior to that, it was, you know, America is great. America is the best raw, you know, and so then you have this, this, this, you know, simplistic dichotomy of everything is the worst or everything is the best. And you're sitting there in the middle of going like, really? Like, like, these are my two options. Like I have to pick one. Okay, I guess no. Yeah. So, so no, I think that's a, that's a really important message. And, and again, this, you know, part of this just shows, you know, for part of why Jordan Peterson caught the attention of so many, you know, particularly sometimes young men was that he was able to frame these things accurately at high resolution, clearly, and people needed to hear that, especially at this moment that yes, there is corruption. Yes, there is corruption. Yes, the wealthy and powerful are subject to, to sexism and racism. And, and these forces are with us all the time and they do undermine and they do keep the living, the playing field uneven. Yes. But you now, given the unlead uneven playing field may have to work harder to run uphill to win the race. And so if you do win the race, you will have shown something and you will actually make progress against these things to you need and you can go the other way too. So these things, you know, these things work together in a complex, better picture of the world. And if you lose that, you lose, you lose people, people then, then they just succumb to alcohol or drugs or all of the normal vices that we use to consume ourselves. So I hang on a second. Someone just knocked at the door and I don't, I don't know who that is. Let me, I will consult my notes. You consult your notes. Okay. All right. Where were we? Did you read your notes? Where are we going now? I think, I think we're just going to skip. I was like, so there's the end of high school. There's, you know, the transition out of, out of high school into, into working. There's kind of getting caught up in the world of warcraft. Like I was, I spent like literal years of my life in terms of time played, like, you know, more, more hours spent in game than at least a year, probably, probably, probably a couple of years of, of online time. Anyway, so yeah. Let me ask you a question about that. Cause that's not at all uncommon. What you're thinking about that now. So I guess a couple of things. Like one that, you know, it's definitely, it's definitely kind of an example of, you know, like the, the, the real world. So Paul, you asked really good questions. So I think one of the things our, our, our society struggles with is kind of the, the step wise introduction from adolescence into, into adulthood, where, you know, you know, we, we do this kind of, you know, Chris, you know, Santa Claus, fairy tale princesses and, and imaginary world thing where we shelter our kids like crazy up until like a certain point. And then all of a sudden it's like, you know, the, the curtain gets pulled, yanked back and all of a sudden, you know, here's the whole world, all, all the possibilities, all the things you can do, all the pressures on you, all like all the scariness and reality of life all at once. And I think it's, you know, it's, it's a, it's too slow and then too much too soon. And I think that's one of the things that kind of having a more coherent and kind of more, a more coherent and more traditional, you know, cultural transition where your society has kind of specific ways of guiding you out of adolescence into adulthood, where they kind of put more parameters or more blinders on your phenomenology so that you're less overwhelmed by the complexity of reality as you kind of leave adolescence would probably lead to fewer people. In this case, young men kind of seeing the overwhelming kind of cacophony of reality that is our complex, ridiculous world and then shrinking back from it and then hiding inside of virtual worlds like, like games. So that's one, you know, one layer of it. Another layer of it is that like, so one of the things I was wanting to kind of touch on was, you know, my relationships with my brothers, my, my eldest brother, the one I already mentioned being super smart, et cetera, that, you know, hanging out in those worlds was something I did with him. So that was probably one of the, you know, that was probably the closest that he and I kind of ever got was going through all of these various kind of digital and fantasy adventures together over the course of like half a decade. And so, you know, he and I were, you know, a tag team that went from, you know, from guild to guild. And we actually even started a guild and kind of did our own thing. And so, you know, that was an opportunity for us to forge, you know, a deeper relationship with another and kind of like spend a good chunk of our lives kind of, you know, hanging out, which is, which is neat and probably particularly neat for him since he's, he's kind of a shut in. And so he, you know, he doesn't have, you know, as many of those relationships with people who are actually in his world. So the opportunity to have that relationship with me was probably fairly positive anyway. So that's one thing, you know, there's, there's like skills that you pick up, right? Like, you know, you're, you know, at the high end of that game, you're kind of organizing 25 or 40 people. Actually reorganizing like a hundred people so that on a nightly basis, you can have 40 of them working together to kind of do complex problem solving, you know, inside of boss fights and stuff like that, where you do like coordinated movements and all kinds of stuff. And so there's kind of like an almost unpaid corporate management side of it, where you're having to get everyone's schedules aligned and kind of give people incentives to actually show up and be, you know, regular participants and stuff like that. So there's, there is kind of a side of it that does kind of teach you some layers of real world skill, but I would say in general, you know, it's, it's a part of my story. It's part of who I, who I, you know, what made me who I am. It's a part of why I'm relatively kind of comfortable and kind of developed in kind of online space, right? That like, you know, I have, you know, I can type really quickly. I can, you know, use these, use these voice comm things very well, like Discord. I don't know if you know this, but Discord was originally developed as a gaming anyway. So, so yeah, I mean, yeah, lots of thoughts, you know, and then it's been, it's been kind of, you know, a process of kind of weaning myself off, like, you know, quitting, quitting World of Warcraft and then playing other games and slowly kind of dropping them and dropping them and dropping them and kind of to this point now where I'm, you know, I'm back to not playing any games at all now, which is, which is probably positive, right? With, especially with, you know, now a wife and kid and stuff like that, there's, and a small business to run, etc. I can't really afford to be spending my time in virtual fantasy land. You've got real, you've got, you've got, you've got some real world things to really deal with. Yeah, it's interesting. You're, I mean, the, the theme starting to develop and you're having a more coherent, more traditional cultural transition where your society has specific ways of guiding you out of adolescence into, you know, into adult, this step wise thing, because when, when our convert, when your battery died, you know, we connected again and we chatted on the, on the Discord server a little bit and I took notes, I took notes of what you said then to me too. You know, what my generation needs to figure out, we talked about homo religiosus, your generation needs to figure out what, what, what, what it needs. And I think that's, I know this gets me, this gets me both into trouble with, this gets me into trouble with church people, because there's an element of church culture that says, what you need is there and it's your own damn fault for not being there. Now there's a wing, there's an element of Protestantism that basically says, oh, okay, but it's also part of the missionary responsibility of the church to, to not only try to meet people where they're at, I think all churches have that, but Protestants are more willing than Orthodox or Roman Catholics to say, let's adapt the church to, to be a part of that meeting people where they're at. The Orthodox are sort of like, well, here's, here's the thing, you know, we have our divine liturgy and when you, every time you, you attach divine to something, you put it pretty far up the hierarchy. It's set. That's right. Roman Catholics after Vatican II, you know, you listen to Bishop Aaron and okay, a little bit more wiggle room there, but you know, you know, you're not going to be able to Bishop Aaron and okay, a little bit more wiggle room there. Protestants, they can, they got so much wiggle room, they can lose the thread entirely. So that's, everybody's got their issues. And, and then one of the things that you said was, you know, what are the intermediate options between the church and their moral matrix? Now that gets into, you know, part of the Adam friended conversation a bit with respect to, okay, well, what exactly is the church? And that's not a, that's not a particularly easy thing to answer in and of itself. And, and this obviously is something where the, my estuary conversation goes because I, you know, the, the word estuary that had sort of been in my mind about what I was doing and what I was thinking and what the world needs and, and various Christian churches, the seeker movement, for example, had their seeker service, which was, which was sort of an adaptation and sort of an adaptation. And they were, they were, they were, they were working on some elements within the church world and the culture to make that palatable to churches or at least understandable to churches. And then you've got something like, you know, Hill song or Carl Lentz, their, their stuff, which is in the news right now because of, of Carl Lentz and celebrities, and you got celebrity church and so there's, there's people, it's getting, getting an accurate picture of reality is always challenging, but, but even figuring out, figuring out where churches and where Christianity is in the West is, is in some ways ridiculously challenging because, you know, I just listened to Rationality Rules did a little, another little debunking dismissive video on the Christ Whisperer about, you know, Jordan Peterson and, you know, he just, he makes those things all the time and I probably shouldn't listen to them because they, they, they get in my craw and, and, and in certain less helpful parts of me get a little reactive. But, you know, the, it's, it's really difficult to, to actually conceptualize and articulate the role that Christianity and the church plays in the West. And that's where Tom Holland's book was so important and profound because he draws a picture that says, you know, you, you might not have ever been to church before, but this, this, the Western church and Christianity has so, have so deeply inhabited the value matrices of the West that, and- I'm effectively Christian. That's right. And, and Ren Girard, you know, put a point on it many times and said the only, the only tools the atheists have to critique the church with are Christian tools. And, and so in many ways for the church, even though institutionally, and if you're counting noses in the culture, you might say, oh, the church is losing influence. And in some ways it is, but when you use the tools of the church against the church to the degree that the church adapts and, and figures out how to deal with those tools, you're actually making it stronger. So, so here's, so here's, I wanted to, so now we're, I wanted to jump to the, the, the, what I have here is Peterson and Company and the Origin Myth of Noah. So final, final chapter. And to tie, I guess, a brief, brief aside, you were talking the other day about how writers sometimes have to come up with kind of convoluted and elaborate ways of justifying what the elephant wants to do when you were talking to Poe and her, you know, struggling with having a second kid. Wait until you hear this. So, okay. And then to tie back to the earlier part of the conversation. Oh crap, that's my brother. Hold on. Which brother? Mickey, can you pause? Yeah, yeah, I'll pause. So you were talking earlier about kind of why you have some, you kind of have a disproportionate focus on that small portion of people who hang out on the discord, right? So, you know, those, those weird people who are into the nerdy stuff. And so one way of construing why that makes sense is to kind of go back to Peterson's kind of bottom up from, from behavior into, into story, into abstraction, from story, et cetera, et cetera, that the, the bottom to into articulated knowledge, direction of wisdom. And so one way of construing kind of what scripture represents, and I think this is very Petersonian, is that scripture represents the output of a distributed cognition or a distributed dream, right? And so that there is a ongoing process across the centuries in between all, you know, all the artists, all the storytellers, the shamans, the, you know, the priests, et cetera, that there's a kind of a type of individual, probably the same kinds of individuals, you know, the same personality cocktails that find themselves kind of hanging out on discord with each other, that the certain kind of person, you know, is, is, is chewing on things, is talking about things, is, is representing things as kind of, you know, a significant part of this for me has always been kind of this kind of subconscious, subconscious computation, or like, you know, that I'm, I have been kind of my whole life kind of looking for, you know, particular puzzles and kind of particular answers to those puzzles. And I'm not necessarily consciously aware of kind of what I'm, what I'm putting together, or what the question, you know, what question am I trying to answer? And it's only through kind of watching what jumps out at me when I'm watching, whether it's you, whether it's Peterson, et cetera. And then, you know, there are these moments where it kind of things click into place, and you're like, oh, like, that's what I've been up to. Right. And so anyway, so if you buy into that Petersonian frame of the knowledge coming up from, you know, from the body from implicit into articulate, then, then a way like when you're talking about kind of the, you know, the different, the different churches or the different traditions in their room for wiggle room, you know, one way of seeing that is that this process is ongoing, right, that like, there's a visual, a visual thing that I was using for it was like that there's kind of funnels over different, over different regions or different populations and that over time, kind of ideas and images and et cetera, kind of evaporate up into the air into the funnel, and then get kind of mixed together. Mixed together. And then, and then maybe they rain back down or something like that anyway. And so I was using the funnel as a way of kind of seeing like the overlapping them over the overlapping nature of them, because, you know, simultaneously, one one population that kind of was working on a particular scripture or working on within a particular tradition might kind of have its thing. And then over here, there's another group that's doing it anyway. The question is, is how does the output of that of that process get integrated? Right. So which which traditions have what kinds of processes right like so in Judaism, I think there's the Talmud, right. So the rabbis over the course of history are kind of gradually kind of chewing on and mulling over kind of react, you know, their lives reality, but then as well the scripture and their tradition, and they're kind of working it and needing it and, and, and, and, et cetera. That's one strategy for doing it. You know, you were just kind of saying that the Orthodox kind of have a very locked down, you know, that like the scripture is kept at the center or whatever, whatever it is, the traditional the center of the tradition, the, the, to the extent that they have already had that process happen, and then have some amount of the output of it in hand, they have now locked it, right. And so they are this, this is our divine revelation, and they're, you know, that's it. And in my opinion, sorry, my dog's chewing on the funnel. That's hilarious. In my opinion, that this might this might, of all times, this might be the time where it makes sense to have your ear to the ground, when it comes to that stuff, right, the ability of whether it's a platform like Discord, like YouTube, you know, this, this unbelievable transformation and democratization of kind of communication and conversation, where the, you know, let's say that the, the CPU rate, like the, the processing power for that, for that process has potentially just gone through the roof, like we have just unlocked millions and millions of people's ability to kind of chew on their own lives and chew on ideas and chew on kind of what's going on. And so it's possible that there is an unbelievable richness of, you know, kind of potential, I used, I used like nectar as a, it's like, that there's this process going on. And then, and then this little kind of drop of nectar gets, gets kind of squeezed out of all of that kind of churning and, and dreaming and thinking and, and, you know, art, et cetera. And so that we actually might be in a kind of a disp, you know, a disproportionately fruitful era of, of, of this process. And, and, and so where is that stuff going? Like who, who has their, their ear to the ground? Who has their, you know, who is ready to, you know, another, another image, if I can, if I can, if I can continue to ramble here, another, another image that I use for it is, or another, a way that this might be happening, a way of visualizing the way this happens is that disproportionately young men who are kind of find themselves on the fringes of society, who find themselves kind of as outcasts for this reason or that reason, kind of wander off by themselves into the land of whether it's, you know, the internet drugs, you know, study, you know, off into the metaphorical desert or out into the sea. And then they come back to, you know, they, they, they wander off and then many of them disappear. Some of them come back to the village and now they're coming back out of the, out of the, out of the dark, you know, out of the darkness, out from the, out from the wilderness. And they have their buckets are, their heads are like buckets and they have something sloshing around in their head and they've come back to the, you know, they've come back to the, to the village to sit with us. And the question is, is, you know, what are we, what do we do with them? Right? Like, do we say, you know, get out of here? You're a blabbering, you know, you, you, you've been out in the wilderness. You're now, you know, half crazy and, you know, you're not speaking proper English, you know, get out of here. Or do we sit them down kind of in an estuary and, you know, sit them down next to a warm fire and say, you know, just take your time, you know, you might have precious cargo in that bucket of yours. Just kind of take your time, relearn how to speak, and then share with us what you've gone out and found out. And, and, you know, like, like high variance male strategies in general, most of those buckets are not going to have very much of them. You know, it's just, you know, water and dirt or whatever. And, and, and some of them are going to have flecks of gold and some of them are going to have nuggets of gold. And, you know, the, the place that, that has that place where, you know, those, those individuals who are going on those, you know, those shamanic journeys or whatever, who are returning with what they have to share to update the, you know, to update the scripture essentially, right? Like, like, to the extent that this is a historic process and where that stuff does get stored, ideally, is kind of in some sort of very, you know, holy and, you know, elevated, you know, storage. It's like an SSD card, right? You keep on using the computer, you know, computer metaphors, right? So it's like, you know, that there is this, you know, the RAM, the RAM is this kind of distributed cognitive dream process and that the RAM is kind of churning away on all this stuff and computing stuff. And then every once in a while it pops out a little bit of just divine data and where does that data get, get stored? And, and I think that, like, you're just kind of saying that different, different traditions have different levels of guardedness around their, their SSD card. Some, some are just saying, nope, like no one gets to touch us. They'll read only, no write. And then other, other, our other, other traditions are saying like, this, you know, this, the process that has given us the divine truth to the extent that we now have access to it is the same process. And there's no reason to suspect why it should be over, right? Like there's no, I mean, like I say, if you buy into the Petersonian frame of this direction of bottom to top, trajectory of knowledge generation and kind of wisdom generation of scripture generation, then there's no reason to think that it's over. Like, so why, why wouldn't we be eagerly seeking the fruits of that process? Sorry. No, it's good. That's good. Well, and, and it's, it's, I look at it more three dimensional than that because, and this is a point that I often try to make, even if, if one has extraordinarily, let's say a high view of scripture, which in a modernist Protestant context means a particular thing. When I look at other traditions, the, the manner in which they hold scripture is different. And so there's, there's lots of layers to that thing too. A guy, Leslie Newbegin is a, he was a, an Anglican missionary. I believe he was Anglican. He was Anglican missionary. He left the UK in the thirties and returned in the eighties. So he spent a good deal of the 20th century outside of the UK and as a missionary in India, and then came back to the UK afterwards and was just sort of he spent his retirement years as many clergy do continuing to, continuing to minister, but now gaining what he had gained over all of his time. And he, you know, one of his great lines was that the church is the hermeneutic of the gospel. And what he meant by that is that it's the, the community itself and if, and it's in its fullness of both thought and materiality and its traditions and its symbolic, dramatic, liturgical reality is, is what takes this gospel and, and, and turns it into real life. And all churches do that. And actually all people do that. They take, you know, whatever texts they have, whatever sacred texts are out there and they incarnate it and they live out and then they contribute back to it. Because even though it's, it's a tremendous, it's a tremendous, it's a tremendous, it's a tremendous assistance to have a fixed text because it gives you actually something fairly stable that you can relate to it. The text that I have in my mind is different even from the text that my grandmother had in her mind a hundred years ago, just by virtue that we're different readers where we're patterns reading patterns. So there's a lot going on there, but I think you're right. And I think we've got, in many ways we are in a period, and this is often said, we are in a period similar to the Protestant Reformation in that what happened during the Protestant Reformation was that literacy rates, of course, were rising and now texts became ubiquitous, democratic, inexpensive. And I mean, they didn't even have all of the institutions around the text. For example, a printer would set up shop near Luther and I just heard something that something like, this was on the Tom Holland, the Tom Holland podcast, Luther's writings were making up about a sixth of what was being printed in Northern Europe at the time, which is an astounding number. Now we are, the ubiquity of content is, we've never lived like this, which makes Google and its supremacy obviously reasonable because when content is ubiquitous, the filter is the relevance realization. And so now that we're on YouTube, I mean, so now we're actually even relating to AI. That's now a new player in the matrix along with all of the other things, all of the other ways that human beings interrelate. We can think of a distributed consciousness, even a distributed unconsciousness. I mean, all of this stuff that we're creating and doing. So there's- And I hear you, now there's a new element within that- Right. That soup or whatever it is, that dynamic. This has never been so live in some ways. And your generation, so I grew up without the internet. So I still remember the old world, but we of course had radio and television and then cable television. And of course, with the internet, it's just this supernova. Everything explodes. And so then in a way, not only is AI out there filtering, but each of our lives, all of us have relevance realization for Vakey's term, which is the filter. And I can very much understand young men, for example, what in a sense you do when you play World of Warcraft is you've just put this enormous filter on your life because all of this time, you're going to bring your world down into one little frame. And in a sense, emotionally, you're managing all of your frames by saying, it's too much, it's too much, it's too much. Just let me see if I can manage this little world for a while. And if I can successfully manage this little world, maybe I'll have a little bit more courage. But now again, the secularization tries to dismiss religion along some certain frames. And I think Peterson is in many ways- What Peterson effectively did was basically say to people, the dismissal of religion as a certain aspect, which was set up by secularity, set up in the 17th and 18th centuries and then continued into the 19th and 20th centuries, this certain set up, that's going away. And you're no longer going to be able to basically hunker down and say, oh, that's supernatural. I'm leaving that over there. And it's like, no, the supernatural natural distinction, that's probably going away phenomenologically, because it's all coming at you. And the easy dismissals of certain things are no longer going to work. And we don't know where that will take us, because what is being demanded of us now, computer games, pot, alcohol, they are all strategies of reducing complexity. And an addict is fundamentally someone who eventually says, I'm going to reduce complexity down to one thing, which is my drug, or kind of a a idolatrous relationship with romance is another reduction of complexity. I'm going to make my romantic relationship with one other person, the only thing my life is about. And we don't look at these things as drugs of sort, but if you look at- In other words, probably God, right? That's right. That's right. You're elevating it to God's side. That's right. And in a sense, that's what God, in terms of the, I'm going to put God in scare quotes here, just so Christians don't have seizures or anything. But that's in a sense how God functions, because it's at the top of the hierarchy. And that which is at the top of the hierarchy then orders the rest of the hierarchy, just like the addict sleeping outside my door, the thing at the top of their hierarchy orders their life. And in some ways, it's a coping strategy to manage overwhelming complexity and come down to one thing. And people do that all the time. They do it with whatever they put at the top of their hierarchy, God, family, drink, romance, children. And of course, religions have been dealing with this, with that dynamic forever. And because we've had to deal with it, but now suddenly things have, especially for people who tend to be, Peterson once said that are the same, the exaptation of food searching and acquiring gets, information searching and acquiring gets mapped onto that. And if you think about that, and with the supernova of food and information, it's not unreasonable to see why we have the issues we have. To further that metaphor, it's a superfluous, low calorie supernova. And that's where the relevance realization kicks in, Google, et cetera, like the cream rising to the top, that now more than ever, you need, it's like the apes who have this giant guts and spend their entire day just om nom nom nom nom nom. Wouldn't it be better if you had a fire, a cooking pot and some tools in order to try to find that high calorie, high protein source of food, as opposed to having to just spend your whole day eating. Right. And Jordan Peterson comes into the window then with his individualism and says, you, you now must in a sense be at the center of this, because your decisions, your choices, all matter. And of course, in the context of a meaning crisis, where we've got the enormous complexity around us and the skepticism that, okay, the world doesn't have particles down beneath. We don't even know what's down there. Is it energy? Is it waves? Is it vibration? Do people offer all these kinds of things? And the critical thought that I too might not exist in this. And to have Sam Harris just sort of blithely, you know. Yeah, there's no there. Yeah, there's no there there. And to say, no, but you can, you can keep going like that. And it's like, well, Sam, maybe you can, but a significant part of the population or a growing part of the population cannot. And so then of course, Peterson comes in and, and if you once you begin to see all this, you begin to say, oh, okay, well, I can understand how and why he had the effect he had. And, and, and for again, many, many people, a very helpful effect, because suddenly, it's, it's like you're getting your they're taking you off the Soma. And now suddenly, you're finding that, well, the real world is actually can be pretty terrific and painful, but it's, it's far more real than the little reduced frame that I was trying to manage the being overwhelmed with complexity before. So, so we've we have hit our tentative time limit. Oh, we had some breaks. Yeah, we had some breaks. So are we are we going to cheat and keep on going? Are we going to are we going to end it here? Oh, I don't know. What do you want to do? I want to talk forever. Well, that's probably not available. Yeah, we can go a little bit longer. Okay. So, because I just I just dumped a whole bunch of stuff here. I'm curious what you're going to pick up. Sure. So the when we were talking about the, the different the different strategies for dealing with kind of novel updating to your to your to your system, you know, different different groups have different strategies for doing that, you know, like we were talking about the Orthodox have a particularly strict strategy, maybe the Protestants or some veins of Protestantism are more willing to bend. And the question is, is which of these strategies is going to work over time? Right? Like which at the end of the you know, these, these these systems are, in my opinion, like I really like the idea of kind of thinking about them as living organisms. I think that's kind of the best, the best analogy or metaphor that we have, obviously, they're not quite uh, living organisms, there's some sort of like co evolutionary organism that, you know, is is living, you know, within and between human minds and stuff like that. And, and but there is a there is a co evolutionary dynamic to it, where to the extent that you are integrating new information, well, or that you are holding or holding it back, that is going to manifest itself as action of your constituents of your people. And then that's going to be more or less successful over time. And so there's, you know, there's a there's a pragmatic element to, you know, is the Orthodox strategy appropriate? Or is the Protestant strategy appropriate? And and who knows? And, and so one of like, you know, to pull to pull way back to kind of one of the reasons why I was kind of had my eyes locked on Jordan Peterson, when he first appeared, was thinking about this at lies, you know, as society existential, you know, as societal existential threat, which is, you know, like, again, that as existential exhaustion, kind of being somewhat lost, having having no kind of coherent society wide tailos that we don't have something that we're kind of all pulling towards, headed towards. And so, you know, especially when you can, when you think about that, in regards to the fact that, you know, we're about to start being able to rewrite our own DNA, we're about to, you know, potentially, you know, engineer some things that are kind of more robust and powerful than us in a bunch of different ways. You know, apparently, you know, there's a there's a chance that the, you know, the entire world has just been shut down by either a, you know, a organic or engineered virus that has kind of shut down the, you know, the entire globe's economy. You know, the debt crisis, you know, I particularly I am particularly worried in the kind of natural historic response of people when their livelihood, like when the quality of their life degrades significantly, kind of what that reliably produces as a tribal reaction, and kind of where we might be headed in the next, you know, in the medium term, you know, how how everyone being pissed off about the fact that, you know, their their lives suck a lot worse than they used to. And now, you know, are we going to find some external scapegoat or or internal scapegoat in order to blame everything on and could that turn into something as catastrophic as a world war? You know, the, you know, if you watch Jordan, if you watch Joe Rogan, he, you know, he has people who come on and talk about coronal mass ejections kind of wiping out all the electrical board and all of our hard drives, etc. Or a meteorite that could come, you know, then periodically does, etc, etc. So there's all of these, there's a, you know, there's a myriad of existential threats for our species. And, you know, and to some degree, like, you know, we were I don't know, like, what are we doing? Like, you know, like, are we are we paying attention? Are we focused? Are we, you know, are we trying to address these things? Obviously, you know, to the extent that we do have functioning leadership of nations, etc., then people are attempting to address these things. But kind of societally, do we kind of have a coherent tailors that informs how we're navigating all of these different things like that? We're you know, what are we optimizing for? And, and that's an example of kind of where this translation of the, you know, our best, our best implicit morality, kind of what our elephants are up to, into conscious and articulatable space matters, right? Like, it's, you know, one of the common things that I've had, you know, in these conversations that I've been having on your on your server, is kind of all these conversations with Christians, where we're exploring all the different ways where our right, our elephants are walking in parallel, or we're, we're, we're headed in the same direction, we're pointing at the same things, we agree implicitly on so much. And so then if that's, if that's the case, isn't that good enough? Like, isn't it good enough just to have your writers in parallel with each other? Like, isn't that like 99% of the of the way there? And I think to it, in a sense, that is true. But, but what kind of our best, our current best approximation of our best philosophy, or our best theology, or our best ethics gets translated into when we write our laws, when we write our when we write our algorithms, when we, you know, when we set up international governance bodies, in order to try to tackle this particular problem, then whatever kind of the dominant theological frame is, is going to inform that, you know, explicit and articulate form. And so it is really important that we do try to do our best to to get a hold of the best possible articulation of our implicit morality. And, and so, and so and so what, you know, when Peterson was, you know, first arriving on the scene, kind of there was a huge degree of kind of jadedness and cynicism in the world, right? That like, you know, that we were done that like, you know, Western civilization was all all but, you know, like, you know, it was an empire, it was a decadent empire teetering on the brink of collapse, and maybe it is. And, but there wasn't anybody stepping up and saying, like, No, and here's why, like, here's who we are, here's why we should believe in ourselves. And this is where we should be trying to go. And, and so, you know, when he when he arrived, like, he was like a salient bomb for me, because like, like, I was trying to say earlier, like, I have all of these kind of, I've been trying to keep track of all of these kind of subconscious questions that I seem to be kind of keyed in on, and they're all in this vein of like, you know, multi dimensional, personal, communal, familial, and societal, like harmony or health. And, and so when Peterson arrives and kind of starts to address, you know, all of these different layers simultaneously, like I said, he was it was like a, you know, a salient bomb goes off in my head. And it's like just cascades of ideation, where it's like, oh, that and that and that and that, oh, that and that. And I suspect that's kind of like an openness thing. Like, you know, we talked sometimes about kind of when an idea hits your head, kind of how far the ripples as it kind of cascades through the, you know, the matrix of your, your, you know, your thought structure, you know, how distantly that trigger will go is kind of a measure of your openness. And so I think you and I are both probably pretty high in openness anyway. But, and so, and so yeah, what like what it that what our communal Taylor's ought to be, I have kind of keyed in on as like the as the biggest initial question that like, you know, we have all these crises, we have all these issues. And what we are, what we are aiming for is super important. And, you know, and this is, you know, again, straight out of Petersonianism, which like, like, that, you know, pick, pick a star, pick the highest possible star, imagine the greatest possible good that you could possibly imagine, and then posit that as kind of a distant and vague goal, and then focus on the immediate. But the first step is, what is that guiding light? Like, what should we collectively be aiming for? Now, you know, this might be an example of my, you know, my failure to properly learn kind of Christianity and to have and to have had enough conversations and kind of delves far enough into it. But I don't know if I could well articulate what a Christian Taylor's looks like. Like, I think, I think a you know, if I was going to attempt to steal man it, it would be something like, you know, that you, you don't try to get too specific, you don't try to you don't try to articulate it too finely. You trust in a, you know, a pattern or a personality that there are stories of that there are there's kind of like an associative matrix around this idea of Jesus or of Christ, and that this represents kind of the archetypal hero and that you're and that you're, you know, the Christian Taylor's is something like, not to not to get too tied up in the details, like don't, don't try to get, you know, don't try to get your hands around it too tightly. Don't try to express it too clearly. Just do your best to embody this, heroic pattern and let the chips fall where they may that, you know, that this is too big of a picture to ever comprehend. It's too big of a picture to, you know, for any for any mere mortal to ever get a grasp on. And so, you know, here's here's the here's the heroic mode. Here's kind of the archetypal heroic mode and just, you know, aim for that and then, you know, cross your fingers. Um, now like that, I can say that's that's my attempt at a steel man. It probably sounds like a bit of a straw man. Um, no, no, it doesn't. The, but what you're right on is part of what we keep bumping up into is the fact that we're using language. We're communicating through zoom. We're writing things in books and these are these are modes of representation, which by virtue of what they are have limitations. And, and this is where Leslie Newbegin's assertion that the hermeneutic of the church is the hermeneutic of the gospel. Now that of course is a communal picture, but if you were to say translated into a Petersonian picture, the focus is more on the individual than the, you know, what Christianity finally is, is, okay, to what degree can you be Christ? And because finally the, you are, you have one life and here it is, and at least one life in this dispensation. Here it is. The choices you make, the, um, the, the ways what, what you both allow to shape you and, and how you spend your time, all of this on this platform right now, here it is. And, and that, I mean, obviously in a sort of what I'm doing with these conversations and what we've done in the last, you know, two, three hours that we've been working at this has been, okay, who is Topher? Who is Topher? What is he? Where does he come from? And we get it, we start peeling back layers, but now for the next, however many years you, um, you, you live in this world, whatever language that we put on you or can describe you, all of those are by its nature limitations in terms of, they can tell us things about you, but, but the you that is, that is at every layer, that is both the thought and the physical and, and, and then you peel you back, you know, generation after generation, because you can go in other ways and discover that you and your brothers are this sort of thing. And now your nuclear family, and now you've got a new one with your wife and your daughter, and then your neighborhood in Toronto and your story is, is particularly for us fairly coherent in that it's not, um, you know, you haven't lived in 12 places in 10 years and, you know, on and on and on and on and on. So, so Christianity, you know, basically gets us down to, gets us down to you, but not just you, because you, and this is exactly what happens with Jesus theologically. We have Jesus of Nazareth, and then we have Christ. And if you read the apostle Paul, there's lots of different attempts in the New Testament to, to articulate, well, what are we really doing here? And so Jesus and the, and Matthew, Mark and Luke talk about the kingdom of God, and John talks about eternal life, and the apostle Paul talks about being in Christ. That's a really weird thing, because we don't say in Jesus, it's in Christ, which is Greek for Messiah, in Messiah. Well, what on earth does that mean? So Christianity attempts to, to, to address it at all these different levels at the, at the communal level, and these things scale up to, to include everything and scale all the way down to include you and the yous that are fractally down inside of you. And so it's, and so in many ways, what, what Christianity always says is that when, when Jesus is about to ascend, he tells his disciples, the Holy Spirit will come upon you. And now, you know, I've spent a fair amount of time and need to do more time sort of deconstructing that for our contemporary audience. What, what, what on earth do we mean by the Holy Spirit will come upon you? Because there's all these different images that sort of inhabit us that I think have, have now been sort of dislocated and warped by, by our culture. But then, then he says, and you will be my witnesses. Well, what does that mean? It means that you, that which is Christ will somehow be seen by you. And of course the church takes on that language and it's used all over the place, but to, to, to, to ratchet up the degrees of that are, you know, and that fits into, of course, young Peterson. Now Christ is the archetypal hero and you have to, you know, what you did basically was just, you've, you've, you've understood enough of the Peterson stuff and oh, okay, I need to be Jesus. But if you say it that way, everybody thinks you're a bloody fundamentalist or a Bible thumper or something, but that's, that's, it's, that's where it goes. I was thinking, I was thinking, so I was watching, so this time of year, I usually try and do some Lord of the Rings things. So I was watching the third Hobbit last night, we had a power outage and everybody went to bed and I waited to have the power come back on. And then I was watching the, the crappy movie of the third of, the third Hobbit movie and Bard's children, the, the village is being overrun by orcs and Bard's children are looking for a way to get to the third Hobbit movie. And so I was watching the third movie and I remember what Peterson said to his son when he took him to a movie that was a little too much for his son, keep your eyes on the hero, keep your eyes on the hero. And I watched the children there, you know, the orcs are overrunning the town, da da, where's, where's, where's my father? Keep your eyes on him. And of course, all of this stuff is built into, if you know, the church world, you can find it in all of the different traditions articulated in all of different ways. And then Peterson comes in and basically says, you know, keep your eye on, on the archetype, on the archetypal hero. If he says Jesus, of course, people are like, but no, and, and that's, and so it only works though, if you have, if you have living stones available to you, if you have those little representations of the archetype somewhere in your life. And of course, none of us fully, you know, can as fully represent the archetype and the strange thing about Jesus that you meet in the gospels is he's, he's sometimes hard on the people you think should be his allies and he's kind of the people you think should be his enemies. And sometimes he's hard on the people that are his enemies and he's kind of people who are his allies. And you know, Jesus just keeps flipping that around. And so we, the amazing, the amazing thing about the gospels is that they have captured that complexity. And I remember when Job was earlier in his journey, he started reading the gospels and, and he would, he just found that for the first time as adult, he just found them hilarious and frustrating. And, and, and when I heard that, I thought, no, he's really reading them now. He's not reading them like, like a lot of church people that are, that, that are so insecure and conscious of their Christianity that they're always doing, that they're, they're, they're doing, that they're chattering writers is making apologies for Jesus and dumbing him down for them, which churches have been doing for them all along. I thought he's really reading it. And I, to me, that was so hopeful because he's seeing something now that he needs to see, because the truth is if you're, if you're a good enough observer of human beings, you will recognize that everybody's this way and, and way too complex for my low resolution image of this person to, to capture. And, and so then the heart of Christianity has always been the Christian and the witness of the Christian. And when Christians are shitty Christians, which they often are, the religion suffers. But the, the amazing thing of the religion is that despite the fact that the Christians are all really bad at it, something keeps shining through and, and that dynamic, you know, that dynamic almost always involves the stories and that the stories don't go away and that they're preserved. And I, you know, Jonathan Peugeot's conversation with Guy Sengstock, which I thought was a great conversation at one point, Jonathan says, I think this is exactly right. You know, it's a good thing I grew up sort of a, a fundamentalist, because what that meant was that I learned the stories when I was a kid. So finally when I became an adult, it was like, oh, but they're all in his head. Right. And a lot of other Christian traditions, they don't have that. And so that was a piece of the, the Sargon conversation with Peugeot that, you know, he was talking about, you know, how, how so many, you know, atheists are probably put off by kind of a low resolution image of Christianity and that you should probably, you should find the steel man. And that was, it was a great, it was a great moment in that conversation. And it's one that, that people in the discord have kind of repeatedly pointed me to is that like, you know, make, make sure that you're, sorry, she's eating this funnel again. Make sure that you're kind of finding the steel man, make sure that you're, you know, you're finding the best version of this kind of, you know, and if, in event, and then you find it, you know, to your dislike, you know, if you don't like it, that's fine. But, but don't, don't be put off by a cheap version of it, kind of find the real McCoy and kind of to your, to your point about the kind of the multi-layered multi-dimensional nature of it, right. That it's like, it's simultaneously happening at all these different layers, like you, you across time, you know, you in different contexts, your family, the community, et cetera, like that this is, this is the, you know, the multi-dimensional, multi-dimensional kind of harmonious nature of these things. And, and that's one of the reasons why I liked, I think that a living being or a living organism is the best metaphor because living organisms are unbelievably complicated. Like, you know, here's, here's a, here's a, here's a super 3D printer, go create a living organism, go create a thing that can perpetuate. No, it's impossible. You're never going to do it. Like we are, we are more miraculous than we could ever imagine. And, and then these, these religions that have co-evolved with us are similarly like just stupendously complicated. And, and which is one of the reasons why, you know, when you, when you see a, a project like the Ritnar, the religion that's not a religion, it's like, I don't know guys, like I think, I think you're underestimating the resolution of the thing that you're trying to mimic. That it's, it's, it's, it's, it's functionally operating at way, way too many levels of analysis for you to have a hope of kind of synthesizing one. Well, you know, counterpoint to that would be that to some degree, the, I think that the social justice thing is an example of kind of a semi-synthetic version where you can kind of take, it's like a, it's like a graft or something where you take a little, you know, a little piece of the tree and plant it in your own soil and then kind of grow it up adjacent. And, and then it, so it has, it has elements of the former organism in it, but it also has kind of gone this kind of very different direction. And, and, but then, and then the fact that it is synthetic kind of, in my opinion, winds up manifesting itself as kind of dysfunction and deconstruction that it doesn't, it doesn't, you know, it winds up not manifesting as, you know, either individual or communal, communal harmony or growth. It winds up manifesting as, as, you know, destruction and anger and, you know, et cetera, which is, you know, an example of, you know, a, a, you know, a pseudo religious life form that, you know, that is, that is, you know, like has been built by, by, you know, I guess hastily, like built hastily in, in kind of almost like a lab as opposed to being, you know, naturally grown anyway. But so a, like one way of seeing what Peterson is kind of up to, you know, like one, one would be to say that he's kind of pointing to a shadow that like he, that what he's pointing to is actually a far less robust and a far less full version. Another way to think about it is that he is an example of kind of what we need next, which is kind of a further articulation, which is to say, like, you know, what is, what are the, these beautifully functional ideas? Like what is the baby that is in that bath water? And how can we understand that better than we ever have so that as we face all of these, you know, all of these challenges that we're facing, that we have the best articulated version of this at hand, like that, that it, you know, and so, and so, you know, rather than seeing yourself as kind of an inventor of something new, more a kind of like, you know, you're trying to bring a magnifying glass to bear or something like that. You're trying to, or, or, or, you know, taking a brush to the, the fossils that are still on the ground and you're kind of just brushing off the next layer of dirt to, so as to uncover the next layer of this idea that has, that has functionally and harmoniously kind of organized societies over the course of thousands of years. But that, you know, like, but that there are also examples of insufficiency of, right? Like whether it's, whether it's the fall of Constantinople, you know, whether it's World War I, you know, like the fact that we did kind of go through, you know, the Nietzschean death of God, right? That like, that, again, this is one of the things that my kind of peculiar salience thing has been tuned to is like, if, if a return happened, what might the hazards then be, right? That if, if we could wave a magic wand and we're all, you know, we all get back into inside the Christian frame, we all get back inside the Christian box, is that going to be good enough? Right? And, you know, a, yeah, anyway, so- We don't even have any idea what that means. And this is, this is something I say to my own people in terms of people who are self-consciously within a certain box, because I think the greater truth, I think the truth is that we are already within that box. And, but we're not exactly sure what that means or what the box consists of and how that looks, because people in the Islamic world and people in the, in Asia look at us and say, oh yeah, these are Christian nations. It's just obvious to everyone, except to us, of course, because we're swimming in it. But, but, and, and then what we see is, and this has sort of been the genius of Protestantism, which, because, and the honesty of Protestantism, which is because the, the, the institutional fragmentation just doesn't let us allow, you know, just doesn't let us deny the diversity of structures, but it becomes this massive, it becomes this, it becomes this massive laboratory of trying on all these tiny, little, different micro things and allowing them to scale up, at least in some small ways. And, and they sort of rise and fall and rise and fall, whereas this, you know, the, this institutional monolith that is the Roman Catholic Church, which is an astounding accomplishment, sort of manages to continue to go exist, and the Orthodox are sort of smaller ones, but also tied to nation states, and we haven't even started to really talk about the relationship between church and nation, because there's deep relationships there that the American experiment, which sort of gets copied. I mean, the, the British kind of learn from their child, which is America, and copy aspects of it themselves, but keeping the Queen. I mean, this stuff goes on forever. But, and, and because we, you know, when we tease it out and try to articulate it, I mean, we don't have enough time in our lives to actually even engage in this enterprise, so instead we actually live it, and we actually choose, and again, this is another one of the big contributions of Peterson, that in every single one of our choices, all of this stuff is built in. It's an incredible compression. I mean, human action is the most astounding compression algorithm we can imagine, and of course, for vacant relevance realization gets exactly right at that. It's a compression algorithm, everything, and we don't even know that we're doing it. We know that the little conscious self of us is blithely aware of why did I choose this? You know, ask Carl Edds, why did you sleep with that woman? Yeah, I don't, he doesn't know. Why were you attracted to her? And you're barely, like, you're barely have conscious control over it. Like, that's right. What, like, what is, it's like, you know, the key, like, what's the key to your relevance realization? You know, I almost, I would, yeah, most of you and most of all of us, that's, you know, it's automatic, or not even automatic, but like, your ability to, to consciously shift it is limited. Like you're, exactly. Donald Trump does what Donald Trump does. He just does it. You talk to Chris Christie, who's often on TV talking about Chris, people are just going on about Trump and Chris Christie's like, come on, don't you know this by now? The guy does what he does. It's, you know, oh, are there layers? Of course there are layers, but he does what he does. And, and we just want to be in denial about ourselves at that level. But yet at the same time, we are creatures who, over time, whether we're spending years on World of Warcraft or years in church or, or years and all of these other things, we are constructing, I mean, we, we are just these astounding centers of being that, you know, it's the, the, what, what, what we are is just beyond compare a little lower than the angels as the book of Peter says. So we should probably land this plane. Yes, we should. Because I see your brother working. It's like, I feel kind of bad. It's okay. We're, we're close today. So it says, this is, this is, I'm just, I'm using the shop as a, you know, a, a, what was a, a quiet reprieve from, you know, the outside world. Anyway, yes, we should, we should land the plane. I guess the, you know, the thing to just to leave on, and maybe I'll just explain it to you and on Discord when we get a chance of it. So what I have attempted to do is kind of, I guess, to be kind of, kind of become a denomination of one, like, like our friend Jacob, right? That like, you know, to take all of these different, and Jordan, Jordan Peterson. Oh, yeah, he's, he founded his own church. He's a denomination of one. Yeah. So I've done a similar thing. I've kind of come up with, you know, I'm, I am now a denomination of one. And, and yeah, it's, it's, you know, it's just, it's incredibly crazy, kind of how multi-layered it all is. But I, you know, I kind of have found something that does seem to, you know, does seem to work for me, does seem to, you know, I mean, like it, when, when I insert it into that key at the top of your, of your own real relevance realization, it seems to work quite well. Like that, that I'll briefly just say that like, it, what it has me mostly doing is kind of orienting my life kind of through my daughter, essentially, that like, that my, you know, my primary kind of, yeah, my primary focus, like, I mean, that like, like, it's almost like a meditation that like, when, you know, when you're, when you're doing some sort of meditation and you're kind of using some sort of thing to kind of focus your, you know, your energies through your vision through the, and then, and then it doesn't stop there, but the way, the way that it all kind of orients and then passes through and then out from is, you know, an orientation towards my child, towards my baby, towards my, you know, towards my, my little girl. And that seems to be working quite well. I like, I like the way that that like, it, you know, it makes me, as a brief example, like when my wife, my wife hangs out in all of these, you know, you know, mom's groups, talking to all her, her friends who have also have children around the same, same time that we have. And apparently, like, the consensus is that I am, you know, kind of by far, you know, far and away, kind of the most engaged, the most, you know, the most present, like, you know, like that I, I compared to all of the other fathers and the most kind of bought in on taking fatherhood as, as the, you know, the most important thing in my life. And I like that, like, I'm happy with that. I'm happy to, you know, I mean, to have, to have that be the way that my whole, you know, my whole salience is kind of oriented is, is, is through there and then farther into the future. But like you say, we gotta, we gotta wrap up here. Paul, thank you so much for, for the couple of chances to, to, you know, to say what I'm having to say. You're too good for me to leave you alone. My question is, what are we going to do with this now? I mean, we've still got, we've still got talk number one. When am I going to put that out? Because, or should that come out second as, if this is a big teaser, what do you, what do you want to do? I, I've now, like now that we have this one to at least partially kind of explain and make up for, you know, some, yeah, some of the, we were using the metaphor of a broken speaker. So the, I don't know, the rips, the rips in the first one, now that we've patched some of the rips in the first one, I'm okay with it going out there. So I'll just leave it in your hand. Like what, you know, if you want to release, you want to release, you know, one and the other, put them together, like whatever you want to do. You know, obviously it's, it's a huge amount of content for your, for your, for your, for your channel to, to make their way through. So, but my channel seems to be able to absorb a lot of content. Certainly does. Well, this is, this has been fun. This has been a privilege. And this is, again, I sort of started this channel because I wanted conversation partners and I have, I have received far more than, than I could have ever imagined. So I, and, and Topher, this has been, this has been terrific. And I know lots of other people are going to be out there. It's going to be jealous. It's like, oh, Andrew Clay gave Topher blah, blah, blah. And it's like, yeah, okay. Andrew Clay could do whatever the hell he wants with his channel. So uh, blame me. But um, thank you Topher. And this, this, this indeed has been a treat. Thank you, Paul. All right. Take care. Bye bye.