https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=BtCvC2_ASKY

 Go ahead. Great. Well, one of the things I want to talk to you about is with the stuff that's gone on with you recently is I've had deaths in my life, you know, grandparents, extended family, but never anything super close directly. My grandfather, I had a very torn relationship with him through my childhood. It was, you know, lack of approval and he spent a lot of time with me. I loved him deeply. I cried when they played Taps at the funeral. But I have not had to go through that deep loss yet. And I know it's coming. I mean, I'm 30 years old and you're lucky if you get that far without a big one. Unless you go, then everybody else gets that. Exactly. There you go. You know, so that's I'm already past the 27 club for artists. So that's got that one good. But yeah, no, I mean, there's something coming in the next, you know, couple years, five years, decade, like something's going to hit. I've had I've had loss and pain in my life as we all have. But it's one of those things, you know, there's the saying that comes back a lot of, you know, if everyone in the world were to dump their problems in a big pile and offer exchanges that everyone would humbly take their own problems back and walk back from it. It very much feels that way. But I spend more than five minutes talking to anyone. I'm like, wow, this person has way more profound tragedy in their life than I've had. So from someone who's in the midst of it right now to someone who's gone through a lot of life without having to be in that that Rubicon, you know, what what what general advice would you give? I think, you know, we talked. A lot of life is not so much how you respond to something in the moment, but how prepared for it are you? And so my for my sister's funeral and her it was a memorial service. I which where I'm working with my brother-in-law, we're going to post it online. I might just post the you know, my eulogy on my channel. But it was a it was a profound experience because she was a teacher at a Christian high school and. The you know, she, you know, sudden death, leaving students right there. She's a middle school teacher. And, you know, these poor six year six graders go through the line and they don't know what any of this is about. But what that school could bring together and that church community could bring together in terms of the the service just was astounding to me as a small church pastor. There was a there's this huge choir that that did this amazing choral piece. One of the former student of hers or formal former alumni is a professional vocalist. And he did a duet with with a woman that was just unbelievable. And so all of that all of that amazing art is within the context of this astounding story that is Christianity of promise and redemption. And so on one hand, as maybe I'll post the I've been waiting for my brother-in-law to post some of this stuff before I post it. But on one hand, your your heart is just broken by grief because you're you know, my my my baby sister is dead. No, you know, and so then your mind processes all kinds of different things. But on the other hand, so, OK, do I believe in the resurrection? Do can I have can I have hope in this moment? Well, you don't just generate that. You don't just say, oh, yeah, this resurrection thing. Oh, OK. Yeah, that doesn't it's you know, we are we're these weird creatures that that grow through time. And so in moments like that, all that you've you know, so it's it's everything that my parents were and built into her and the work that she built into her her work as an English teacher in that Christian community and the life that she devoted into the relationships that she had in church and in school and the relationships we had in family in that moment of loss. We have. Amazing resources that in some ways have been accumulated for generations that now we can call upon. And it doesn't make the suffering not hurt, but it transforms it in a strange way. And and that's what I experienced in this and the same with my father's death. When my father died five years ago, you know, there were no there were no loose ends, as often happens with a sudden death. And that was a blessing. But the. So if someone has if someone has lived well. It's an immense comfort. Now, I've also done funerals for people who haven't lived well. Yeah, that's harder. And I don't mean it in terms of the Christian narrative of of salvation and damnation. I mean, just in terms of. What the family then has to walk through. Yeah. So it's hard. I mean, that's that's one of the things that not having been raised in a church community is always so hard is, you know, where do you draw that line in eulogizing someone between being just sugarcoating and being dishonest? It comes up in media all the time. I mean, there's so many TV shows and movies have explored that idea of, you know, how do you approach it? Bojack Horseman did it really beautifully in this last season with the season five. There's an episode where his mother passes and he doesn't extend it. The whole episode is just a monologue of the eulogy of his mother. And it's very, very deep and esoteric for an animated cartoon show. But yeah, no, it's one of those things that you can't. You know, where do you balance the authenticity and the genuineness and the pain that people sometimes bring to each other's lives and the devastation they can leave behind in a family? I mean, somebody who's really spent decades mentally and verbally abusing or physically abusing family members. Yeah. You know, what do you do in that moment? And what is that space for? Yeah. Maybe this isn't the place to air the grievances. Maybe this is the place to put a bow on it. You know, and that's right. You know, but then what do you do? And so so part of what the dynamic of this of this service was. My you know, my sister died suddenly. And what that leaves in the community is a lot of shock and why and anger. Now, the now I the pastor, one of the pastors of my sister's church did the main eulogy, which was, you know, which was absolutely expected and fine. But I could then in my eulogy, I expressed more of the anger. And what you want out of a service is for is for the community to be able to process their stuff together. Yes. And and so anger is a. Anger is a tricky thing, especially in, say, a Christian context or perhaps a Christian culture where there's a lot of where there's a lot of fear of anger because, oh, well, you know, I can't be mad at God or I can't be mad at God in this way or or am I mad at God or, you know, in my experience with people's emotions, people have emotions and they look around for things to have their emotions towards. Yes. Well, then the neuroscience backs that up. I mean, we have our feelings first and then we search for interpretations. If you hand somebody a warm glass, a warm drink versus a cold drink and you introduce them to someone, they'll say the person felt warm or felt cold. And you can you can replicate that easily across cultures. And it's just like we are hardwired for that. It's very easy. And I, you know, I relate really deeply there because I had a lot of anger issues as a kid. I was actually diagnosed ADHD as a child, never, never medicated, diagnosed again. And as an adult, when I read through a book that had 25 clinical categorization criteria for ADHD, the only one I didn't have was a rational outburst of anger because I went through three years of anger management therapy. So I went on that one. Well, that's the thing is that what I what I realized in the last in the last five, 10 years is that as a child, what what what I took from it, I'm sure this isn't what my anger management therapist is teaching. What I took as a child was that anger was bad. Put your anger in a little box and don't express anger because only bad people express anger. Right. And that that's a very easy message to get in today's society. And we're happy to give that. And the whole toxic masculinity thing ties in there. And we don't want anger, aggression, you know, even just confidence in general. You know, I get a lot of a lot of feedback of being over arrogant, overconfident, full of himself, all that. And they are all tied in the same kind of intensive emotions where passion and strength and energy can come from that. That is necessary. You know, that is a part of being human. You need to process it. You need to work through it. And I think it's one of the things that I'm struggling with in modern religion is reconciling the teaching I'm getting from from reading older sources and then trying to reconcile that with modern view of Christianity. And there's a lot of people, especially from the rational atheist side, who want to come at it with the hippie dippy Jesus, love everyone, forgive everyone, no matter what, be a doormat, let everybody walk all over you and turn the other cheek means that you never you never strike anyone and you never act out in anger and you never act out in aggression and you don't protect yourself. You don't protect your family. And everything is just lovey dovey compassion 24 seven. And that does not reconcile with my reading of the Bible or with any teacher before the last 50 years. That's right. I don't know that there were many who were doing that interpretation of Christianity 100 years ago. So and as a culture, then we have these. So the problem is, if you can't if you can't process it over here, it leaks out over there. So on one hand, oh, we're completely inclusive and we don't say anything bad against anyone but punch a Nazi. That's like, oh, OK. Well, and who's a Nazi? It's everyone you disagree with and anyone. Very easily reconciled. Yeah. So well, the same one, the same idea, you know, you see the same thing in any, you know, parallel in culture. You know, you have the PETA and animal rights activists. You're like, OK, great. That's that's awesome that you know, you want it. You want to support animal rights. That's great. Can we look at the numbers of how many small animals are killed to make your salad? Can we look at the people that you're the people that you're hurting in your in your violent protests and trying to protect the lives of these individual, supposedly sentient creatures? You know, that's the people just first order consequences is as far as most people get. They don't want to have a long extended conversation. They want to have their emotional outbursts and feel justified. And, you know, it ties to the Jungian shadow work stuff that, you know, whatever gets suppressed is going to get expressed somewhere. It's going to come out and through something in your culture. I think we're seeing that. I think we're in a current time of massively suppressed anger and rage. And I mean, you're seeing right now just the last couple of days you had politicians calling for reform in the European acceptance of migration and immigration because of the underlying rage in the population. Like, it's not even, oh, we need to look at these policies for any actual policy reason. We're not we're not saying it's wrong in the direction of too much or wrong in the direction of too little. We're saying people are responding with anger and that is bad. So we must adjust our policies to control the angry response we're getting from people. And that that I saw when I worked in schools, you know, that you would see, you know, a parent who comes in and yells at guidance about their kid being in the wrong class gets their schedule changed. And the parent who comes in and politely requests a shift in their schedule gets pushed back and pushed back and pushed back. So you're training people to be more angry, to get the response they need. And that's and people see that they see that anger. You know, most people are terrified of anger. And if one thing I've learned in my life is that if you can be the one who sits and calmly listens and speaks back in a calm, measured, reserved tone, that people who are angry hate that more than anything in the world. They just want you to scream in their face to justify their anger. But if you just turn to them with it, I really think that's part of I'm sure there's depths that I will never understand. That's part of what turn the other cheek is, is there's nothing more harmful you can do to a violent enemy than to accept their anger and their rage and their pain and not reflect it back. It doesn't mean not defending yourself physically in threat of death. But it does mean that if someone's screaming in your face and you sit and calmly listen and say, OK, I understand where you're coming from. Here's my side of the story. And I feel that we could have a more rational, calm, respectable conversation about this, that they instantly feel like a child. And it reverts all of the dominance in the relationship back to that. So you need some kind of outlet, though. You need a place to put it. And that's you had mandatory military service could be a thing, you know, sports. You got weightlifting. You got you even heated debate. I mean, I was in a club, but I was in middle school. And it was a great chance to get in someone's face and really work on something and get get some aggression out that I couldn't get out. I wasn't a sports kid, so I didn't have that. But I think we need that. And these these communal events can be a place for that. Yeah. What did you what did you try to do in the eulogy in the service to to catalyze that? Well, I just shared what was on my heart that, you know, I'm sitting there and I'm looking at my nephew and my nieces and my brother in law. And I'm angry because they have been robbed of their mother. And and I used so I'll post it probably in a few days. I used Luke 11. Luke 11 is not Luke 11. John 11 is this amazing passage where like Peterson says, you can't make these things up. So Jesus, Jesus has these three friends, Mary, Mary, Martha and Lazarus. And Jesus, they're they're his friends. And Lazarus gets ill and they send word to Jesus. You're the faith healer. Quick, get back here and heal him so he doesn't die. And Jesus dawdles and people are like, why are you doing this? And Jesus is saying, oh, I'm going to let him die. And you're like, no, no, no, Jesus. That's not what you're supposed to do. So he goes there and then the sisters are they're just torn up. Jesus, if you had gotten here, he wouldn't be dead. And then so on one hand, Jesus looks like he's kind of above it all, just looking down at everything, you know, pulling the playing the strings. But then Jesus gets to Lazarus's tomb and the Greek there is far more dramatic than the English. A lot of English translations pull their punches. Yeah. And Jesus is angry and he's heartbroken. And he's both of these. And you say, now, wait a minute. You could have avoided this and prevented this. Yeah, I could have. But all of this is Jesus basically says all of this is for God's glory and your own good. And they're like, well, who are you to decide these kinds of things? I mean, the whole story is in there. And so I talked a little bit about Lazarus and how, you know, Jesus, Jesus wasn't angry with the father. That's nowhere in the text. Just angry at death that his his friend should not be dead. And then, of course, he goes to he calls him from the grave and Lazarus comes out. But that whole scenario is vital, I think, for for us. You know, and this is us having permission to be angry at death. And if you read the Psalms in the Old Testament, the Psalms are the prayer book of the of the Hebrews. It's full of raw emotion. The whole Old Testament is it's all the New Testament, too. You shouldn't segregate them like that. They're full of raw emotion. And it's the Bible doesn't have a problem with it. We have the issue because we don't know, you know, how to process. Yeah, it reminded me what you said of a JP quote of him saying, you know, I don't like the question of do I believe in God because you're trying to put me in a box and I don't like being put in boxes. And that that's it seems it's part of the message of what Jesus was saying there was, you know, why didn't you do this thing? Well, it's not your place to put me in a box. You don't get to tell me how the Messiah acts. That's that's my role. It's beyond your feeble understanding. Don't question me. You know, there's some level of that, which I think I think is certainly there. I mean, certainly a teacher. And so he wants people to understand what he's doing. But there's there's a long arc for the teacher. And that's you can start a novel in chapter one. And you say, well, I want to know who the killer is. Yeah, we're going to get there. But give me a couple of chapters to tell you a story. OK, buddy, it's going to stick. It's going to hit a lot harder if you wait to find the reveal at the end. And that's the parables, the teaching story, like from an educator standpoint and from understanding the neuroscience, everything like is good teaching. It is really good teaching. And you save the morals for the end. And that is the important way. And you don't just reveal the whole thing at the very beginning, because then the experience of it doesn't have as much impact. So I can see how just just just from the educator lens, let alone the other lenses, that that that was the right approach, that you don't want to just say, oh, no, don't worry, I'm going to let him die. But I'm going to resurrect him afterwards and show you that I can even conquer death. It's fine. No, he wouldn't say that because that lessens the impact. Well, actually, he does say it. He tells them he says, well, I'm you know, I'm going to Lazarus is asleep and the disciples are like, well, we'll just wake him up. He's like, no, he's dead. The disciples never get it. Oh, interesting, interesting. And and so but but, you know, all of the tensions are in it because then suddenly you realize, OK, Jesus is your friend. But he's not. You're not having a friendship with a peer, really. And that has implications that we really don't like. And so the only place you can go, then, is trust. And then it's like, OK, so Jesus, Jesus, friends are really pissed at him because they let his brother die. Yeah. And Jesus, Jesus can handle that. Yeah. And Jesus says, well, you know, and every parent knows this of a child. So, you know, we talked earlier about having pets so that kids would know. So we had guinea pigs. If you want to if you want pets that you'll do a bunch of funerals for, ask some guinea pigs. Yeah, I had I had some as a kid. Yeah, same idea. And so I remember I remember standing, you know, out standing by, you know, these little places that we would bury our pets. And, you know, my my children sobbing because they were there when these guinea pigs were born and they held them and they loved them. And they and here they're dead. And and, you know, I always cry at the guinea pig funerals because my kids are crying and it's like, oh, God, this is horrible. You look at the wife and you say, why did we have pets anyway? This is a bad idea. Yeah. But no, it's not a bad idea. And yeah, no, it's so it won't even be easy to like, why do we even let our kids outside? She fell and scraped her knee. Why don't we just lock her in the basement forever so she'll never escape and never get hurt? Like, OK, there's also problems there. How about we just hide death from her? I mean, that's the Buddha story. Let's just hide death from him for his entire life. And then he goes out as a 20 something and sees it for the first time. It has to go hide for a week and deal with the internal drama and turmoil of that. Like, you can't hide people from the suffering. And it's the the not sleeping beauty, the Snow White, you know, they don't invite, you know, malevolence to the funeral. And it's like, you got to invite the evil queen to the birth. You got to invite the evil queen. You got to let her be there because she's going to show up either way. And it's better that she shows up when you're ready for her than when you're not ready for her. And that's, you know, with the guinea pigs, you're not you're never more than a few years out from something bad happening. And that's good. You're ready. You can have that conversation with them ahead of time. But you never know when it's coming with grandma or aunt or brother or with anything. You know, that's you got to you got to get ready in advance. You got to build up your arc. You got to build up the dikes. You got to get it. It's all the same archetypal stories over and over and over again. And it's and again, as you know, we were talking a little bit before I started recording, it's not just personal, it's communal that here and people often will ask me, I say, I'd much rather do funerals than weddings. And people are kind of offended and shocked at that. But but at a funeral, if if the life and the community have been cultivated. It's yes, you're you're you're brokenhearted, but it's also this it's hard to it's hard to describe what it is. But it's it's everything coming together where you can say you can look into the grave and say, you know, yeah, you took my sister, but you will not win in the end. And you can hold that and you can have a whole community together. And you don't say that in a trite way. It doesn't feel trite in that context. And with so much grief, people, you know, people again, I talked about this in the video I did a few white people had their mirror neurons and they see the grief and they're like, oh, I got to say better. They're in a better place. Yeah. They're not suffering. You know, they're not suffering. And so, OK, but to feel that comfort. And so, you know, we recorded the we recorded the service and I watched I watched it once now and I'll watch it again and again. And it will. We don't we don't have words to really. Yeah. You have your own. Words aren't made for this. Yeah. No. It's religion, it's art, it's music. You know, there's yeah. But there's certainly there is too long. There's there's too long to grieve from from a practical standpoint. You know, if you're crying all day for the day after a major loss, that's totally understandable. If you're crying all day, 40 years later after the loss and you're still crying all day, every day and unable to function society, you probably have things that you need to deal with because you should have gotten to a place of integration of that pain by now. It doesn't doesn't mean that you're happy about it. It doesn't mean you don't think about it every day. And you can still think of those people every day. But you need to be able to become a part of your community again. But there's also too short. And that's I think a lot of people don't recognize that in our society. It reminds me of the Icarus myth that this author I like a lot, Seth Godin, who wrote a whole book around this, The Icarus Deception. We talked about how in modern culture, we tell the Icarus story as you don't don't fly too close to the sun or the heat will melt your wax. And that's true. You know, that is part of the story. But there's another part of the story that doesn't get told, which is don't fly too low because the water from the waves is going to loosen up the wax connection to your wings. You'll also fall. And so, yes, it's like, OK, we don't want you to be sad forever. And I feel this pain for you and I don't want you to feel this pain. But maybe 40 minutes after I found out that my sister died is not the time to say, it's all fine. There's no suffering. Don't worry. You don't have to be sad about it. Like, it's OK. It's OK to grieve for a while. And we don't know what that number is, but it's somewhere. You know, maybe a day is too short to get over it. Maybe 50 years is too long. And we don't know what the range of it. It's one of the things I really admire about about Jewish culture is they have that that sort of tradition of, OK, we're all going to sit together. We're going to go through this process together. We have the ritual. You've been through it before on behalf of others. And you've been on the other side and now you're on this side. And you know that you have to accept this from us because you understood how hard it was for you to offer it in my time of need. And now I'm here to offer it back to you. And you offered it to me five years ago when my wife passed. And now I'm here to offer it to you. And that is so powerful. And that's something I feel we lose a lot in modern culture. Even those who still are religious often bounce from congregation to congregation. They bounce from denomination to denomination. And so the traditions are different. Things don't feel the same. And that nostalgia, that connection to, oh, yeah, when I was 10, I went through this too. And when I was 14 and when I was 12 and when I was 25 and when I was 36. And I went through this with multiple different people, the same traditions, the same songs, the same patterns. You know, I have that to lean back on instead of having to renew this process every time it happens. It feels like that's happening in culture in general and in broader society that we're atomizing. And every experience is supposed to be this unique, genuine expression of our internal spirit and be yourself and express yourself. And I'm like, cool. Yeah, there's definitely value there, too. But there's also value in doing things the way they've been done. Maybe they were done that way for a reason. And it's OK to continue to do those things. Even if you say, well, objectively, it's not true. OK, but there's comfort in the pattern that you can get and then comfort in the community. One of the things you mentioned that stuck out to me was how beautiful the music was. And, you know, that's something that that exact same performance with those exact same performers, note for note, exactly the same in the exact same venue with the exact same audience without the context of we're at a funeral celebrating the loss of someone important. That music is different music. It's not the same music. And like, yeah, OK, maybe they sing a little bit louder and you can hear something of the tears and the tone when they're singing at a funeral. Maybe, maybe. But realistically, the fact that you know it's a funeral matters. It changes the circumstance there and it changes the art. It really does. And that it's part of it. It's not just notes and rhythms. And that's something that I've struggled with so much as a musician, is that it's easy to get focused on the the technicalities instead of realizing the technique matters because poor technique gets in the way of communicating a message and expressing something to people. That at the end of the something I've dramatically transformed on in the last few years is flat out telling the singers I work with, like I would rather see wrong notes, wrong rhythms, wrong, wrong words, wrong, wrong pitches, wrong harmony, bad tempo. I'd rather see all of that than see you not try to express a message to your audience. Now, ideally, you don't have any of those errors and you express a beautiful message. That's great. And it sounds like you had a wonderful experience there without a lot of technical errors. But adding 10 technical errors to that performance would not make it less impactful than the exact same performance with pitch perfect accuracy without the broader context. It's the thing that brings us together. We can all have that experience together. Which is which is exactly why preaching at funerals is in people are going to hear this weird. So easy. Yeah. Because on a normal Sunday morning, everybody's all over the place and, you know, everything's all over the place. At a funeral, it's like, okay, we're we're not going to we're we're in a church. We're we're going to talk about death. All of us are going here. We've been here before. And like you said, communities rehearse this over and over. And I often have that. So now as churches, as the as the level of participation in general in society within religious communities, church, of course, is what I know particular recedes, people will pop up and someone will die and they'll be like, oh, oh, oh, well, well. And it's like, yeah, you know, I'm happy to do a service for you. But but aren't there people in like but you've never invested in a community in an institution within a group of people. And so it's it's kind of like retiring and like, well, where's my where's my where's my retirement money? Well, did you put some away every year? Well, no. Well, yeah, well, it's the end of the grasshopper. You know, it's coming into winter and you have you have no food. And you say, you know, where's all my food? And like, well, somebody was was storing away food in the spring in the summer. And it wasn't you. So and if you build those relationships, you have that, too. I mean, that's one of the one of my goals, one of my long term goals in life, sort of a criteria for knowing that I'm having a successful life is having people around around my community here, but also just broader around the country where I know that I have a couple dozen people that if I didn't have a place to stay, would be happy to have me crash on their couch, because that's a deeper level of friendship than just, oh, let's hang out. Let's get a drink. Let's go have a meal. Let's hang out and play a game. It's like, oh, if I didn't have a place to stay and I'm in your town, can I crash on your couch for a week? Like, that's pretty intimate. The list of people that I'm allowing that on is pretty short in my list. Like the longer that list gets, that's a concrete, tangible example of community in a way that I don't, you know, I think you would have that normally in a church. It's like, oh, people who would attend a funeral for me, people who would attend my wedding, people who would come for the baptism of my child. Like these are things you're seeing regularly in secular society. We don't have a lot of that because it's like, it's all casual, which is nice because it gives you a lot of freedom, you know, and you see it in the dating world. It's like, okay, well, let's be super casual. I'm like, okay, great freedom and gives you some advantages, but there's also some disadvantages and there's some things you don't get until you commit fully at them. I'm learning that in my relationship to their, that's right. Beautiful, wonderful, amazing things in relationships that you only get when you are a hundred percent in and there is no out. That's right. The jobs, it's the same with faith. It's the same with music. That's I tell my singers that all the time that like you have to go all in. And if it means you make mistakes, that's okay, because you're going to make mistakes. You just have to let, because there's, there's a level of art you can only achieve if you're willing to risk losing it all. And you, I mean, it's the one that struck me, I don't watch sports much, but we watched the winter Olympics last year and what's his name? Sean White, I think the, the really big snowboarder, somebody had gone through who, so this guy had won gold medals previous years. New kid comes in, hasn't won the gold, goes right before him. Second to last one, absolutely killing it. Like it's 9.7 9.8. It's like, does a great job. And then you see the returning gold medalist come for the very last one after they get three runs each and you'd already had other ones that didn't have a high enough score to win. This other kids beating them and you see them just leave it all out there on the pipes. And he goes for these huge spins, these crazy moves. And everyone's like, wow, it's amazing. And yeah, that's amazing. But also we could have fallen in, snapped his neck, much prior risk that he could have snapped his neck on that. Then on the previous runs when he wasn't going 110% and so yes, that, that is, people get cut off. That happens. You know, you get cancer in your twenties, like that can happen. And you can have your relationship explode. If you gave everything to it, you can move across country for a job and then they can lay you off a week later. Like those things happen, but there's some advantages you only get when you go in anyway. And that's, you know, the long-term conversation you and I are having is around this leap of faith. And it's, you know, at a certain point it is stepping over a threshold. It is leaping into the void and not knowing for sure that something will catch you. And some, sometimes you only get caught when you're willing to take that jump. You know, the, my, my girlfriend went skydiving a few months ago and that's, that's a very visceral experience of that. You know, it's like, you can't know it's going to be okay until you're out of the plane. You got to actually get out of it. Like, Oh, maybe I can test out the parachute on land. You got to jump out of the plane. That's part of the process. And so, so that's, you know, it's, it's so, it's so hard. And, and it's the journey of a lifetime. And it, it, it, there's such an advantage to having the culture and the society around it and being raised in it and having your community and your church at the same time, I'm, you know, we're talking about this advantage versus disadvantage thing. You know, I could very easily see, particularly for someone like me, who is so hyper intellectual and hyper rational and always wants to analyze things and figure out the meaning behind them. That if I was just raised, if I were raised in a church community, you know, I would just question everything and doubt everything and want better explanations. And, and I, I pro the chances that I have a great, you know, expert of apologetics in my congregation are pretty low. So, you know, this, that there's a lot that's the ones like you, you know, I've been getting a lot more into apologetics lately and, and people like you and there's a Catholic Bishop Barron who's really enjoyable too, who has very similar. I listened to a great talk he gave at Google, where he's just like giving the practical stuff for these guys who are hyper rational, hype, hype, mostly probably, you know, he probably had the crowd of Catholics there who were to Google, but if you have a crowd at Google, the chances that the room is fully religious are pretty low. I don't know that the tech giants are attracting that right now. So it was, it was very practical and it gives you that, that grounding, which is, it's nice. Cause I got lucky. I really think that if I was raised in a major metropolitan area, I would have had a much rougher life. I was, you know, relatively rural, main, you know, relatively isolated from, from all the, the crazy cultural shifts and just sort of nice stable, you know, the same kids that I went to elementary school, went to my middle school, went to my high school, no real fights, no real drug issues, no real, you know, like never got suspended. Nothing really major. Went to a college in my, in my home state and you know, awful winter. So we're inside for half the year. There's not a lot of trouble you can get into to drink too much. And my whole, my whole family had problems with drinking. So I didn't drink till after I was 21. So I was able to avoid that one too. And like, you know, I had a massive overeating problem. I was, it was over 300 pounds when I was in college. And yeah, yeah. So I've lost about a hundred cents then. That was, that was my addiction. Yeah. It was, was again, you know, I see it with, you know, I read up about bulimia, anorexia, you know, binge eating. It's all control. It's all just, you need some control in your life somehow. And I saw the addiction in my family with, with smoking and with drinking and with other stuff and gambling and then, you know, variety of stuff and like, oh, well, you know, I didn't fall prey to any of that. I'm so smart. I have no addictions. And here I am at 300 pounds shoving nachos and cheesecake down my face, you know, so it's, you have in retrospect, you understand it a little deeper, a little deeper. And so I'm still, you know, struggling through those nowadays, but what I was trying to say is that, that I feel profoundly blessed to have been in a relatively stable environment through the entirety of my childhood, adolescence, early adulthood, because I didn't have that, you know, a church community, a strong, you know, family tradition bringing me up there. I was able to kind of substitute, you know, consistent friend circles, consistent culture, consistent gatherings. We have the thanksgivings and the Christmases and the holidays and the weddings and like those, while not as powerful, I think, as a, as the deep rooted religious traditions were at least enough to keep me, to give me a grounding from which I could construct an identity that was relatively wholesome and not just obsessed with self-expression and, and, and individuality at the, at the expense of community and connection and love and faith. No, that's, that's, that's, I can see that. I can see that. Yeah. Well, and it's true that, you know, the, the Peterson Harris thing, you know, the Peterson always comes back, there's this residue, there's this vast residue that's in the culture, and it all is connected to old things. And these institutions, when I say institutions, I don't just mean churches formal things that we can point to that of buildings and officers, but also these, these practices that carry on generation after generation, they, they ground us and, and, and you have to feel for those, for those who have not that. And there are, and there are many, there are many. And I've, I've told this story before. I remember a, I remember a, a, a man dying and his estranged wife, the family situation was fairly shattered and she was, I remember the, I was in the room when the guy was dying, a horrible death. And I remember her just embracing her brother and they were singing a sappy Kenny Rogers song together. And it was like, all right, well that's, that's what you got. You better work it. Yeah. And, and it worked for them for that moment and it helped them. And so you don't, you don't want to get too elitist and hoity toity about that because what they had was what they had and what they needed was each other in that moment. Yeah. Many people don't even have that. Yeah. Yeah. One of the, one of the really transformative stories that, that Peterson told that, that stuck for me was talking about wrestling. And he would say that how like, you know, people need these, these dramas, these stories that give them a narrative of good and evil and that's something to aspire to and triumphing over, over, over adversity and suffering. And like, yeah, okay, you can judge the people who are, who are watching WWE to get that, but like you're getting the same thing from your novels or from your plays or from Harry Potter or from, or from your religious stories. There's, there's more to a lot of these things. But at the end of the day, we have different things that speak to us in different ways. And maybe just, you know, maybe hearing your mom saying Mary had a little lamb is the most powerful music experience you will ever have in your life. You know, those things matter. They mean something. And that's, yeah, yeah, we can, you know, we can sit from our ivory tower and judge, you know, the quality of artistic expression that some of these people are able to, but you know, there's nothing more beautiful than a like stick drawing from your child with little, you know, a little drawing of her and a drawing of you and a little heart in between. And here's a picture of us, daddy. And I love you so much. Like, that's way better than a Picasso. I will take that over Picasso any day. Thank you very much. So there's, there's certainly levels to all of it. You're, you're, uh, we're dancing around a topic that, that is helping me to segue to one of the things I wanted to talk to you about today. Um, so there's a story that, that I'll, I'll tag at the end there that, that I would love to get your thought on. Um, but a bit, if you wouldn't mind, I'd love to take a couple of minutes and just sort of lay out an argument. I'm working on basically my Christmas sermon. I have, I have choir concerts that I put on regularly and I've had many, I had a pastor from Minnesota come up to me after my last concert and said, young man, that, that choir concert was the best sermon I've been given in two years. Had a woman come up after and say, you know, you're clearly a very strong Christian man who's speaking with a relationship with Jesus. And then I had friends who were atheists who were just like, Oh, that was a really fun concert. Great job, man. I loved your inspirational messages and how you tied it all in about a little bit of life. It's like writing that line is very hard. Um, but, but I find that the Peterson stuff really helps with that because he ties it into psychology and to, to neuroscience and biology and all of that as well. So I think that that helps. And then I also think I have a little bit more leeway because Christmas season enables a little bit more of secular people to talk about the religious side of things because it is Christmas season and music is an intrinsic part of that, especially choral music. So, so here's the basics of, of where, where I'm trying to go with what I want to say is that that we talk a lot about the good news and that, that, that things are good and that the beauty and the nativity and the gift of Christmas and that, that, that brings us, you know, joy and, and, and, and happiness and joy to the world. The Lord has come and you know, all, all these songs speak to this message of things are great and wonderful. And we just, one of my choirs just sang a setting of Eagles wings, the Psalm 91. And I heard a great sermon the other week about it, talking about how that, that, uh, Satan actually quotes that Psalm to Jesus in the desert saying, you know, oh, well God will take care of everything and he'll protect you and, and, oh, no harm will ever come to you and you'll have all the power and goodness in the world. And that, that, that's not the real message. It's not that things are good. It's that things are horrible and awful and suffering and malevolence and evil are real, but that you are stronger and more powerful than that suffering and evil. And you can overcome it with the light of God inside you and the connection of faith and community and, and, and trust in Jesus and, and trust in your loved ones and, and, and full, strong, courageous action in the face of adversity, that those things are as powerful or more powerful than the evil and loss in the world. So there's the classic things that, you know, that, that we all bring up and that Peterson talks about all the time. If you know, we have poverty, we have amazing advances in technology. We have more peace in the world than we've had in a very long time. You know, the Stephen Pinker, better angels of our nature, you know, violence is lowering all around the world and we're getting more civil rights and more rights for people all around the world. We're bringing people out of poverty. We're, we're traveling to, to, you know, Elon Musk put a car in space. Like that's insane. That makes no sense. And we did it. And that's cool because if any other animal put a car in space, it would be the only thing we'd talk about for like a year. If pigs somehow figured out how to put a car in space, it'd be amazing. But because we're humans, we don't think of ourselves as natural phenomenon. And it's just like, Oh wow, that, that crazy Elon Musk guy did a thing. Like no humans got together and made rockets and sent things in this space. That's insane. It's really cool. We live at the peak of human civilization. As my, my, uh, one of the, my shoulder angels, Akira, the Don, this, this musician who does a lot of, uh, mixes of motivational speeches. He says a lot, you know, we're, we're at the peak of human civilization. Your ancestors would all be so, so proud and grateful to live in a society like this where they could reach these heights. And you know, the King of France couldn't buy everything we have in our pockets with, with just an iPhone. It's insane. You know, every Pharaoh in Egypt would kill for those resources. But at the same time, there is also bad news. There's, there's wars. There's the fire in California. There's, there's thousands of people hungry and, and homeless and dying. There are children suffering of disease all around the world. There, there are awful things too, but we can overcome the awful things together through community, through faith, through work, through, through, through strength and confidence to push through the things that seem difficult and insurmountable. And that everything that that we feel pride in overcoming was once a thing we felt that we could never overcome. And that's where that strength and growth comes from. And there's, there's a few parallels there. There's, there's the neuroscience where as you do things that are difficult and get better at them, you wrap myelin sheets around those neural chains and you become better and stronger. They, they research into flow. Psychology talks about the zone of proximal development from about three to 5% outside your comfort zone, where when you're, when you're there, you're stretching yourself, you're making some mistakes, you're improving, you're getting better and you continue to improve over time. You go too much more than that. You fail too much and you lose motivation. You go too much less than that. You're not growing. You're not developing. In epigenetics, you have parts of your genes that are specifically activated in response to stress and to specific events in your environment. It was just one of the things that was most motivating to me and losing weight was leading us a study that showed that certain genes for being more overweight are turned on in overweight fathers and passed on through the sperm. And that just losing weight before impregnation can lead to those genes being turned off in your children. Wow. Yeah. So that like one, one of the best, if I plan on having kids in the next two years, one of the best possible things I could do for them is lose 30 pounds because I'm helping that it's going to be much harder for them to lose that 30 pounds because it's written into their genes because of me, you know, and that ties back to the whole biblical idea of, you know, it will pass on from generation to generation down seven generations and like, yeah, the sins of the father are passed down upon the children. And you know, you have the abuse of alcoholism in a family and that, and then you feel justified in drinking because it's what you saw from your parents. Then you end up passing it onto your kids and you pass it on. And yeah, it sucks to have to overcome that. And we say, Oh, well, you know, my parents caused all these problems in my life. Like, yeah, they did. It sucks, but you got two choices. You can deal with all of this shit or you can put it on your child and let them deal with it. Do you think your five year old daughter deserves to deal with it? No, bear your cross, bear your burden, get over it. And like, yeah, it's awful. It's terrible. It's really awful. It's not fair in any way, but we all have those things. And then the other one that sticks to me is the weightlifting, you know, analogy that you don't get any stronger by lifting the weights. You can already lift, you have to lift heavier, heavier weights in order to get stronger. And you can do that emotionally. You can do it mentally, you can do it spiritually. You can, you can force yourself into uncomfortable positions where you strengthen yourself. And I think that the strongest spiritual guides that I've had in my life are people that are willing to entertain ideas that could completely shatter their faith. They seek them out. And I've seen that from you, that when you, when you come across a resource, where you're like, Oh, this really, you know, goes against where my spirituality is centered. I got to dig into this and see if there's some meat for me to work through, as opposed to just closing your ears and saying, la la la, and listening to only the people that agree with your ideology. You know, I listened to you as a Calvinist, I listened to Bishop Aaron as a Catholic. I listened to the, you know, in between, you know, Jordan Peterson type people who aren't quite on either side. You know, I've got my Lutheran pastor at the church that I direct, you know, I've got little things coming in from every side and I can see where they line up and then I can see where they disagree and say, okay, now enter myself into the picture and say, you know, how, how does this all line up? So I want to, I want to lay out that, that framework of think things are good. Things are also bad. The goodness inside you gets more good. The more you confront the bad in general. And then the biblical messages that stuck out to me was, was, uh, the temptation in the desert with Satan of, of, you know, the, the, the desire for power, the desire for greatness, that, that internal struggle. And that's for me, for now, I don't know where I sit on the literal existence of Satan and Lucifer, as opposed to just the internal struggles with the evil side of ourselves and the, the adversarial brother and the, the Cain and Abel that lives inside of each of us. But to some degree you have that, you have that side, you have Judas, who betrays Jesus, who represents, you know, the, the, the, the loving friend and the trusted loved one who will betray you and likely, yeah, that happens. That happens in life. Maybe not to that extreme. You don't necessarily have someone who's, who's beloved as a brother sentencing you to death in exchange for some money, but we're all going to have someone in our life that we trust who betrays us. We're all going to have that internal struggle with desiring something that we know we can get through other means and the easy victory and the easy power and the easy success at the expense of your moral virtue structure. And then, and then you have the death on the cross and you have, you know, the physical overcoming of even, even death can be overcome. And that's one of the things that I get from you that I like a lot is that, that you do need to some degree, you need the literal physical resurrection in order to tell the full story because otherwise it is just this general metaphor of, oh, yeah, no, you can overcome death in a spiritual sense. And like, no, literally he came back and overcame death that to that extreme that we do not know what's possible in the universe and we can, we can reach these heights. There is nothing that the world can throw at you that is not possible to overcome with enough internal strength and enough willingness to confront the darkness in the world. And maybe it's not you that gets to overcome it. Maybe you will die in the process. There are martyrs and saints all throughout history who did everything right and still, and still died. And that's, you know, Socrates talked about, you know, connecting to his demon and that, that, that his, his, any, any, any wisdom he had in life came from following the inner voice and that inner light. And that when, when he was sentenced to death and had the opportunity, all of his friends, you know, the, the people who sentenced him said, just apologize and leave town and it's fine. And he said, Nope, that's, you know, I've lived a good life and I get a chance to put all my affairs in order. And this will probably be more meaningful than anything else. And we still talk about him because of that. Even in death, you can with through Jesus, literal physical resurrection, but, but with the saints, with the martyrs, with Socrates, you've got people who, who even in those awful places where they couldn't stop it, you can still keep your internal sense of strength. And that's, you know, to be Jordan Peterson talks about to be the one at the funeral, who, who, who is able to, to, to nurture the, the, the family members and support them instead of being the one who needs the constant nurturing and support from others, to be one who adds light to people's lives. And then to think of it, you know, a similar analogy would be to be at the electric chair, you know, unjustly for a crime you didn't commit and to still be able to act out in love in that moment and to take that last moment to speak in love of your captors and say, look, you know, the quote, you know, forgive them. They know not what they do to be able to say, Hey, I'm completely innocent and you shouldn't be doing this to me. However, I know that you believe I am guilty and this doesn't put a smudge on your, put a mark on your soul, you know, you're good people. And if it comes out one day that I'm innocent, then I hope that you can forgive yourselves for what's happening here, because I know it's not your fault. They're there. Everybody who's making this happen doesn't know that what, what the truth is. Hopefully you'll find out someday, you know, that, that is power. I mean, that's insane. And that you get to be that person. And that's the, the one, when I, you know, when I talk to my, my, my friends about, you know, struggles with family or, or, or, or career or, or peers, when you're fighting with someone say, Oh, this person is so rude and it's so unfair and it's so unjust. You go, yeah, yeah, no, it's awful. But, but, you don't have to be that person, which is awesome. Cause they, they're that person. They're an irrational, awful, cruel, unfair, mean person. And yeah, maybe they're able to do something bad to you, get you fired or, or yell at you and make you cry, you know, make you lose money, make you lose resources, make you lose family members. You know, those, they can do things to you, but you get to be the person you are. They have to live with that. They have to live with being that person all day long. And so if you had a choice of being the person who's being screamed at and yelled at and, and, and attacked and, and, and destroyed, or being the person who is doing those actions, I think most of us would choose to be in that position of, of, of, feeling the attacks, the slings and arrows from other people, because it's, it's better to be a good, good person and, and be attacked than it is to be an immoral, terrible person and live with that for the rest of your life and have your, your little kingdom of miserable people that you rule over. And yet we don't. And yet we don't. No, we forget. We forget. I think that's really what it is. We get caught up in the day to day minutia of the world and we lose sight of what's really important. The, the, the, the, one of the, one of the interesting, well, the season, the liturgical season of the year that has Christmas in the church tradition is Advent. And, and Advent starts out the church calendar year. And it's about a coming. And obviously the angels sing, the shepherds go. The this, this radical, this radical other regard that gets practiced and gets embodied in the Christian story of Jesus coming. So Jesus, Jesus comes and, it's in Philippians two, Jesus comes and is treated poorly and because he does so without, because he does so without animosity is exalted because he submits, he's exalted. It's, it's so talking about this stuff is so difficult because there's all these little pitfalls because you can, there's always this question of, okay, generosity and justice. And generosity only has the valence, the resonance that it has when it's seen with the foil of justice. And, and justice only has the, only, only has the weight that it has when the, the wrongdoing is fully appreciated for what has been lost. And the challenge is, the challenges as, as someone who tries to talk about this stuff is, is always to try to get all of those, all of those pieces present and right. Because on one hand, when we say, and Peterson says this all the time, you know, okay, you know, you know, okay, you have the, you have the power within you to overcome. Well, first question is, who do you mean by you? Do you mean you, the English, you've, you singular and you plural and, and which group of people? And then the question is, you know, so at the end of the, at the, Jesus is arrested. Peter has had, has been full of bravado as the chief disciple and Jesus, when everyone else abandons Jesus, Peter is going to stand there with him. And so right at the end, you have Judas and Peter and Judas betrays him and Peter abandons him. And it's, it's a, it's a, it's a difficult dance on one hand to tell someone you have the power to win this when maybe they do, or maybe they don't because you know, for your child, let's say, you know, someone, someone breaks into your home and, and they're, you know, they're, they're raping the woman in the house and the small boy is wrecked with guilt because he couldn't stop them. Well, you go to that child and you say, no, you, I never expected you to save your mother. That was not, you know, and the child is guilt ridden. I should have, I have the power within me. No, you don't have that power. And so it's always this dance where, where we try to figure out what, again, it's, it's the question of context. What message do we send and, and how can that actually be distributed properly in all the infinite multiplicity of, of human complexity so that they get it? Well, what happens in Advent is that, and again, this is, Peterson is dead on right about this stuff. You have the creator of the universe and he comes in as what? There's, there's no human being more helpless than a newborn. And so suddenly now we have, we have a drama and we have the creator of the universe coming in as a newborn. And as, as many have noticed being, you know, spewed out into this world between feces and urine, being suckled at a, probably a teenage girl's breast who is, you know, scared to death because no woman who has ever given birth knows what it's like to, you know, in a sense, half her body splayed open and put her life at risk for this child. The death rates were much higher back then. Yeah. I mean, nowadays we don't think about that much. You don't usually go into labor thinking, you know, there's a substantial chance I won't come out of this, but that's at that time it was very substantial. So, so you have, you have this, and then you have her, her husband who was likely older than her, who has had a dream that says contrary to every other birth in all of human history, oh, she didn't cheat on you. She, God did this. Yeah, right. It's a big ask. I mean, it's, it's one of the major arguments the APS make, you know, it's like, Hey, it's gonna be a very convenient excuse. Every feeding girl got to say that. So. And, you know, Joseph knew it. And so all of this stuff comes down into the story. And, you know, one of the things that I started doing about this time of year is I listened to Handel's Messiah usually over and over and over again, cause Handel brings all of this stuff and connects the whole story. And so one of the challenges as someone called to speak in these events is how on earth do you say anything in the midst of all this wealth? And, and that is, that is so difficult because all of it is built into the story already. And it's built into, I mean, if you, as a musician have, have, have made the selections, and obviously, you do, if you're doing it with children, you do the choral pieces that they can handle and, and, and, oh, it's, it's, it's so hard because, and part of the difficulty is that all these things are true at once. You have, and when Peterson says to people, you have amazing capacity to overcome what you never imagined you could. Oh yeah, that is so true. And you will face dragons. You will never slay. Yep. And you need, you need, you need a champion that can do that for you. Boy, that's really true too. How do you, how, how do you speak one side without betraying the other? It's so hard. You have to live in that contradiction too. Well, and so then how do you then represent it and embody it? And so then, so then you look at, you look at your whole score. So you've got, again, Advent, Christmas, you've got all these musical riches. You've got, you know, Wesley's, my, my father's favorite Christmas carol, Hark the Herald Angels Sing. Just phenomenal. And then who did the, who did the music to it? It begins with an M, right? Yeah, I don't recall. This phenomenal score to this phenomenal piece of writing. And so then, then as a preacher, what we often do with Christmas programs is just lessons and carols. And I will, I will maybe do just five minutes because. There's only so much you can add. Well, and so much I don't want to take away. You know, everything was good except the preacher just muddied it up with some, you know, with some of his own ideas. So it's, it's so, so hard when you've got all of those riches. And, and so then, and the difficulty that you have is as a pastor, you have a whole liturgical year to build up. This is what we say in Advent. This is what we say in Epiphany. This is what we say in Lent. This is what we say in Easter. And so you have the, this entire canvas. And so what you have for this is. Yeah. It's so hard of wrap it all up and put it into a nice little package and using words. So, so it's, it's, it's very, it's very difficult. And, and I would, I would just recommend as is often the case, go with, as we talked about earlier, go with, CS Lewis once made the observation that the person who sets out to be original, almost always fails. The person who basically learns the tradition. And this is the same in music that the great musician masters the fundamentals and then can make a contribution. Yes. So speak from the heart. Well, keep it aligned to. And know the, and know, know the material that's been given to you and start with that start work, work from the shoulders of the previous generations. And so when you get to Advent, well, what, why are the angels singing? Well, why are they singing? Well, who are angels and why, usually in, usually in Bible stories, when one angel shows up, you know, someone, someone loses their shit on the floor. If that's what happens when one angel shows up now that the heavenly host shows up and they show up to shepherds, the dig into some of that stuff. And you will discover that, you know, Peterson has just kind of cracked this world open for people, but there are immense riches in there that all too often pastors, we pastors obscure with our idiocy because these, all these angels show up and what do they have to say? Well, a king has come in and so then the Magi come and they're expecting, so we put the stories together. They're expecting a king and it's this baby and there's no halo and there's no glowy and swaddling from the middle or chaos of the earth and we yourself want an angel for the worldview of another angel so I think that all these means Mary is always changing them because if you've had a newborn, And then there's the leap of faith that we were talking about before that it's, you know, you've been waiting your entire life for this event to arrive and then it does and it doesn't look anything like you thought it would. And you can just go back to doubting and leave or you can stay there and spending your whole life and steeped in this tradition to expect a certain thing and then when it shows up It's not what you thought it would be And I think that we all face that in our lives that that's you know The thing that we're hoping for I mean marriage kids career whatever, you know It's never the thing that you thought it was going to be when you were so idealistic and so young And it's always both and that's what you are getting. And you know, so it's yeah You're going to discover your strength You're also you're going to discover your depravity You get to see them both congratulations and all in the middle of that is a whole bunch of the mundane and the banal Basic day-to-day crap And and so then in a in a Yeah Yeah concert. What do you want? So paul, who are some of your favorite writers on on like christmas theology? Specifically like advent like are there any particular books or or sermons or or speakers that you've loved? No I can't think of any I you know, I I just use the text mostly because And then work from there There the text is pretty clear and it's well, but it's but the amazing thing so as a preacher You you talk about these texts every year and so on one hand that becomes a tremendous challenge because You've you every oh, yeah, i'm gonna work this angle. Okay. I'm gonna work at this angle then life has changed So other things come in But but you also as peterson notes the text is inexhaustible So go back and So so what'll happen is say, okay. Well, i'm gonna do luke this year So start reading luke and luke one and suddenly i'm got okay I've got mary and there's she's announced and then she sings this song and this song is very un-christmassy Because the song is all about god tearing down The tyrants and raising up the lowly it's like oh Okay, well and then you get into you know, they're going to bethlehem and angels and shepherds and and then at the end of it, you've got the bringing jesus to the temple and anna shows up and And simian shows up and and so I my recommendation is Go to the text and follow the thread Because There's a reason The church has been camping on this for 2 000 years and preachers have been camping on it for 2 000 years Because it still works And go to the text and follow the thread. And so when you read the text and you find something that you say Well, what's that doing there? Well, do start doing some digging go and google it and start You know start piecing together piecing together and see what comes and And I think In the end you will and then when you're looking at your whole canvas the because you've probably got all that in your head Anyway, these are the pieces we're singing So this is the so i'm reading that and oh there's that okay So i'm going to go there and i'm going to dig into this and i'm going to explore this You'll you'll you'll do it. Thank you That's really helpful On on that same kind of idea and note. Um, I I just love with the last couple minutes Um to talk to you a little bit about choir music in general since you you spoke a little bit about that That the powerful performance you just heard recently and and loving messiah, which is you know, one of the you know pinnacles of the art form Um, it's what I've spent most of my life in and I I really do feel like there is something special about The the unity of singing voices together Um Particularly, you know, it's one of the things that when you study classical music um, it's easy to breeze over the the history of the church with music and and to just sort of the transition from acapella music um and and as as in the church music and and the usually the way that the music history kind of uh wraps a little bow around it and keeps keeps it as a tight sound bite for uh for exams and such is that the the church Prioritized homophonic vocal music because everyone needed to be singing the same words at the same time because the point was to praise The works in name of god and that if you were not praising the name of god, then music was degenerate And so polyphonic music with with multiple Sets of lyrics overlapping each other. You couldn't understand what was being said so you couldn't properly praise god So it wasn't appropriate for the church and instrumental music didn't have words that were praising god So it wasn't appropriate for church and then eventually people were able to convince the church palestrina and other composers among them That that the the value of the broader world of music and then you get the organs coming in in the baroque period into the classical Period and you get full consorts and orchestras and and these these larger works of music Um back back from that root of the tradition of gregorian chant moving into organum with simple two-part moving into acapella music for hundreds of years Before instruments and and real advanced polyphony was allowed in in the church setting And that it always felt simplistic to me that that you know That seems like too basic of an explanation for for for where the role of music in the church that you know That the church was trying to use Every form of expression possible the the written word the spoken word architecture Visual art sculpture music that all of these different modalities are coming together to tell the the central story and and to help find meaning and connection and community and purpose in life and And I I do genuinely believe that choir music it it I come from a biased standpoint I've been doing it my whole life and it's what I've dedicated my life to but I do genuinely believe it holds a special role among the arts for There's there's the spoken language there's there's the the truthful speech that that that is the center of of self-expression and We have that that that you know classic thing of most people are more afraid of public speaking than they are of deaf But most people are more afraid of singing in public than they are public speaking. I would say in general And and to sing with others is also a very intimate thing because singing on your own is a separate activity when you sing With others you unify your breath you unify your brainwaves you unify your heartbeats to the point of of Literally becoming more of a symbiotic organism than an individual actor, especially when you lose yourself And I mean if you're singing the hallelujah chorus and you're really into it And you are letting yourself go into that music you really in many ways cease to be an individual for the span of that That piece where you are now part of a collective whole in the same way that you have cells But your cells are making up your organs and you wouldn't say that all these cells are individual It's like no, that's my lung and you wouldn't say oh, that's my lung you say no That's my body and my lung is part of my body But it is it is my body that your body becomes a part of this massive ensemble and and for me, it's so much more powerful because the instrument only exists in that crossing over of multiple people with thousands of hours of work collectively through their lives coming together for this unified purpose in addition to The structure of the place that you're in a lot of this great choral music was written for the beautiful cathedrals Which carry this down in a way a modern concert hall doesn't and the audience being a part of that You don't get that experience without someone there to hear it It is you know the whole you know, two sound of one hand clapping tree falls in the woods Is there anyone there to hear it? You know like is is it art? Is it a concert if no one is there listening if we just show up and get on the risers and we sing our full Our full concert lights and everything and then bow and then leave and there was no one in the seats Did we give a concert or was that just a dress rehearsal? You know, what's what's the line? Where where does it become? You know if two people are listening is the concert now if you know 10 000, you know, does it need just one? You know those those kind of questions are always difficult. But but for me it's it's this You get it with with group dance. You get it with theater. You get it with with orchestra You get it with sports. You can get it with a lot of different things but Singing is the most direct route to it with the most powerful payoff Because everyone has this the same thing down their throat The same little chunk of meat that flaps together to create vibrations that for some reason speak to us of meaning and purpose and value and beauty um My my one of my earliest vocal coaches, uh, would always have this great little bit where he would ask you know Why why do we have vocal chords? It's over communication for expression. No, no, no biologically evolutionarily When did vocal chords come about? Why do we have them? What's the primary purpose and you say oh, you know grunts and communication No, no, no, the original purpose was to be able to close off the airways to improve defecation That was if you can close off and force a column of air you can help so that that's where your beautiful singing voice comes From and yes communication and crying for your mom mom and telling your wife that you love her Sure all those things too, but also that's that's the main purpose there and so there's no reason it should exist You know, we don't there's no there's no Again, it's the what you say with the bible, you know You wouldn't make this stuff up if you were creating species from scratch like singing doesn't seem like the kind of thing to throw In the mix it doesn't seem that useful but it arises from this and it's absolutely amazing And it it's one of the things peterson says all the time that music is one of the few things in your culture You can't deny anymore That everything's so easy to rationalize away and just say it's not but even I think I said this in our last talk even the punk rock aphiess nihilists listen to their punk rock aphiess nihilist music And have an aesthetic experience while they're doing it and they go to concerts to be in group connections and feel a sense of unity And community through the expression of their punk rock athiess music And so so for me choral music gets at that more than almost anything else Um, I I know the lutheran tradition is very strong on that. I know there are certain there are certain traditions there Within your tradition sort of what what what does the choral music tradition mean to you? Well, I for one thing i'll just give a disclaimer. I'm not an expert on this There are people who are and i'm not one of them Another thing back to what we were just talking about how many angels show up How many? Multitude of the heavenly host praising god and saying did they was it It wasn't just one showing up as a soloist and singing a beautiful. I see it was right And it wasn't one preacher standing up to talk. Yeah, it was and and you see this in fact You find it in the book of revelation as well where you have these These choirs of angels where there are and and you have these huge groups in Part of part of what we're talking about here is also of course, as you know technology And and so this leads into a question of what's the relation? What's the theology of technology and that's by no means a simple thing But as you were talking I was thinking of so I have a I have a class that I do Called sierra leadership network and i'm doing an introduction to theology and in preparing that I came across this this I get it. It's always a lot because I I represent myself publicly as a calvinist People people always get hung up on that with determinism and such but here's a quote from bb warfield who was a a reform theologian Around the the turn of the the 19th and 20th century early 20th century. This is this is his quote From each point of view alike the fundamental principle of calvinism is seen to reside in its profound sense of god and its reference of Of everything to him He who believes in god without reserve and is determined that god shall be god to him in all of his thinking feeling Doing throughout all of his individual social religious relations is a calvinist What calvinism really represents is a logical theocentric thinking a worldview a religion a soteriology in which the vision of god in his glory rules all And the one endeavor is to render to god His rights in every sphere of thought and action and what that means in this context is You can have your you can have your choir and your musicians In a space with no audience and God is there Receiving and also claiming his glory and so if you ask me what is what are what is what are these things for? I say they're for glory and well, you know, i'll tell you if you're having problems at the other end of your big tube here Um, you know, you might you might thank god for that as well. Amen Um, but this but having it come this way is you know It's it's for glory and that's and that's what the the technology is for and the the effort is for And you know one of the things that I see as schools, you know cut back terribly on the arts They don't when I was young. I started playing the violin in first grade in the suzuki method And you know here i'm a little first grader my little violin and and you do that and you just keep playing and playing and By the time you get to junior high or high school We've been playing that instrument for a number of years and now you can play in an orchestra And and it's the same as when you're singing if you're doing this thing And again, we don't know this we have trouble describing it putting into words But we're doing this crazy thing together And it's producing what I would call glory and So the angels come down and they sing glory to god in the highest That's what all of as a calvinist my tradition says all of this is for glory. So Technology is for glory and people are for glory and and the world is made for glory And and this is where you know back to our previous conversation of what to say in the midst of something the most One of the most amazing things about god is his hiddenness And and what one of the things that is expressed in his hiddenness is his humility because the I would say the amazing the most let's say a composer a composer sneaks into the the the opera house and You know listens to watches watches the performance and is there with the audience and feels the whole thing coming alive And the the greatest composer is the most humble one who sits there and loves nothing better than to see the musicians and the audience and to see the glory And and not have to say yeah, I did this. Yeah, this is about me No, no and god and that's that's the crazy thing about god in that We give glory to god and god says i'm just gonna bless you more and and the blessings go back and forth And when it comes to the resurrection and the age to come In in my theology, it's it's the growth of that and whereas now you have You know middle schoolers or high schoolers or adults sometimes and people carving a little bit of time out In in glory you will have There's there's no time limit now suddenly There's no limit to to To what you're and there'll be struggle and they'll be working on it and they'll be challenged But the lid's off baby, you're not going to lose your soloists To the age of decay and their voices aren't going to decay and all of the stuff that you have been learning Through precious time through decades now continues to go that is a that's that is an alarmingly joyful and glorious vision And that in a sense, so you have this story of advent. Well, why does jesus come? Jesus comes to give us this because someone has to go And and there's a dragon and that dragon is death And I can't take that dragon on and that dragon took my sister But my hero is coming and he's going to take death out And it's not just going to be good news for those who live after death It's even going to be good news for those who have been deaths victim and as This vision continues to compile. Well, gosh, how can we do justice to such a vision? Well We'll need we'll we'll need we'll need these vocal chords and we'll need these scores and we'll need lots of different people And we'll need a setting where this can actually reverberate the my my sister's My my sister's So it was in a modern church that we had her service and my one disappointment about the recording Is that just like almost every contemporary space? the congregational singing is Muffled by design and they didn't mic it so you hear the organ playing these amazing hymns But when I was there I had I had the people And it was amazing it's one of the tragedies in choral music is that that we Many people want to secularize what we do and there's beautiful amazing wonderful secular choral music But there are very very few spaces that are designed to heighten the singing and and really stone cathedrals are it It's it's there's some modern concert concert halls But most of them are built for instrumental music or for theater or for soloists or for amplified music They're not built for unity of human voice and the stone cathedral still are the ones that are still left at least And there's something you get there that you don't get in other places and the greeks talked about that They talked about music as a manifestation of the laws of physics and the laws of architecture and that all of this Ties together and that it's part of the experience and it is it really isn't and people don't appreciate that in modern days that What you said the context matters, but it's it's a physical space the physical Architecture of where you are but also the emotional context in the spiritual context We talked about at the beginning of the talk that like being there for a communal experience that is tied to the loss of someone In the community makes it a more powerful experience and means that probably people who might just melt the hymns on sunday Are actually singing out this time because they don't want to get caught melting the hymns at a funeral So and maybe it's maybe it's just that maybe it's just shame and that's okay Because it gets them to open up and then maybe after the first verse they actually feel something and they realize that maybe they Should be singing the hymns a little bit more often and what I what I tell my choirs every every time I work with them, especially church choirs is that In in the choral world church choirs are are relatively near the bottom of the heap In terms of what people think of in terms of commitment that most people would think like an audition professional ensemble Well, you're going to practice at home and you're going to study your score and you're going to work really hard to improve And if you're in a college choir or a touring choir or a performing like pop acapella kind of choir You're really going to do a lot of work to drill and to get precise and then you go to your church choir And oh it's you know We like to get together and we're friends and we're volunteering and we're not professional singers And oh, why does it matter so much if our tone sounds like oh don't worry about those notes and those words Oh, we mess up the words sometimes but it's fine because we're just getting together and god appreciates our gifts No matter what they are and even you know, he just loves us for who we are And we don't have to aspire to anything better. And so what I what I tell my choirs is that that There it's there in the bible it says you praise him with singing praise him with dancing praise him with the sound of trumpets It doesn't just say pray with your spoken voice Quietly, it says that music is part of what you do and there are people in the congregation who will never do that For whatever reason and we may not be able to reach them But when we sing an anthem in the choir when we lead the hymns, we are praying on behalf of other people That's right And it gives us a much higher duty than just performing music to honor the composer and to produce a valuable piece of work That you might do in a professional choir setting in the in the in the church setting you are it's literally as if someone came to you and said and Had been struck in mute and had some throat cancer or some disease And wrote you a note that said please pray for my husband I don't have a voice anymore to pray and I think it matters to god that I pray with my spoken voice I can't do it. Please pray on my behalf You would take that seriously and a lot of singers don't take it seriously But it is most of the even in a singing congregation my congregation is a singing congregation Most of them sing the hymns But there are people who don't and even those who do are often very reserved and they're not praising with their voices They are mouthing along and producing some notes, but that is not praise That is not glory as you were saying, you know That you have to give your all to it to really to really feel that and so we're doing that on on behalf of them It's a genuinely sacred responsibility. It is profoundly deep and I think too few people appreciate how Meaningful and powerful that experience is and what a responsibility it is that with the highest level It's what we're saying earlier with with the context of the funeral that with the highest level of meaning Comes the highest level of responsibility the the the the the the speech you gave there the the eulogy you gave the the music that was shared there the The communal experience that was given there was probably more powerful than most of the last couple of services in the last couple concerts Those people gave but it came with as we said with the snowboarder It came with the risk of completely bombing and ruining it Because if you if you give a bad eulogy at a major funeral for someone people love like that's that's rough They're going to be talking about that They might not say anything to you, but oh, yeah, yeah, you know, there'll be conversations going on in the side, you know Generation, you know, i'm sure you know, you're like, oh I can't believe uncle paul. Yeah, you can remember that you will It was so uh, he used he used that stupid old story that all the pastors use and he thought it was so witty and so profound And you know like that that kind of stuff happens same thing with concerts, you know, same thing with anthems You go up to there to sing about god and you mess something up like it means something to these people They it affects them deeply. So so yeah, I mean that that yes Yes, there's wonderful good news and yes, there's terrible bad news and both of those things exist at the same time And yes, we can overcome the difficulties and yes There are difficulties we can't overcome and there are dragons that will eat us And there are dragons we can fight and yes, there are beautiful meaningful wonderful passionate performances We can have and also that means that sometimes you're going to bomb on stage and it's not going to go well And that the only way you get to reach those heights is through the the difficult lows And and for me, I really think the next couple years is is swallowing that That pride and and taking that leap because at a certain point there's no rationality that's going to get me there And it's you know, there's a door open there's light coming through under the door and there's there's a welcoming hand beckoning beckoning on the other end and i'm i'm worried that the you know, the floorboards are going to give out underneath me when I when I step in but uh, I think at the end of the day, you just got you got to take that leap You can't you can't it's the same thing with the concerts, you know You can't you can't give a beautiful concert without risking absolute Awfulness because it very it's very easy to over prepare It's it's as i'm sure you you experience with sermons as well You know public speaking or performing or singing if you if you get it too drilled and too specific and too perfect It loses that spirit in that soul in the moment. You need that little spark in there And so I don't I don't think that i'll ever come to a perfect rational understanding of faith. I think many many have tried And none have succeeded So it's not it's not the kind of thing that can be reduced to that just like you know Okay, so you've got the you've got the you've got the congregation. You've got the choir. You've got you've got all the elements You're in a stone cathedral. You can't reduce that to It just is what it is. It's the whole thing And and in the context of a cathedral it's Now you've got the symbolism there. So you're you're actually Represented the glass story That this what we're doing right in this moment is Is the story of the universe in? In a box that's where that's what we're doing And and this is what we do for each other. We ultimately in my tradition What we do in worship and we're doing it for god. He's the primary audience not us Oh, sometimes we'll have an experience and sometimes we'll have a bad experience and you know, but it's okay But this is but at the same time just like you said you you you've got to you do it all for the glory of god Are you going to bring him a lousy gift? I mean That's the thing that's so weird to me is well, you know, whatever I give is good enough for god You know god accepts me no matter what you go. Why wouldn't you want to give the best thing? If that's genuinely believe what you're doing is is on behalf of god then it does it's not an excuse for lower standards It's it's a call to higher standards. That's right. That's right. That's right Yeah, I apologize for taking more of your time than we That's that's always good talking to you. This this is really great. Thank you so much Thank you tofer and i'll send you the recording. I'd appreciate that. Yeah. Yeah, take care. Take care. Bye. Bye Bye