https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=3PXYu5GydmU

 Hi, this is Paul. Before I start talking about what I'm going to talk about, I want to say thank you for all of you who responded to the, what's now sort of known as the Woodshed video, where I talked about the two new initiatives, Living Stones Online and Estuary. In many ways they're not new initiatives. I've had my sermons and Sunday School classes on the Living Stones YouTube channel for quite a while now, and Estuary in many ways is an outgrowth of the Jordan Peterson meetups that I've been working on. But the response of many of you, especially in support of Living Stones Church financially, has been impactful and powerful. And so those of you who signed up to support the Church, thank you. A good number of people asked, well, how, I'm not really interested in supporting the Church, how can I support Estuary? That's tougher because the Church is an organization that can receive funding. And in many ways, if you support Living Stones, since Estuary is sort of in my head, you're supporting me. Some of you decided to support Patreon at a little higher rate, which was absolutely fine too, and I appreciate that as well. So it's, we had, I had my question and answer, my weekly question and answer on the Bridges of Meaning Discord server this morning. And before we recorded, we often have a non-recorded and a recorded section. Before we did the recording, I answered quite a few questions about Living Stones Online and Estuary. Living Stones Online is very much Church. We're looking to facilitate Bible studies and prayer groups and things of that nature, especially for people who are having a difficult time, especially now during COVID, getting to Church or for one reason or another, they have difficulty finding a Church that really fits them. And so Living Stones Online is really about that. And I'm going to be trying to develop some new study materials. All of that will be on the Living Stones Christian Reformed Church YouTube channel and on the website. Those of you who sent in emails to the address in the woodshop video, I am basically, I've been, part of the reason I haven't done as many videos lately is because this is a one horse show here at Living Stones. It's just me. I don't have an administrative staff to do a bunch of things for me, so I got to kind of do it myself. And some of you have offered to help out and I've accepted some of those offers in certain cases and people are, John Van Donk is entering stuff in the new database because we have a new app which is rolling out for the Church. We have a new website which is rolling out for the Church. There's a new Church management software and that means if you're registered as a Living Stones Online partner, then you'll be able to get emails from us on what's coming out and you'll be able to use the app and find out things that way. So all that is Living Stones Online. Estuary is more similar to the Jordan Peterson meetups and that is morphing partly because Jordan Peterson hasn't been around and estuary is a far broader concept and I talked about that a lot on the Discord server again. The Discord server in many ways is an example of the kinds of things that I want to see estuary promote and support. But estuary won't be the kind of thing that controls things. By nature an estuary is a very active, chaotic place. I was having a conversation with John Van Donk who noted that in the Netherlands back in the 50s they essentially tried to get rid of estuaries and control them by directing fresh water flow. In fact in Northern California in the 1950s, 40s and 50s they had a major project where they were thinking of in fact damming up the California Delta and building an enormous dam and creating an enormous reservoir where the present Delta, which is an estuary, is. And if you go to Salcelito over in the Bay Area, it's really a cool place. You can visit the live, they didn't have computer modeling then, so they built this huge model that replicates the tidal flow and the water flows and because we had a lot of engineers in this church at one time, you know, they all told me about it and I went there one day on a Saturday with my kids and it's really cool in Salcelito. It's worth finding and visiting but when you realize the project that they were envisioning and built the model for, it would have been the complete destruction of the estuary. And so my vision of estuary is not one of control but in the words of one person I talked to, an organization that can entertain heresy. What does that mean and why should a pastor be involved in something like that? As many of you know, I've long believed that churches should be a place of open conversations where people can tell us what they think no matter how heretical and figure all that. And so in that way, estuary isn't a part of Living Stones Online. Estuary is something that I think every church should have or at least should promote or facilitate but not control. So it's chaotic, it's a little wild, it sounds a little risky and dicey but I think a big part of the problem of church has in fact been the kind of projects that we've seen destroying estuaries and grasslands in North America where, well, we want to control the flow. Well, one of the things that the Dutch realized is once they controlled the flow, the estuary no longer functioned as it should, as a biome, as a place where sea monsters come, as a place where river creatures go out, as a place where plants and animals flourish. And Jonathan Peugeot just recently did a new kind of a total world picture in one of the most important icon that he's working on. And maybe I should tell Jonathan he needs an estuary in his icon because an estuary is sort of the place where the fresh water meets the salt water and where maybe the lion and the lamb can, well, the imagery, yeah, but maybe the lion and the crocodile can have a conversation. So a lot of people have a lot of buts because, well, and I said, well, these things can get mushy. And I said, well, if you go into an actual estuary, a levee isn't mushy. A levee is a hard cement wall or an earthen structure. A levee isn't messy. An estuary, if you walk into one, your feet sink a few inches into the mud. But what holds an estuary together, it's all these plants. And there are many different kinds of plants. And actually the mud holds together because of them. And you would think estuaries are weak and levees are strong, but when Katrina hit, the levees of New Orleans failed. And I'm a person who lives behind levees here in Sacramento. We're a city that every winter pretty much the river level is higher than the land level and everybody in Sacramento sort of holds their breath while the levees hold. But one of the things that they noted after Katrina was that part of the reason Katrina hit so hard was all of these estuaries, all of these grasslands, all of these places where river meets sea had been developed and destroyed. And yeah, there's a lot of mush, but all those little green plants and all those trees actually make a barrier that withstands the hurricane unlike the rigid levee. It's sort of like the skyscrapers that sway in the earthquake. That's sort of, instead of being shattered to death. So I'm going to continue to work on these two concepts. Living Stones Online will be church. And when you donate to Living Stones, it goes to the church. If you want to continue to incentivize me about estuary, you can give to Patreon. That's fine. But I'm going to keep continuing. I'm working it out. The church website is getting closer and then that means that the app is getting closer and John Van Donk entered in a bunch of names and we're trying to get up to speed. And again, it's me and a few volunteer deacons that are trying to manage the church side. So be patient with this and hopefully we can get through it. But that wasn't what I came to talk about today. Maybe I'll have to release this as a separate video. So the Jordan Peterson migration is sort of what I call it. Derek Thompson is a writer for the Atlantic. I've read a bunch of his pieces. Didn't really have too many thoughts on it. This tweet got many of you on Twitter. You're very helpful to me when you at me in something of note and help me find things. And you'll notice that a lot of things get on my videos from Twitter because it's kind of a place you can watch real life. Derek Thompson, writer for the Atlantic, my view towards organized religion. Okay, we could talk about the definition of that word. 2005, ha ha, religion is so dumb. If everybody just stops believing in God, we can finally be rational. Where have you heard that before? 2018. Hmm. This is sort of peak wave Jordan Peterson. Maybe secularization unleashes a bunch of ersatz religions that sort of fake religions. Jordan Peterson's would say ideologies, which are crippled religions. This ersatz religions, you know, woke religion and 2018, we weren't talking about it in those terms, but the movement got tremendously religious. It started taking on all of the ritual and pageantry and earnestness and activism that we often associate with religion. So maybe secularization unleashed a bunch of ersatz religions that are also bad. Hmm. 2020. Everybody get back to church now. Now, now he was responding to a tweet by Katie Drummond. Katie Drummond is a, is a journalist at Vice and her tweet said, QAnon has gotten a lot of attention global. Now I first really got lessons in QAnon from Strawn and some of you know who Strawn is and some of you don't. He hasn't been on the channel yet. I've been trying to get him on the channel for a very long time. Strawn was the guy who, who introduced me to the work of John Vervecky. Strawn is sort of a, a, a philosophy nerd and he was pestering me for a long time because he was high on, on, on Jordan Peterson until he found John Vervecky and now I think he pesters John Vervecky more than he pesters me because John Vervecky knows more philosophy than I know. So, so Strawn can nerd out on his philosophy and but when QAnon was doing his thing, Strawn would always send me these videos on QAnon and I just always kind of watch and not understand and it really gets into the conspiracy theories or the conspiracy thinking. If you go back to my, my conversations I had with Brett, 2T Brett, 2T Brett Sockel, reciprocal narrowing and critical theory. I'd done some videos on that how, well, well the point is, the point that I've made many times in my videos, we need narratives in order to simplify the world and sort of like if you build a computer, like this computer right now has a, a seventh generation or a sixth generation Intel processor, but then it has an Nvidia graphics card in it too and right now we're working on improving our church streaming so Rick built a massive computer for the church and we're waiting to put in a massive graphics card because, well, in some ways narrative is sort of like that graphics card, it crunches reality very efficiently into systems. The difficulty that we have is that into stories, the difficulty that we have is we need these stories in order to process the world but not all stories are correct. So QAnon puts out there is, is Donald Trump really a liberty mastermind who is fighting the deep state or is Donald Trump a selfish grifter who is, who is fleecing America or is, or is Donald Trump an idiot? Which Donald Trump is it? Well, anybody who thinks about this for a minute would say, well how much information do I really have about Donald Trump? Well, isn't all my information filtered through the media one way or another and boom, there you go, we're in the sense making question in all of these videos by Rebel Wisdom about sense making. How, how can we figure out the truth when the truth at least at the top of the political hierarchy is mediated through all of these voices? So of course the narrative of Vice will have thoughts about it, the narrative of QAnon and you all can debate, you all can debate that in the comment section if you want to but the point that she made is, which is always an interesting point, maybe I'll pull up another, another article that I saw recently. Yeah, this was one that, that one of the people who actually met her in the Southern California meetup, Trump's new favorite COVID doctor believes in alien DNA, demon sperm and hydrochloroquine, the daily beast and again, sort of the, it's marked alternative medicine, yeah, it's pretty alternative but you know, it's very interesting how selective a lot of these narratives are because with a different narrative, someone might point out that they're picking on a woman of color but now it's perfectly fine to basically mock her publicly. So this narrative business, I mean perhaps the whole sense making conversation will help us be a little bit more self conscious about how we come to believe the things that we believe and this is in many ways exactly the point that, that Derek Thompson was making and it was very much the point that Brett Sackle and I were talking about that we have to believe within narratives and in some ways we're captured by these narratives because you can't just take in data, the only way you actually appropriate and accommodate data is if it fits into or begins to resist the narrative that you have and in many ways the way that you live your life is working out that narrative and running through the subroutines and the subplots of those narratives. This is how human beings work and if you're a reporter for Vice or if you're a reporter for the Atlantic, you know this is where the cancel culture comes in because well when you see someone is straying from a narrative, oh we've got to define our narratives, we've got to protect our narratives, we've got to hone in and keep our narrative straight because if we lose our narrative, well again as a minister I know this is how churches work and this is how churches have been working forever and in many ways churches have been working far more self consciously on this. Now with the multiplicity of narratives as a function of diversity, I haven't read much in terms of this woman's background. Okay just from the Washington Post article she received her medical degree in Nigeria. What does that mean? Is she a person of color? She should be believed? This is her lived experience. She's a person of color. This is her lived experience. Now how do we work between these narratives? How do we find the truth? Is COVID-19 something that was hatched in a Wuhan lab? I don't know. I wasn't there. Maybe it was, maybe it wasn't. I'm not in a position to tell people those old flippant diaries were published. Concrete. I mean when I was a child and I tell them so much I wanted to be Jordan on a stack of trash. So I really had to be careful and help them figure out new ways of Ohh se than their own 9 hour white Motumen Science program. And from that point in time my inspiration to go amadur is not something I'm to church now? Yeah, this is this is what's happening. Well, why back to church? Well, compared to some of the other things that we're seeing, church doesn't sound so crazy. Now, this very much gets into the work of Clay Rutledge. And Clay Rutledge was on Paul Antleitner's podcast. And that was a, he had that on YouTube and I'll put the link down below. But that was a particularly interesting conversation that he had with Paul. And in fact, in this same replying to Derek Thompson's tweet, Clay Rutledge dropped in an article that he had just written for National Affairs and it was entitled, The Spiritual Species. And once I saw that, I knew I had to read it. And once I read it, I thought I knew I had to talk about this. And so here it is. And it's a very interesting article. Survey after survey and the state of religion in the United States paints a similar picture of faith and decline. Now again, the definition of these words is going to be moving around. Faith, really? Faith and decline. That's sort of the journalistic narrative about what's happening to religion. Just in the last decade, according to Pew Research Center, the percentage of Americans who describe themselves as Christian has decreased from 77% to 65%. While the number of religiously unaffiliated is up from 17% to 26%. Atheists, an estimated 4%, that's if you think everybody is an atheist while you're living in a bubble of 4% of the population, continues to make up a very small fraction of the population. But that number is double what it was a decade ago. So it was 2%. So again, if you think all of your friends are atheist, you're living in a little atheist bubble. You might even call it a congregation because 96% of your fellow Americans don't call themselves atheists. This supposed secular shift becomes much more dramatic when focusing on younger generations of American adults. When considering specific religious behaviors that may better reflect deep commitments to faith, such as frequent attendance at religious services, around 40% of millennials today are religiously unaffiliated. And less than half of Americans attend church at least once a month. More broadly, religious ideas, symbols, lessons, and conversations are increasingly absent from I would put in, but from American public life. Atheists and champions of secularism are emboldened by such trends. They view the decline of religion and its influence on culture as a sign that human beings are finally becoming more enlightened, that people are moving beyond antiquated supernatural beliefs, pay attention to the frames, and towards more evidence-based rational approach to life. And this is exactly what the new atheists have been calling for. They imagine a purely secular humanist future in which people will no longer turn to faith for guidance and inspiration. Regardless of the state of traditional religion, however, there's not much reason to believe people can even become truly secular. Okay, what do we mean by truly secular? They mean that, well, people will only believe in reason. Oh, what do you mean by that? I only, and I hear people say this all the time on YouTube, I only believe what can be known by science. Really? I don't even buy that for a minute, because most of what you're living on, maybe it's theoretically possible to be known by science, but you don't have the time in your life to check out everything you need to know by science. You walk onto an airplane or drive over a bridge, and well, surely, scientifically, a good engineer could figure out whether or not that bridge is safe, but you're counting on some mix of authority, governmental authority, and science by an engineer that the bridge will hold up, but you can't know that because you don't have enough time to check it by your supposed science. Human beings are inherently spiritual species, and now maybe I'll have to dig up clay religion and say, let's have a conversation about that word spiritual. What exactly do you mean by spiritual? Because it starts, when we start diving into some of those words, well, things can start to get interesting, and striving to reject this part of our nature undermines our ability to flourish. Spirituality and religious traditions that help shape and regulate our spiritual lives play vital quests and play vital roles in the human quest for meaning, and in many ways, if you look at Clay Rutledge's work, he's very much on the meaning beat, and he's a psychologist, along with Jordan Peterson and John Vervecki, and, you know, a lot of the conversations we've had on this channel, which is central to our psychological, social, and physical health, as well as our economic growth and prosperity. In other words, this meaning-making thing, the economy runs on it, people run on it, but just like the word spiritual, if you're pushed to define exactly what do you mean by meaning? Well, can I use mean by meaning? Does it place there? What do you intend? What exactly is meaning? And again, John Vervecki has a, you know, takes a stab at a definition, but it's pretty sloshy. Not that its definition is sloshy, but is it an experience? Is it something that is out there? Is it sort of in a Verveckian way, sort of put together with the combination of me and out there, and together we sort of discover it and co-create it, and, you know, all those John Vervecki hand motions. We should thus be skeptical of claims that we grow less religious than attempts at eradicating religious from the human experience, and I think Clay Rutledge is dead on right. The popular belief that human beings can move beyond religion to become more fully secular beings is based on a cultural learning or a blank slate view of religion. It's based on a pretty small view of religion, and if you listen to someone who at least looks at, looks at, talks to a sociologist, if you read Jonathan Haidt or, oh, I can't, I think of his name right now, religion for them is that thing that organizes people's lives between the secular or between the sacred, the thing that if people give this thing up they lose their essence, and what is that? I thought my essence was like in this beating heart and in this physical body, or is it in fact in the story? I answered a question today on the Bridges of Meaning Discord that was recorded about grief. Why is it that when somebody dies you feel like something has died in you? Well, doesn't my skin protect me against that? Well, yeah, but what exactly are you? The cultural leaning approach does have value. It helps explain the diversity of religious faiths and why, well, let me finish the other paragraph. The assumption is that people are born non-religious and that they come to hold a range of supernatural and related religious beliefs as a function of enculturation. Now, this is where I'd love to bring in a little bit of Brett Weinstein as he notes that actually human beings really need both tracks. You need the biological track, that is fairly easy to see. You need the cultural track, but here's the thing with culture. Culture is so huge it makes biology look like something you can put in a petri dish. Well, how do you get a handle on culture? Well, you sort of do so with narrative and story. That's about the only way you can because again that's what our little NVIDIA or our AMD graphics processor crunches all that stuff down and turns it into a nice pretty narrative computer game for us to watch. That's what we do and as John Verbecki noted, we started doing that at a very young age and we do it all our lives until things break down and we can't do it anymore. But just if you would, let's say, you're looking for, if you would burn this book, would the book actually go away? See, that's the thing because the book is on the pages but that's, this is a book but a book is also a thing that isn't exhausted by this thing right here. The cultural, to support the cultural lean, the cultural learning views, advocates point to the fact that people from different cultures have distinct religious beliefs and that these beliefs often change over time as a result of education, scientific discovery, and engagement with people who hold different beliefs. In other words, we're pretty good at managing these narratives and it seems human beings that are biologically similar hold different narratives differently but they also hold the same narrative differently. The cultural learning approach does have value. It helps explain the diversity of religious faiths and why people tend to follow the specific religious traditions that they've been raised but it also neglects a growing body of research on the psychology of religion and spirituality. The dogmas, rituals, and related practices that this that are just that distinguish or unite different faiths are certainly influenced by our families, communities, and broader cultures but cultural learning is only a part of the story. Ignoring other aspects of our spiritual nature, again he's using that word a lot, you should really define it if he can. I'll send him Patreon money if he can. Has led to many to overestimate the extent to which society has secularized. In other words, I'm starting to talk about this more, I really have to work more on my Vervecki article again. One of the things that I talked about that sort of sprung up as I developed that is in some ways after listening to Tom Holland, secularization is a secret second sister to the church. The church didn't conquer India, the church didn't conquer Japan, but secularism did and I made the point, Hardcore History is one of my favorite podcasts and World War II History is really a favorite of mine and he's been doing the the Japanese supernova and it's very interesting because the Japanese got secularism pretty quickly when Admiral Perry sailed his fleet into their harbor and they couldn't do anything. Technologically in terms of meat space, they realized if they were going to develop they needed to work hard and work fast and work together and their culture really afforded them to do it. Japanese culture developed remarkably quickly, they became remarkably powerful and at the beginning of the 20th century they cleaned the clock of the Russian Empire and when the Russians finally sailed their fleet all around to the Japanese, the Japanese Navy destroyed them and everybody in Europe had these racist ideas about the Japanese that these little backwards Asian people, they can't do much. Well, the Japanese showed the world something in the Russian War and then later on at Pearl Harbor, the Japanese Empire was nothing to sneeze at, but the Japanese Empire was also very much a part of a culture and Dan Carlin in his podcast goes through that well. When Americans raided, when America in the Doolittle raid where they basically tried to bomb the Imperial Palace and then they ditched their airplanes over in China, the Japanese went over and killed a quarter million Chinese people. Now that's pretty brutal. Now we all have these rules about you know, would I do this, would I do that. Can we imagine the Japan of today doing that? Now the Christian Church has never grown in Japan. Why would it be that the Japan of today would not commit such an atrocity, at least we would hope now. We would not expect it of the Japan from today, but there are a lot of atrocities committed by the Japanese in the Second World War. What changed? Well secularism came in. Oh, it's secular, it's empty. There's no religion up there. Well secularism carries with it these values, these humanistic values which in many ways are Christianity light so they're not going to church. Very few Japanese people go to church. They're not going to church, but a while ago in one of my sermons I played a little video of Japanese people talking about religion and boy, they sounded like moralistic therapeutic deists. American religion, not the kind that makes you go to church or has you take the host from the priest or any of that, but American religion came over with the church's secret second sister and conquered Japan and nobody saw a religious flag. In fact, religion changed and I'm sure Shinto took steps down and Buddhism took steps down. Christianity from the first sister of the church didn't really come up. Now I got a question in the Discord server today about the, I'll probably post this on Monday, so I'll probably post the Discord question and answer on Tuesday or maybe I'll do it the other way around. I don't know, we'll see. I didn't post many videos this week so I know some of you wait for these monologue videos more than anything else. So where was I going with this? Oh yeah, a question in the Discord server about the Hagia Sophia becoming a mosque and it was really a good question by Jacob about the relationship between buildings and what's in the heart and the Hagia Sophia being reconverted into a mosque says a lot about what's happening in terms of the politics of Turkey because converting it to a museum, well what is the difference between a museum and a mosque or a museum and a church or museum and a temple? A secular person can walk into a museum, a Christian can walk into a, a North American evangelical Christian can walk into a museum and see a statue that had been in a temple, some other place in the world and think nothing of it but if they walk into a temple where the statue is set up as an idol, Christians start to get nervous. Why? What's going on? How does the building they build relate to the people that are building it and the reason and motivations that they are building it? What's going on there? You see we, we, we, we look around and we say secular and well see I grew up in a tradition that said there's sort of no such thing as secular really. What does that mean? Well we stopped talking about God and I was watching someone sent a clip of, maybe I can find it, here it is Ian Hutchinson on with Lex Fridman and about, I don't know about, I love these new, his personal journey on religion. I love these new things. I try and use them in my question and answer video. How these, you can go to right to the spot where a new chapter starts in a very long video. Personal journey and religion. Well maybe I'll play it. You're gonna have to watch that clip yourself because I played it and I had a little bit of commentary but the volume was so low it gives my videos a problem with volume that I don't have any time this afternoon to actually fix so watch the video yourself. Basically the point of it is that they struggle to talk, well not really they, the evangelical Christian or, or I don't know if he's evangelical or not, but the Christian basically doesn't have any problem with his ideas about God but the, the interviewer, Lex, is, is, you know, he's sort of kicking through the regular menus to figure, well how can we talk about God and, and this is, he wants to be respectful to his guest and all of that but, but you can see the culture is sort of lost, don't know how to talk about it anymore and well maybe we're relearning. Fewer people today may be identified as religious and attending religious services but there's scant evidence that they have been abandoning spiritual pursuits, again I'm going to define that word, supernatural beliefs altogether, supernatural, a little easier to define but just as fraught and just as modern. It would be more accurate to describe many different currents as evidence not of secularization but as religious substitution and this is one of the things Clegg Rotledge worked with Paul Antleitner and has been writing about and talking about for a while now. Regardless of what people think about religious beliefs and practices of the past generation, today's Americans overwhelmingly hold beliefs that go beyond a purely scientific view of the natural world. In a 2003, well it's getting 20 years old now, 20 years has changed quite a bit, a 2003 Gallup survey found that around three-fourths of Americans endorse some sort of paranormal belief. Now we use the word paranormal instead of supernatural, people feel a little less nervous or a little more nervous. In other words, they believe in things like as ghosts, witchcraft, reincarnation, astrology, telepathy, and clairvoyance. What's more, the less people are engaged in traditional religious practices, the more inclined they are to hold alternative supernatural and paranormal beliefs. In other words, you're going to go to one church or another and only four percent of atheists out there, spiritual but not religious, does not mean paranormal karma. Karma has become the word at least in California, you know, they don't want karma and it's like, boy, you should really think that one through because, yeah, a lot of this stuff can be more easily picked up if you don't do too much theological reflection. The Baylor Church survey similarly observed that less often people attend religious service, the more likely they are to hold paranormal beliefs. The individual least likely to endorse paranormal beliefs are those who go to church at least once a week. In other words, Derek Thompson, everybody get back to church now, QAnon is taking over the world. Would you rather have those evangelical Christians or the QAnon hordes? Well, this is exactly the point Douglas Smyrry has been making. It's exactly the point that, you know, someone like Peter Boghossian feels more comfortable talking to Christians like me rather than some other people who have their own new religion that they're practicing in the streets. Other surveys have shown that young adults are less likely than older adults to describe themselves as religious but are more likely to hold a range of alternative spiritual and paranormal beliefs. And the most secular regions of the country are where new age and pagan beliefs and practices thrive. Do we knock on wood? What's that? Well, that's just a saying. Well, yeah, it is. But, you know, what are we doing? Well, I don't find Christians knocking on a lot of wood because they've already sort of got a universe that they are living within. Such trends are not confined to the United States. A survey of Canadians, yeah, we're looking at you folks, you 30 million people who live to the north of us, a survey of Canadians found that young adults are less likely than older adults to believe in God and Jesus Christ as the Son of God. They are equally or more likely than older adults to believe in life after death, existence of angels, and people's ability to communicate with the spiritual realm. What do you mean by the spiritual realm? Not supernatural or anything like that. Spiritual. Oh, okay. Surveys in the United Kingdom and Sweden also show that belief in ghosts has been rising in recent decades. In other words, you're going to believe in something. Many who claim to reject all things religious and spiritual are frequently interested in what I describe as supernatural light beliefs. I like this adaptation of his in this piece. These beliefs are often not explicitly supernatural, but they certainly require a leap of faith and have qualities that mimic traditional religious beliefs. They also tend to invoke the language of science and technology. Yeah, science, science, science. Well, isn't it all sciency that karma and stuff work, right? This includes the belief that intellectually and technologically advanced extraterrestrials, okay. The extraterrestrial question which plagues Jonathan Pigeot. Extraterrestrial visitors are monitoring us and have helped to shape the development of our societies. Maybe that's true. Can you know it? Is it a conspiracy theory as the government covering it up? When I started exploring the area of religious superstition, substitution, sub substitution, sorry, you get a word in your head and you can't read. When I started exploring the idea of religious substitution, I was surprised to learn the extent to which Americans are attracted to supernatural light beliefs. A 2012 National Geographic poll found that 79% of Americans believe the government is keeping secrets about UFO from the public. Donald Trump opened that up. Thank you, Mr. President. And 55 indicated that they believe the government threatens those who witness a UFO. Other surveys indicate that around half of Americans believe that intelligent aliens are monitoring human activities. Once again, studies in both the UK and the United States show that the less people identify as religious, the more likely they are to believe in UFOs and in intelligent alien beings are monitoring us. Well, that's interesting. When I dug into the specific beliefs people hold about UFOs and alien visitors, I noticed a number of similarities between these beliefs and traditional religious beliefs. For instance, alien visitors are often depicted as having god-like powers and serving a protective function. Well, that's watch the Marvel Cinematic Universe. That's what our um historical archives are teaching, Galaxy Quest. These enlightened beings, believers claim, are here to watch over humans and help us reach our full potential so that we can one day join a larger cosmic community. Moralistic therapeutic deism with a UFO twist. Some beliefs implicate aliens in the creation of major world religions, proposing that all the different faiths will one day be united. Do you ever watch the History Channel? Was it Ancient Aliens? Ancient Aliens? Is that it? Other supernatural light religious substitutes include empirically unsupported practices and are products promoted by wellness gurus, transhumanist aspirations such as indefinite life extension, transferring human consciousness out of the mortal body, upload, and certain conspiracy theories. There's that word again. Of course, many of those who reject religion also don't believe in aliens, conspiracy theories, ghosts, witchcraft, astrology, spiritual energy, psychic abilities, or the healing power of crystals. But that does not mean they lack a spiritual side, Sam Harris. Do your meditation app. According to a Pew survey about one-third of atheists report frequently feeling a deep sense of spiritual peace and well-being. 35 say they often wonder about the meaning and purpose of life. Only 35? And 54 percent indicate that they often feel a sense of wonder about the universe. That's what the guy in the billboard used to say in Sacramento, the freedom from religion society in Sacramento. Atheists like believers also exhibit a teleological bias, a tendency to think about the world in terms of design and purpose, and to believe that things are meant to be, even if they explicitly reject religious explanations. Surveys of scientists indicate that some atheist scientists embrace the idea of spiritual atheism. What do you mean by that? In a way to approach deep existential questions in a less traditional way. And advocates of secularism often view science and religion as having an antagonistic relationship. You hear that a lot on YouTube. But studies indicate that most scientists do not share this attitude. Elaine Howard Eklund, a Rice University sociologist and director of the world of the school's religion and public life program, has conducted extensive research with her colleagues on how scientists view religion and negotiate scientific and spiritual issues. In one large survey of university professors, scientists in the field of physics, biology, chemistry, sociology, economics, political science, and psychology were asked to indicate which of the three following statements about religion would best describe their own views. There's little truth in religion, there's basic truth in many religions, there is the most truth in only one religion. In every discipline survey, the majority of scientists indicated that there are basic truths in many religions. 63% held this view on the low end, physics professors, while 76% held it on the high end, sociology professors, for an average of 71% across fields. In another survey, researchers found that only 15% of scientists believe that science and religion are actually in conflict. They're dealing with any dissonance they might have if they're religious. An international survey conducted by Eklund's team also found that the majority of scientists in the countries such as the United States, France, Italy, and Taiwan believe that science and religion are not in conflict because they speak to distinct realities. Less than a quarter of scientists in every survey country said that science has made them less religious. Next he writes about a very interesting survey coming out of the University of Helsinki that tried to see, well it's sort of like an implicit bias test with galgal with um with electrical skin response, lest I say that other word incorrectly. Their hypothesis was that if atheists do not in any way believe in God, they should then challenging God to hurt people should not cause them any distress. But if any underlying, but even if at some underlying level religious ideas regarding a deity do affect atheists, then atheists might show physiological signs of stress after challenging God to cause harm. And lo and behold, they did. Not all of them, but some of them. And this again goes to the point that in many ways what comes out of our mouth as Jordan Peterson said at Lafayette College, well that's just the surfacey stuff. What's really going on down deep in your psyche? Quite a bit more complicated. Researchers also conducted a second experiment to address the possibility that physiological effects observed were due to a specific type of harm being proposed, not the fact that participants were provoking God. After all, even if a person did not believe in God, daring God to do bad things could trigger a stress response because of the negativity of provocation. To rule this possibility out, the researchers asked participants in the second study to read additional statements that involved identical harmful outcomes that did not invoke God, such as, I wish my friends would turn against me. I was reading this and I was thinking about, when you read a question that's in one of these psychological tests, don't all these questions sort of have the same smell about them? What's with that? And that would be a whole other interesting thing to think about. Anyway, what they found out was the findings only further confirmed that atheists experienced distress at the physiological level when provoking God. Atheists exhibited significantly higher skin conductance when reading aloud the harmful statements that involved God than when reading aloud the harmful statements that did not involve God. In other words, it was the spiritual, there's that word again, aspect of these negative statements, not their pernicious content that triggered the greatest distress response from atheists. Atheists may not consciously believe in God, but then, but they did exhibit bodily stress response identical to that exhibited by believers when provoking him. Interesting. In sum, the findings of the research using diverse methodologies, measures, and populations are at odds with the view that human beings are becoming a secular species. Our society has become more individualistic, safe, and affluent. People may be breaking away from traditional shared belief systems that bind individuals and communities together. That's more the sociological perspective, but our spirituality remains an immutable aspect of our nature. What do you mean by that word? Why are so many of those who do not subscribe to religious traditions drawn to alternative supernatural and supernatural-like beliefs? Why do even atheists report spiritual interest and display signs of being influenced by religious ideas, even if only at a physiological level? In other words, what makes human beings naturally spiritual? We've been talking a lot about that kind of stuff. He's going to give us an answer. Well, like all organisms, humans are engaged in a struggle for survival. Our bodies are made up in a variety of systems that work in concert to keep us alive, and much of this requires no conscious attention by us. We don't have to think about breathing, for example. In fact, our brains regulate many bodily processes without conscious attention. Yet, humans are unique from other organisms in several important ways, especially in terms of our cognitive capacities. The cognitive capacities that rely on our conscious awareness have played a vital role in helping us form complex societies, bend nature to our will. We just passed that sentence on without wondering about any of those terms, and make the types of scientific recoveries and technological innovations that grant us safer, longer, more comfortable lives, but less meaningful. At a fundamental level, then human beings are conscious thinkers. We want to solve problems and make sense of the world, and because we are highly self-aware, we also want to make sense of our own existence. We ask existential questions about meaning and purpose, and we grasp in existential uncertainties and fears. We are organisms in search of transcendent meaning. He doesn't define that word either. We just want to live. We don't just want to live. We want our lives to matter. We long to feel part of something larger and more enduring than our brief mortal lives. A large body of research indicates that religious and spiritual pursuits uniquely contribute to our search for meaning. What are we searching for? Is it God? Is God like Frodo searching for Tolkien? Is meaning that way? Where is meaning? Where can it be found? Is it something that we feel? If we found a drug that, if ingested in one way or another, could give us a sense of meaning, would that solve this problem? A large body of research indicates that religious and spiritual pursuits uniquely contribute to our search for meaning. So what are religious and spiritual pursuits? Well, again, in some ways, that's easy. Going to church, thinking about what? In other words, where he's going is that, well, we're using his supernatural light and all these other things to search for meaning. But does it stand up? Does it do so well? Need for meaning thus orients people towards religion and spirituality. But what about religious substitutes such as paranormal and supernatural light beliefs? My research team also explored this question, and we similarly found that higher need for meaning is associated with greater attraction to a range of non-traditional beliefs. In other words, they need their meaning fixed somewhere. Well, what about QAnon? Well, what about some activist pursuit out in the streets? What about tearing down statues? Fills you with meaning, right? For instance, we found that higher scores on the need for meaning predicted the endorsement of various supernatural or paranormal ideas like belief in reincarnation, horoscopes, mind reading, but also these effects were largest and sometimes only statistically significant among atheists. That's interesting. We also conducted several surveys, several studies focused on beliefs in UFO and alien visitors. In this work, we replicated previous research showing that the less religious people are, the more likely they are to hold a range of beliefs about intelligent alien visitors monitoring and even influencing the lives of human beings. You're going to pray to the alien overlords and have them come down and do something for you? Can they read our thoughts? Do we put on the tin foil hats? We also found that atheists are more likely to hold these beliefs than theists. Using statistical modeling, we discovered support for the proposal that people aren't particularly religious as well as that people who aren't particularly religious as well as non-believers are more inclined to believe in UFOs and alien visitors than believers because they lack a strong sense of meaning and are thus more actively searching for meaning than these more religious counterparts. In other words, they're more meaning hungry and when they see some UFO, it's sort of like zombies versus aliens or plants versus zombies. Chomp, chomp, chomp, chomp. This research offers empirical evidence for the idea that those who do not internalize an established religion, existential structure through which to understand the world, remember the narratives or how we compute this stuff, are searching for something to fill the void. They might not even know it. In fact, you don't sit down and say, I'm feeling a little meaningless. I might go to Roswell, New Mexico and see if I can. I just learned that the man who gave me this was born in Roswell, New Mexico. Maybe Rick's an alien. Maybe the aliens put me on the Jordan Peterson quest. Maybe this is all the alien plot to, I hope they don't probe me. Am I doing what the Daily Beast is doing? Maybe. Maybe I should stop. This research offers empirical evidence for the idea that those who have not internalized and established religion, existential structure through which they understand the world, there's a definition of religion, are searching for something to fill the void. That makes them more attracted to a number of paranormal and supernatural light ideas, including the belief that they are not alone in the universe and intellectually and theologically superior beings are watching us. And that I've seen people who have deconstructed from Christianity. Well, what I see them pick up is usually sort of the religious ideas that they're getting from the broader culture. Suddenly you're not talking about providence, you're talking about karma. Or providence and karma, not really the same thing. My name is Earl. Researchers have found other evidence supporting the assertion that our existential nature, our need for meaning and purpose, motivates spirituality and religiosity. Studies show that when people experience threats to meaning, they become more religious, spiritual and willing to take leaps. These findings are not restricted to the university laboratories of research psychologists either. Psychologists at the University of Auckland observed that at the same time religious faith was decreasing in New Zealand, it increased among those who were personally affected by a devastating earthquake that killed 185 people. That's another study that focused on Google search, trends across 16 nations, found that the higher than usual weekly searches for life-threatening diseases predicted higher search volumes the following week for religious terms such as God, Jesus and prayer. A third study of individuals in Uganda, Sierra Leone and Tajikistan discovered that the greater exposure to war people experienced, the more likely they were to participate in Christian and Muslim religious groups even years after the war. Such findings suggest that people may increasingly turn to spiritual ideas and beliefs in response to the current coronavirus pandemic. It appears that when again this is not anything new, any preacher will tell you this, it appears that when people face existential threats that challenge the meaning of their lives by reminding them of their mortality and uncertainty of the future they often turn to spiritual and religious beliefs. However, this does not necessarily signal a revival of traditional religion just because increased anxiety related to the meaning, heightening spiritual interest does not mean individuals will be driven to join religious groups or start attending religious services. Most people, particularly in those individualistic affluent societies, will instead engage in private spiritual practices or turn to religious substitutes. How about that meditation app? But how well do these things really work over the long term? Why do religious substitutes fail to offer meaning? One theory is that traditional religions do a better job promoting close familial social and community bonds than the alternatives. In fact, a large body of research has established a strong link between social relationships and meaning. Belongingness increases one sense of meaning whereas loneliness, social exclusion, and alienation decrease it. Similarly, the people who are most resilient against existential anxiety are those who feel socially supported and valued. In other words, doing that meditation app doesn't really hold a candle to being a member of a church. This isn't rocket science here because think about it. Wouldn't it be the case that over the long periods of time, those religions who actually do a better job at helping human beings cope with meaninglessness will be the ones that survive the religious marketplace of ideas? It doesn't mean that might happen in one individual's life, but over great periods of time, these religions have sort of gotten their act together and they've learned how to do things. And when I talk about Living Stones online, well, it's a new thing because on one hand, I have all of these traditions and best practices and things that have been bassed down to me either directly through training or indirectly simply through practice. Now we're going online, I'm doing all of this exaptation, is that the word? A fancy vervekey word where I've got all this mechanism in my mind that I use and all this experience that I use in real life church and now I'm sort of applying it to Living Stones online. Many alternative spiritual beliefs do not offer any moral guidelines for family and community life, that pesky morality and religion, but morality is pretty important. When people step out of line morally with one another, folks don't like that. They do not promote the type of social duty that builds strong relational bonds and they lack the historical and institutional scaffolding that generates transcendent meaning for individuals by weaving people together across place and time. Indeed, many religious substitutes reflect the individualism of our modern times. They encourage a more self-focused and hedonistic search for meaning. It might feel liberating to take a buffet style approach to spiritual needs, but there is not much reason to believe that most people trying to fashion a personalized meaning framework will be successful. Even within more traditional religions such as Christianity, there are reasons to be concerned about the influence of individualism, which is distorting faith into more of a self-help focused, ego-centric enterprise. There's plenty of that in Christianity, but this also bears on John Verbecky's religion that isn't a religion and developing an ecosystem of practices that develop meaning, so on and so forth. It's really hard to compete with the big players on the block. It's kind of sort of like having a startup and you're competing with Google and Microsoft. Well, in Google and Microsoft, these guys haven't been around that long, but in terms of Christianity and the other major world religions, they've been around a long time. Research also indicates that traditional religion serves a self-regulatory function that benefits one's sense of meaning. Religious beliefs and practices promote self-control. When people attend religious services, study religious texts, pray and interact with fellow believers, they are better able to discern and pursue personally and socially constructive goals, monitor their own behavior, avoid the types of environments and situations that encourage maladaptive choices. That's really nice way of talking about bad habits, and navigate the life stressors that may otherwise lead to unhealthy behaviors. Drinking all the time. Studies have found that by facilitating order and structure, self-control positively contributes to meaning. Religious substitutes, on the other hand, often lack a self-regulatory qualities or the institutions and social support systems that help people regulate their behavior. Now, to my knowledge, Clay Rutledge is an atheist, but he's just a scientist doing his stuff. Critics of religion often portray faith as restrictive, as a form of psychological and social control. In reality, for many believers, religion is a source of freedom. Freedom from versus freedom to. It's really difficult to develop a career if you're spending all your times drinking or doing something like that. This is because it promotes what I call existential agency. The sense that one has the ability to pursue a meaningful life. You can do it. Just hearing you can do it from your cartoon character is a lot less powerful than the sum total of all the religious experience that comes to bear upon you. Without social and cultural structures that successfully inspire social duty and self-control, people are vulnerable to a crisis of existential agency. A meaning crisis, along with feelings of despair, purposelessness, and hopelessness. This really maps onto Vervecki and Christopher Mastropietro's videos about the meaning crisis. Human beings have an inherent spiritual nature. Again, there's that word. Gotta work on that word. But he's a psychologist. I'll give him a break. That is at least partially driven by the need for meaning. To actually help people successfully find meaning, raw spirituality benefits from being shaped and regulated by a belief system. I was noting, let's go to the big picture, shall we? I was noting, so in my household, we're all living together, we got one TV and we sort of share it. Of course, kids can watch stuff on their phones or computers, but my wife and I pretty much just watch stuff on our one big TV. I don't watch YouTube, I mostly listen to it. But so Married at First Sight is now a different show has passed through different fads in our house. So Married at First Sight is now a rather popular show. And what's interesting about this show is that, I find the show a little off-putting, frankly, but they start a relationship between two people. And of course, it's additive, it's a reality show, but they start a relationship between two people and for the most part, they're building a narrative arc and they're showing things. But I watch these people who are trying to do something crazy and I listen to how they talk. And so there's procedural knowledge, there's the propositional. Here's the thing about the propositional. The propositional is in some ways inherently more of heaven than of earth. It's inherently elevated, it's inherently above. It's really something that, well, why do we like it? It doesn't change. A equals B is different from, I feel meaningless today. Oh, well, how does that work? The propositional in many ways is sort of a way of, to borrow our phrase from Jesus on the Sermon on the Mount, putting your treasure in heaven. The propositional takes things out of the ever-changing world of consciousness or the ever-changing world of materiality and sort of in a platonic way freezes it. So we talk about love, but there's the love and there's, which is the book? Is it this paper thing that is subject to fire or mold or all kinds of other things? Or is it what Isabel Wilkerson wrote? Which is it? And when you start to get at this and you start to think about what Clay Rutledge is working on, well, things start to come together. It is vital to see how these facts of what traditional religions provide are connected to its social benefits. Now, don't forget the Durkheimian definition of religion because, again, most of the time when we're talking about religion, we're talking about it individualistically, we're talking about propositional belief systems, we're talking about procedural practices of ritual, and we have skepticism whether we'll do these procedural practices of ritual result in outcomes out there in the public space. But don't forget the Durkheimian values as well that is deep within religion. This is almost always the aspect of religion. So when I was doing my interview with a guy, I'm sure that'll come out at some point. I might have to do another talk because I ramble so incessantly. But, you know, when Verbecky says a religion that is not a religion, well, in one sense he's using the Durkheimian definition of religion and in the other sense he's using the kind of natural supernatural duality dichotomy with respect to religion. So it's vital to see how these facets of what traditional religions provide are connected to social benefits. Some people are sympathetic to religion because they view it as serving important societal needs, but they downplay religiouses religion's spiritual component. That's pretty common. I think churches are important and I'll give it Benjamin Franklin gave to lots of churches deeply impressed by George Whitefield, still sort of an atheist or a deist at least. They imagine that religion has many sociological, psychological, and health benefits because it promotes strong interpersonal familial and community relationships. In other words, they view religion as purely sociological terms, ignoring its intra-psychic nature. But religion is more than just a social institution. The spiritual dimensions of religion is clearly vital to its social power. In fact, spirituality and social and so and I'm getting tired. Spirituality and sociality work hand in glove. Spiritual cognition, I'd be curious about that saying that those two words together, and social cognition rely on the same intuitive processes. Studies show that the more religious people are, the higher they score on measures of moral concern for others. In fact, are religious people more moral than irreligious people? Science says, in other words, they experience feelings such as love, compassion, awe. They're using the same intuitive exaptation, intuitive cognitive processes that spirituality implicates. Spirituality also acts as an invisible thread connecting individuals in ways that purely rational and empirically guided thinking cannot. Thus spirituality, especially when it is regulated by religion, enhances social life. Indeed, studies find that prayer makes people kinder towards others and more likely to forgive relationship partners and friends. Pray for your enemies, Jesus says. Prayer also increases relationship satisfaction among couples, and couples that pray together experience greater feelings of unity and trust. In recent study, my team asked both theists and atheists to describe in writing what gives their lives meaning. For both groups, social relationships are the most frequently mentioned sources of meaning. Believers, however, are more likely than non-believers to emphasize relationships. Believers were also more likely to view their lives as meaningful. This suggests that religious belief may play an important role in promoting the relational bonds that help make life meaningful. Religious beliefs and practices, prayer, which enable people to feel connected and supported by God, also help meet social needs when individuals experience social loss, loneliness, and societal marginalization. In short, faith provides social support when other sources are unavailable. And if you are a member of a church, you will get not just imaginative support, but probably relational support from others. Okay, let's go back to Derek Thompson's little narrative. My views towards organized religion. 2005. Ha ha, religion is so dumb. If everyone just stops believing in God, we can finally be rational. 2018. Maybe secularization unleashes a bunch of ersatz religions that are also bad. 2020. Everybody back to church now!