https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=rI-T5ARRn7c

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current version of my Sunday sermon. It may change a lot or a little by Sunday. If you want to see the final draft, you can go on to the Living Stones Christian Reformed Church channel and you'll find a bunch of my sermons and Sunday School lessons and those kinds of things. In the 1930s, the Soviet Union was trying to, in some ways, erase Christianity and its legacy from the world for a more rational and reasonable solution. And one of the things it tried to alter was the seven-day week. Those of you who know anything about the Bible know that the seven-day week is found, comes from the Bible. And they decided that they would reshuffle the calendar so that you wouldn't have these pauses in the week that you have on Saturdays and Sundays weekends, but rather you would have people working five-day work weeks, but they'd be all scattered so that industry could keep going, so on and so forth. It was an attempt and it was a complete failure. People hated it. And even in a tyrannical society like the Soviet Union, this had to be abandoned because it simply wasn't accepted because people couldn't get together. We have a little outfit called Sierra Leadership Network and we had an event where my friend Eric Dirksen, and those of you who watch my channel know, I did a conversation with Eric. Eric did a little lesson for a group on the electionary and the Christian liturgical calendar. And he referred to this experiment to the Soviet Union and he used this phrase, a calendar is a shared blueprint for a shared life. You recognize that for Americans, there's an American commercial calendar that in many ways establishes the rhythm of society in the United States. And it's all done basically for commercial purposes. The year starts with New Year's and then of course Super Bowl. I'm going to basically hit the highlights here. And then, you know, after New Year's is out, the stores are filled with Valentine's Day stuff and then Valentine's Day is gone. They'll be right now. There's Easter candy in the supermarket. After Easter will be summer and back to school. And then Halloween, Halloween now after Christmas is the second largest commercial holiday. After holiday Thanksgiving, Thanksgiving seems to be getting smaller and smaller since it used to be the bulwark that held Christmas back. And then, of course, the big one, Christmas comes. And that's the American commercial calendar. And you'll find people decorating and doing everything according to this calendar. The commercial marketplace sets the beat for communal American life, for shared American life. Now, for many more centuries before that, the church had liturgical seasons and liturgical Holy Days. And of course, Holy Day is the original idea from which we get our ideas of holidays. Now, those of you who grew up in the Christian Reformed Church know that there are tensions between this and the Heideberg Catechism as 52 Lord's Days. And the Heideberg Catechism doesn't celebrate Christmas or anything like that. But even in the Christian Reformed Church, where liturgical calendars and seasons had been resisted for a great many years and dismissed as Roman Catholic or papish, the church order in the Christian Reformed Church still had a whole variety of holidays that the church order said that they should be celebrated in Christmas, New Year, Thanksgiving, Ascension Day, Pentecost, so on and so forth. And these, in sort of an interesting way, have now become giving days. And the Christian Reformed Church tries to set giving calendars according to these days. There are seasons of feasting and seasons of waiting, Advent, Christmas, Epiphany, Lent. Now, we've been in the season of Epiphany, where the light goes out, the message goes out. And if you look at this calendar, the climax of Epiphany is Transfiguration Sunday. And that's what the sermon is for. And it's followed by Lent, which gets kicked off with Ash Wednesday. In some portions of the country and the world, you'll have Fat Tuesday, Mardi Gras, which is this feast right before the fasting season of Lent begins. I've been talking about the Sermon on the Mount, and I intend to pick up the Sermon on the Mount back when we get to ordinary time. I usually don't follow the lectionary terribly rigidly. But the Sermon on the Mount is very much Jesus changing the world and Jesus taking religion and modifying it in some startling new ways. And we saw this in his irreligious Beatitudes. Transfiguration Sunday is, of course, built on a story that's clearly in three of the four Gospels. And we'll read that story today. It's used in the liturgical calendar really as the climax. I should change that word to climax from height. Now, I am by no means a liturgical wonk here. And so some of you out there are. And so I'll read your corrections in the comments section, and I should learn and benefit from them. But this is sort of the climax of Epiphany, and it sets up the drama and darkness of Lent. And I couldn't help but see this this this classic painting of Jesus sort of looks like Neo in the sky from the Matrix. And of course, Jesus is accompanied by Moses and Elijah from the Old Testament. They can represent the law and the prophets. They're up on a mountain. They also represent two figures that via some traditions ascended into heaven as well. The Assumption of Moses is an ancient book. And of course, Elijah goes up in a fiery chariot. Now, before we get to the transfiguration, it's important that the story is set up by two other stories. First, you have Peter's declaration. When Jesus came to the region of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, who do the people say the Son of Man is? Now, pay attention to that, because, of course, the Son of Man is this figure from Daniel seven. And it it exemplifies Jesus eschatological role. That means his his role as as heir of an empire, heir of an everlasting empire. It's also a very sneaky term for him to appropriate and use publicly because Son of God would be heard in different ways by by Romans and Gentiles. But Son of Man would have been understood by the Jews. They replied, some said, you are John the Baptist. Others say Elijah and still others, Jeremiah and one of the prophets. But what about you? Who he asked, who do you say I am? Simon Peter answered, you are the Messiah, the son of the living God. There it is. Son of Man is Son of God. And those two ideas really do come close together. I think a lot of Americans, when they hear Son of God, don't hear it in the same ancient monarchical context that Peter would have understood it. Son of God very much as God's representative, God's heir, God's son. And when the son of a king comes, well, you treat the king, the son of the king as you would the king because he bears all of that authority. And he is he is, you know, he is from the father, son of man. Of course, this this other figure from Daniel seven, Jesus replied, blessed are you, Simon, son of Jonah, for it was not revealed to you by flesh and blood, but by my father in heaven. And I tell I tell you that you are Peter and on this rock I will build my church. The gates of Hades will not overcome it. I will give you the keys to the kingdom. Whatever you bind on earth will be bound in heaven. Whatever you loose on earth will be loosed in heaven. And he ordered his disciples not to tell anyone he was the Messiah. And when we get to the end of the story of the transfiguration, this is going to be repeated. But now pay attention that this is the revelation of Jesus. But it's a little complicated because he's Messiah, son of man, son of God, all those things lined up and all those things. Things are true. But the disciples are, as we'll see from the next little section, filling in their own expectations and assumptions to these titles. Now in the second and the next section, Jesus will lay out his mission as the son of man and son of God and Messiah. And this is not what the disciples are looking for. From that time on, Jesus began to explain to his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and he must suffer many things at the hands of the elders, the chief priests and the teachers of the law, and that he must be killed and on the third day be raised to life. Now, I think whenever they heard killed, they stopped listening because nobody shows up on Easter Sunday morning to await his resurrection. So Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. Never, Lord, this will never happen to you. Is Jesus the son of God? Is Jesus the son of man? Is he your master? Is he Messiah? Peter seems to forget that because Peter seems to have a very clear idea about what the script involves. And what Jesus is talking about here does not, is not on Peter's script. What good will it be for someone to gain the whole world yet forfeit their soul? Or what can anyone give in exchange for their soul? For the son of man is going to come in his father's glory with his angels, and then he will return each person according to what they have done. Truly, I tell you, some are standing here will not taste death before they see the son of man coming in his kingdom. That's a very strange thing for Jesus to say. Now, and this is what follows. After six days, Jesus took with him Peter, James and John, the brother of James, and led them up to the high mountain by themselves. There he was transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun. Have you ever tried to look at the sun? And his clothes became as white as snow, as white as the light. Old tapes in my head. Just then, there appeared for them Moses and Elijah talking with Jesus. Notice they're on a high mountain talking with Jesus. You can do a little search in Matthew about where these high mountains show up. Peter said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here. If you wish, I will put up three shelters, one for you, one for Moses and one for Elijah. While he was still speaking, a bright cloud covered them, and a voice from the cloud said, This is my son whom I love. With him I am well pleased. Listen to him. Pay attention to clouds, clouds in Daniel 7. Clouds will show up in Acts 1. Clouds show up on the top of Sinai. Clouds are connected with theophany, which is God showing up. What happens when a theophany shows up? When the disciples heard this, they fell down to the ground terrified. This is the standard thing that happens in the Bible when God the Father shows up in glory. But Jesus came and touched them. Notice the interplay. Get up, he said. Don't be afraid. That's commonly said when God shows up. When they looked up, they saw no one except Jesus. As they were coming down the mountain, Jesus instructed them, Don't tell anyone what you have seen until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead. Notice how this ties up the themes of the previous two passages. You've got the Son of God, you've got the Son of Man, you've got the warning not to reveal this. Now why? Why not reveal? They already have guessed who Jesus is. They've already declared who Jesus is. Why is this going this way? And what does this passage mean? Now, I think contemporary people have a hard time sort of making this story out. And I think part of it is just because of the symbolic aspects of the story. Now Jesus shines here, but light making for us today is not common, or is common and technological. Now remember in the ancient world, where do you get light? You got light from the sun and the moon that had heavenly resonance. So remember, people live below, heaven is on top, heaven is where Jesus comes from, heaven is where God is. All of that, all of that, what word shall I use? Geography of the kingdom is foremost and built into the disciples world. And fire, well fire also has, fire comes down on Mount Sinai. I am a consuming fire, God says, the burning bush. So these are where light comes from. And here, Jesus shines. And again, for us that, obviously that would be strange. Second Corinthians 14, Paul makes the comment that Satan can masquerade as an angel of light. So what is going on in this passage? Jesus as son of God and son of man has lost the impact that it made on its original audience for us. And I think, well, a lot of that has to do by our imagination of God. The last couple of weeks over in YouTube land, two pretty big YouTube stars got in very early on the YouTube game. They're comedians. They published basically their spiritual deconstruction or deconversion stories. And I think that's a very interesting story. I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And I think that's a very interesting story. And when I read it, it reminded me of Augustine. And when I read it, it reminded me of Augustine. God is no such extended, long, broad, thick, high, deep being. God is no such extended, long, broad, thick, high, deep being. Now there's a lot of debate of whether we should even use this word being for God. Is God a being in the system? No, not really. God is the ground of being. But God is not simply contained by the world or exhausted by the world. But God is not simply contained by the world or exhausted by the world. And I think that's a very difficult story. And I think that's a very difficult story. And I think that's a very difficult story. And I think that's a very difficult story. And I think that's a very difficult story. And I think that's a very difficult story. And I think that's a very difficult story. And I think that's a very difficult story. And I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. I think that's a very difficult story. Our being lives so far away At that A In him we live and move and have our being. оas the Apostle Paul says. And so this idea, that the world is just kind of going on Their being lives so far away. o That isn't true. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty. We can't talk about him Because we don't have the language for him. him but our language can't exhaust him but the whole earth is full of his glory. Luther tries to get at that and we see Jesus wielding this power in the adult Sunday school class. We looked at John 4 where this man comes up and you know he's desperate to have Jesus come to his house and you very quickly get the impression that Jesus doesn't need to do anything that we can see in order to heal this man's son. What kind of power is that? He's not bound by space. He stills a storm with a word. This is the kind of power he wields. We've been watching the Good Place and commented on it and this maybe this doesn't work with the screen overlay. You know it's so interesting when I watch the Good Place that simulation arguments come into my mind and that's sort of come into our imagination because you know that I mean Janet and Michael can just sort of snap a finger and worlds disappear and words come in and so this is something we can imagine so God is even more than that and not only more than that but better than that quite obviously. Now how do you represent this to ancient people? Now on one hand they knew it far better than we did but all of this symbolism is what they're saying that they led up to a high mountain and while mountains sort of represent well closer to the throne room of God in an elevated way. The Garden of Eden if you look in the book of Ezekiel was on a high mountain and of course that the Theophany and Sinai is on a mountain and Jesus goes up and gives the sermon on the mountain so you see this running again and again in Matthew. Matthew speaking to the Jews they get this symbolism and then he's transfigured he's metamorphized and his face shown like the sun and his clothes became white as light itself and this is in symbolic ways trying to communicate to his disciples that well Jesus isn't the sun Jesus is the author of the sun Jesus isn't the moon the moon reflects the light of the sun of which Jesus is the author this is Jesus then Moses and Elijah are talking to him the law and the prophets and Peter wants to build Peter wants to build tabernacles and that's you know it doesn't go anywhere it's what an ancient person would want to do in such a case because you know build them their embassies so people can have access to them but he doesn't fully understand as we saw in the last story and then this is in fact in many ways Jesus responding to Peter's inability to understand that when Jesus says he's going to Jerusalem well you might not understand him Peter but you'd better go along with it Jesus is God's son the prince and obedient subjects obey him which is what the father has said when the disciples heard this they fell down to the ground this is this is rote but then Jesus touches them God is literally too much for us to manage and Jesus who is God but in this incarnation and again we can't get our minds we can't get our minds around the the ancient common concept of God it's too much how can we get our minds around Jesus but he comes and he touches them and he enables them and he reassures them and he says don't tell this until the son of man has been raised from the dead and it's just all too much for us to know that Jesus doubles down and makes it far more and takes it makes it far more than Peter's petty preference about Jesus' mission Peter this is way beyond you what this calls for is worship and then we'll forget raised from the dead now here's the thing we are small we can't handle God showing up we have trust issues we don't believe he's good when when God feels absent we're full of ourselves and we imagine we can know and do and be and all of that without him and then when he shows up we don't know what to do with ourselves we would in our sinfulness we would rather not exist at all than be in his presence we are blind even to those most obvious things about us in his light we see ourselves and we're horrified and this is our predicament with God Jonathan Peugeot another person in this group of conversations that I'm having with John Vervecky in a in a debate kind of a debate that they had Jonathan Peugeot is a Christian John Vervecky is not Jonathan Peugeot lays the incarnation in a way I'd never heard it laid before the expression of the infinite is equal to the infinite and when you say it that way it just doesn't compute the expression of the infinite is equal to the infinite that's what the church councils declared these councils that we find in our creeds Jesus triune God father son and holy spirit the expression of the infinite is the intimate infinite he is revealed and we struggle he's revealed in all of his glory and we babble he then he touches he comforts he reassures understanding how we are then the son of man will die and this is unthinkable to Peter it's unthinkable to us how can this happen Albert Camus gets a piece of it Christ the god man suffers too evil and death can no longer be entirely imputed to him since he suffers and dies how can that be how can the ground of being take on flesh and suffer for his rebellious world and sanctify it the night of Golgotha is so important because divinity ostensibly abandons its traditional privilege and lived through to the end despair included the agony of death it's lent it's coming but today the light is turned up and we look at it the law and the prophets speak of him we see the world by his light that's how we ought to live that's how we ought to see gratitude is the blueprint of a shared life so together we pass through the drama to have it sink in to have it to have us understand it together to be remade even as we decay on the way to the final resurrection remaking that's who Jesus is that's who we are that's how we journey together