https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=7dshAsIDP7I

 Well, you and I have never spoken, so I don't know how much introduction both of us need to do for each other, but why don't you go first, and then you can ask me anything you want to ask me. Right on. See, well, my name's Guy Sinkstock. I am a... Where'd you grow up? I grew up, well, I grew up in Chicago. Specifically Hinsdale, Illinois was where I was born, which is about a half an hour west of Chicago. Until I was about 12, I grew up in that area, Downers Grove, Westmont, Hinsdale, Clareden Hills, that area until I was 12. I moved to Arizona. Was there until I was about 23, and then I moved to the Bay Area to go to the San Francisco Art Institute over on Chestnut Street in North Beach. And I've been, that's how I got to the Bay Area. Okay, okay. Did you go to, well, did you do any undergrad stuff before the Art Institute, or is that your first college? Let's see, I actually, out of high school, I went right to massage school in Tucson. Okay. That's unusual. And then I was actually going to, then I moved back to, I lived in Prescott, that's where I graduated high school, and then I went to massage school for a year. And then I moved back to Prescott and got my practice going to then enroll into, I was going to enroll into Prescott College. And at the time, Prescott College, it's considered probably the most liberal school in the universe. Oh, really? Yeah. They had a bachelor's degree in Jungian psychology, and I was going to take that. And then I got sick, and I had this whole kind of epiphany about actually, I just wanted to be an artist. And so, shortly after that, I disenrolled and I moved out to San Francisco, and about a year, it took me about a year to get my feet on the ground here, and then I started art school. Okay. Was your family religious at all growing up? Well, I've come to understand that I think it's impossible to not be religious. In fact, it seems that the less formally religious you are, the more religious you can actually turn out to be. I agree with that. You talk about a lot. No, no, actually. I think we are Lutheran by denomination, but I had no upbringing in that. However, I feel, the more I learn about Luther, I feel deep in my bones, very much like him. Really? Yeah. That's interesting. I don't even know that much about him, but just the temperament and the orientation and the rebellion and the sense of betrayal and all the stuff that I understand, the little bit I know about Luther. In fact, Christopher talked about in your interview, and I thought this was really striking, where he talked about that he was raised Catholic, and that as he gets older, he realizes how deep Catholicism is. I think that that really points to, in fact, I texted John right after I heard that. John and Pervaiki and I have been having these long dialogues over text. Oh my. Which is something we could talk about, this whole thing about what the hell are we doing here. How do you even describe all this and talk about it? It seems something both old and new at the same time. Anyways, when I texted John after that, I was thinking about that that was really a profound insight, I think, that he demonstrated in making it. Because it points, I would say, to that he's finding himself more of a Catholic than he didn't even understand. But as he gets older, it emerges. He can see it. Yeah. That points to where something like religion exists. It exists on the primordial level, the pre-reflective level, and organizes our perceptions. These deep things, and that's what I mean by what I'm talking about. I think it's almost impossible to not be religious. If you have phenomenology, how you have the most simplest perceptions are, when you get down to them, you almost have to use religious terms to start to make sense of them. Peterson has made that point in numerous places. I had a conversation with Savilla King, who has the Quality Existence Channel, and she made a similar point when she went into clinical work, when she was starting her work in psychology. A lot of free clinical work is often in poor neighborhoods, and as Chris Arnade, the point he made in his book Dignity, if you live in poor neighborhoods, you don't find atheists. They're just few and far between. That has a lot to do with the role of religion. I deal with people all the time who, via the Jordan Peterson thing, they went through a period of estrangement with religion, and then somewhere in their 30s and 40s, or 50s or 60s even, I've baptized people in their 70s, that they discover it so deep inside themselves, and they're curious about its presence when they discover it. But then, of course, with all of the tools, hopefully, that they have after years of maturity, they can begin to do some assessment and evaluation and come to some mature engagement with it. Even if, as you said in your case, you didn't go to church much, even if your parents perhaps went to church more in their youth, that got into them and it seeped up through them to you even without having to darken the door of a church. It's just built into us so deeply. All of our social practices and all of our customs, our manners, our embodied, pre-reflective sense of... Because it is one of the things I really like about Heidegger, because he has this understanding of historicity, this sense that there's nothing that the human being does that's like an object that exists in an environment that then makes decisions in axes. All of that were already always in a historical context. Just for example, that you're going like that, and that you have a bookshelf, and that you have a chair, and the way that you sit in that chair. If we were to break down the countless conversations, and the countless interactions, and the customs, the history of the most simple gesture is saturated with the gravity of this unfolding history, this deep temporality. One of the things I really appreciated a lot about what you say often is you often... I don't know if you say this, but it's what I hear. As you talk about, yeah, we like to think that we're very transparent to ourselves. You usually smirk, or you usually... Yeah, we like to think that. Yeah, you giggle like that. It's actually part of being a human is a big part of it is that we're not. We emerge. We find ourselves here, already here, already begun. I just remember at some point when I was a kid, these faint little memories of just having this sense of being on a playground, and I'm running down the field. I don't know, I'm four or something, or five, and just having these inklings of, wait a minute, I'm here, and I'm already running, and I have a first and last name, and I'm in a boatload of concerns, and I come to already begun. That thing that we emerge from, it seems to be something about that primordialness. What I've understood in now studying, right now I'm studying a lot of St. Maximus the confessor. Some of the richness of what they're actually describing is something like that, that which we're already embedded in. When we then come back and reflect upon that, we come back and try to make sense of that. First of all, the way that we make sense of it matters. But also, another thing that Christopher really said, and I've been thinking about it ever since, where he talked about he's very present to that we are in the light of the dying star of Christianity. When he said that, it tickled something, like a feeling in me that was so difficult, I didn't even have quite words for it, but it brought it to the center. Because we don't have for 2,000 years, we've had this centralized coming together that's been our conscious representations, mirrored our social practices and the primordiality. But now that's fading away on some respects and we're left with these values and these ways of enactment, but without that unifying star, that really rumbled to me when he said that. The exchange has been more complicated because of course, C.S. Lewis and the last book he wrote, which was the discarded image, goes into the model of the cosmos that was the medieval model, which was inherited in many ways from the classical model. We like to think about history as the seamless transitions. You had Greco-Roman paganism and then Christianity. There are reasons that Christianity comes up and what was sort of an in-house feud in the Jewish community becomes this tsunami in the Roman world, which takes a couple of hundred years to really gain steam, but just really emerges in force in the Roman imagination and just basically cleans paganism's clock. The pagans that write about it are so frustrated because the Christians are just winning by virtue of their love and their generosity and the pagans have no weapon against this, which is exactly what the apostle Paul says. There's no weapon that's formed against this and there's no law against this love. Then of course, that happens in the Roman period, the late Roman period, but then the Christianization of Europe, which happens in the collapse of the Roman period. That takes hundreds of years and there's still with many conversations this, well, that's from Christianity, that's from paganism. A lot of it in many ways kind of comes together and I'll get in trouble with this with some people, but I always get in trouble and I don't seem to mind. What happens is that Christianity has this capacity to infiltrate these other cultures and religions and that doesn't always go well, but people don't seem terribly bent out of shape by Christmas trees and celebrating Christmas in December and some of these things, which clearly had influences from other traditions, but Christianity has always had this capacity to the Christianity that is growing and being practiced, let's say in mainland China today. American Christians on one hand celebrate that rise, but when they meet Christians there, they're like, well, wait a minute, they've got these other ideas and the same thing's happening in Africa now. And so, I mean, this has happened in the past and continues to happen. And so if you read St. Maximus the Confessor or Christian history or other people from the past, you get this sense of, well, the symbols there and the names are there, but there are other things which are quite different. I remember reading, doing a little bit more in-depth work on Augustine. How Augustine sort of married Christianity and neoplatonism together, just fascinating. But this has happened time and time and time again over the years and it hasn't stopped yet. But you're right. These things get into us deep and they don't let us go. What do you make of the tendency, and it seems part of the characteristic of Christianity is it does seem to be able to get in there, right? And it's not always good and it is good a lot of the time. What is it about Christianity that seems to be able to kind of get in there in these different ways and flourish? Well, speaking as a Christian pastor, I think because it's true. And that's just what happens with truth where you just can't get around it at some point. And I was listening to Jonathan Peugeot did a conversation with, I don't remember his name, but I probably talked to him at some point. He was studying René Girard and I mean, Girard is an interesting figure. But there's these dynamics that happen and we see this sort of being played out in our culture now with people posturing with victim status and in order to gain status and all of this stuff that's going on. And there are just certain, and Jordan Peterson talked about this and I remember one of the things he said about archetypes, which he said, you know, the thing about these archetypes is you just don't get beneath them. You just get to the point where you realize, okay, here's the story where the man who is God becomes the servant of all. He in his life shows amazing power and yet dies the most humiliated victim and political loser that you could imagine in the symbolism of the period. You know, there's nothing higher than God and you have the worst punishment that you can have where you're not just killed, but you're humiliated and it's public and anyone who wanted to presuppose that you have political aspirations, well, this is the death of Messiahs, you know, nobody likes their Messiahs killed or captured. They want their Messiahs victorious. And so there's this story has within it a capacity that you can't really get beneath it. And, you know, I always think about the fact that when Jesus sets up his disciples and tells them to bring a sword to the garden, and then when Peter does with the sword, what everyone would expect is how a sword could be used. Jesus tells him to put it away and then heals the man that Peter struck. And in a sense, what Jesus is saying in that garden is if there's any blood that's going to be shed, it will be mine. Now, who says that? Yes. You know. Right. Yes. Yes. Yeah, I know. And that goes so deep. Right. It goes so deep. And he walks into a political and people often are not aware of the political And people often are not aware of the political religious culture war that Jesus was born into. But, you know, basically the definition of losing in a war like that is death. And Jesus basically walks into his death and says, I am going to win this war by dying. And it's like, that's not how you win wars. You win wars by killing. And Jesus says, no, I am going to become, I'm going to be the son of man, which is a title out of the book of Daniel. I am going to become the king of the world by losing. And everybody listens to that and says, that's just crazy talk. But then, because everybody imagines he's going to conquer Rome by building an army and killing Romans. And Jesus says, no, I'm going to conquer Rome by dying as their victim. And that's exactly what happens. And it's like, yes, how does that happen? Okay, that's a weird historical anomaly. It can't happen again. But it keeps happening. And so, you know, there's this terrific novel by a Japanese, it was turned into a movie. I don't know if you've ever read it called Silence, where the Jesuits go to Japan and they're converting people and Japanese authorities, they've seen enough of this and they want to get rid of all the foreign influence, which means the foreign religion. And so basically, they're really savvy about it. And they say, okay, well, this is how we're going to handle the priests, we're going to put to death the villages that the priests have converted and that they love unless they renounce their faith publicly by stepping on this fumi. And so this novel is about a priest who, you know, now is stuck at, well, I can save the village by denying my Lord and denying my faith, which will destroy the evangelistic efforts. And should I, you know, go to the go? Well, it'd be one thing if they were going to kill him for his faith, but they're going to kill the village for his faith. And so it's a, and Jesus, Jesus in the, in the symbol of this fumi speaks to the man and says, trample me, trample me. It's for this reason I came into this world to be trampled. And it's just, it just inverts everyone's assumption about power and life. And Jesus says it, he says, if you want to, if you want to hold on to your life, you will lose it. Yeah. But if you lose it for my sake, you will find it. And you just can't invert that. And so that's why Jesus just persists. Right, right. So interesting. So interesting. You know, it is stunning to, I often think about what the Romans would make of the, you know, the make of like this, this cult emerging, right? I just would imagine it wasn't even like that they, my understanding is it wasn't even like that they necessarily saw initially the Christians as threatening. They just didn't understand what they were doing. They're like, wait a minute, you're giving to the, huh? Like it, it wasn't even like it was opposite of what they were doing. It was just so radically different, right? That it must have looked just looked insane from their point of view on some level. Tom Holland has a new, so he's a, he's a Roman historian. He has a new book coming out that talks about this because if, you know, in antiquity, if you were a pagan and you saw a weak or poor person, well, you know, there's no, if you're weak, well, you were born to it and it's your own fault. So, you know, pay, pay the price and Christians come along and just invert that. And the Romans, well, what do you do with the people who let themselves be killed? Right. Right. And, you know, they had seen that in Masada, let's say, where everyone on the mountain, you know, there's this revenge suicide. Well, you can kind of understand that. There's still pride in that. But it's no, just go ahead and you run out of the village when there's a plague. We'll stay and we'll not only care for our family who are sick, we'll care for yours. And of course, those who live. Yes. Well, what are they going to do? You know, they're just overwhelmed with gratitude and you just can't stop that. And of course, the weakness of Christianity almost always comes when Christians are given power because we succumb to all of the normal temptations of power. Right. Right. And then bad things happen. Yeah, totally. I really like the one of the things that I liked about the way that Verbecky described Agape. Yeah. Like this notion of, and this is where I was when I was listening to them, I was struck by the work. You know, the work that I do is I develop something called circling. That's kind of now all over the world and I'm still understanding. I'm still understanding exactly what it is. However, this notion that Agape actually makes it unconceals and makes people. Yeah. You know, just this idea of that, like this principle of where the Roman citizens, right, the people were people were the ones who had power and everyone else was slaves and they didn't, you know, it was brutal. And then here's this guy, Jesus, who's evoking this deep, unearned love, right, this transcendent love where it's just like he literally allows everyone to become a person. That sense of that particular power of that. And I, and that really put the language, a lot of these deep experiences that I've been having for years circling with people because one of the things about circling is it's it's you know, you could say you could say that circling is a it's a practice of essentially essentially practicing the basic presuppositions and could say asanas, if you will, of whatever it is that makes for profound kind of life changing conversations. Right. So it's it's it's secular. It's not religious. However, it's interesting. People who do it and are are into it end up using these very spiritual terms. And I think it's precisely because of this deep sense of a kind of agapic love that they experience, which like some of the some of the vocabulary that's come out of circling some of the grammars is this notion of being deeply seen. Right. This experience where people have they come out and they're like, oh, my God, I've never been seen so deeply in my life. And and I think what they're describing is something very similar to that, that unlike that that sense of love that that parents have a lot of. Right. And that's one of the things Vrvrkhi talked about. If you exist and you have an identity and you're a person, it is because of agapic love. That's right. Right. If you did, if that weren't there because you can't. The person can't earn it. Right. If there's any transaction in there, it's not agapic love. And so there's this quality of that where you start in a circle is that your your intention and where you sit is basically like we bring our attention to one person and we just begin to relate to them as a person. Right. And and then people have these experiences of like deep reverence and these deep insights and these deep love. And there's this mutual kind of transformational experience that they they come out. They come out of. And I think about I think about circling as a kind of in a certain sense analogous to something like a yogic practice where, you know, like where yoga is is on some on some level, you're just doing these these mind body postures that are these archetypes, if you will, for every other posture and mind coordination that you have in your normal life. And so you go and do these deep stretches, you know, these extreme things where you like, you know, you coordinate your body and strengthen and you and you lengthen. Not not so much so that you can go and like do downward dog on your desk at work. Right. It's so that when you're not thinking about it, you inhabit the different. Areas in your life and your baseline is just more open. And what's interesting to me is that, especially given like how primary like relationship, human relationships are almost everything for us. Right. That there hasn't really been many practices that are actually about just the fundamental I thou connection that circling happens to be. And so what often happens is that people go into like a weekend or an evening or they go through a course with it and then they they go into these deep stretches and then they have they go off in their life and then they come back the next day or they get these phone calls and they're like, yeah, I went home and I realized, oh my God, I've never actually seen my wife before. I've never actually saw my like as a person. And this and I think that's telling about what what you're stretching. And one of the things I've appreciated about. Your videos and the place that you come from is I can. I appreciate how deeply it seems to me that you you are grounded in a fundamental care in people. Like you're really like you're really you're really open to people. Right. In such a way in the particularities of people and like there's like almost like an unprejudicedness about it. Right. Even in even in in like that you're opening up to this conversation. Right. And you're talking you're sharing yourself, but you're also interested in such a way. Something about the way you participate with people and your orientation with people. I recognize that because I very much I very much feel like that I in the last 20 years in doing circling, I've cultivated a lot of that sense of being if people are just amazing, like people. They're also awful. Yeah, that too. But they're not neutral. There's no no no no neutral. No, never, never. There's something it's hard to put it's hard to put identified exactly. But there is a place that you come from and meet individuals and peoples that have a certain kind of respect and reverence and an openness that feels like unfortunately, in my experience, more and more rare in the world. Yeah. I you know, it's it's it's fascinated me. Yeah, I don't want to I don't want to leave your story. I kind of want to get back to it because part of the reason I always get into people's stories, and I'm sure you very much understand this, is because as you mentioned, as we began talking, it's all this contextuality that I love when so I did a little bit of commentary on Brett Weinstein's talk with Alastair McGrath. But when when Brett begins that conversation, he's dead on right and saying that human beings have this genetic material. But we are so much software and and no one you cannot birth a human being in a test tube because so much of how we are and who we are our ability to function. We gain this from our parents and from our context. And and it's, you know, it's amazing. It's amazing how much good we can get out of such terrible contexts, but also how much bad stuff we can pick up even in such overwhelmingly good context. I mean, those things are always there in the middle. Yeah. And and I'm interested that I mean, you mentioned that you you got your you got your start in massage school. And now I know a lot of people aren't probably going to quite understand that. But the thing about if you're doing massage, what you're very sensitive to, I mean, that's one of the things that you pick up. You're sensitive to someone else's body, which means that you're probably sensitive to them at a level that they're not aware of. Yeah, because they're in our culture, especially the more the further we get down this development track, as we call it. Yeah. Where we're doing less and less with our hands, we're doing less and less work with our bodies. Whereas, say, I remember when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, one of the practices in the church there was when we would do the Lord's Supper communion. There was always foot washing at the beginning of that because I was a missionary and I was high and exalted and I really hated that. But they so I always had to wash everyone's feet. And the so I'd be out way back in the stick somewhere. And we just have a circle of us because only only only certain people could take the Lord's Supper in these churches. There are always way more people looking on than we're actually doing it. And then we all take off our shoes and then to hold the feet of these often older men and women who have lived most of their life barefoot, most of their life in on hills and mountains, scratching out a living. And, you know, their feet were often pancaked, calloused. You know, this world had shaped and formed their feet. And then now I, this young kid coming from North America with a theology degree, now I am to wash their feet before we partake of the body and blood, which is often some little crumbs of bread and grape soda. And and this is and this is what we're doing. But as someone, you know, beginning your career where you're touching people's bodies, they don't even know what's going on in their bodies. I'm not surprised that this eventually then worked into the audible massage where OK. And, you know, one of the things that I've watched living here in Sacramento is the, you know, the rise of yoga in a community like this. And I. One of the things that I see now, it's of course no mystery that the vast majority of people in a place like Midtown Sacramento that are at yoga studios tend to be young, white, affluent women. But the disassociation that I think they are attempting to, you know, attempting to address in the practice is something that, you know, strikes me and that that very much connects with, OK, so you've got, you know, now, you know, the little that I've sort of gleaned so far from you and some of your videos about circling. The fact that in this society, people are not known and I think, frankly, increasingly not even known as children, which was for many people, the first, the first, the first love that you would have is the love of your parents. Yes. And now when you stroll through Target or Walmart or go to eat in a restaurant, how many times don't I see a family sitting at a meal in a restaurant, you know, the kids are playing on a phone. Yeah. Parents are either talking with each other or they're on a phone. And I'm thinking, we have no idea what we're doing to each other here. Exactly. Well, I think one of the things that you get at, I think one of the consequences of this, and I'm seeing this more and more and I'm, because, because circling happens to be about a practice about the fundamental unit of relating, I'm actually being exposed to a lot of people in Silicon Valley. That, whether or not they're, they oftentimes they can't articulate it because we don't have much language for it right now. But the reason why they're coming there is because they, there's a, there's a sense of that, this tactile sense of this intimate dance of encountering another human being and staying with it, right, is becoming more and more foreign at such an earlier and earlier age, right. And this coordinated activity, not even just like just, just not even the higher levels of like what we're talking about and conversation and stuff like that, but just the act of being in the presence of another, there's a, there's so many things that are being communicated, including a, like being in a shared social practice that we're engaging in, like you're going like this, I'm going like this. You know, if I was like way up here like this, you would both, you know, you'd both like, hey, there's something that we're feeling out. And I think that that back and forth is literally the fundamentals of our identity is what will come to be our identity and our personality. And if you change any part of that, right, at an early age, especially, right, and then a whole age and a whole area. This is why I think technically we can get into the technology thing in Heidegger because I think it's eerily, it's we're in a very eerie time if you begin to see it, which I think you're pointing to. But if you change that at all, all of a sudden people stop, they start occurring less and less human. So for example, I had a somebody, a young guy, he's like 25, I think he's in Silicon Valley, he like he made it big in the, like a startup and he doesn't have to work anymore. And he tells me about like that he was in a relationship and that and how he does all his relationships is he signs like a one month contract with them. Like, they make agreements, you have certain times that they meet and they put it all in their calendar on their phone. And he was talking to me like this and I thought he was joking. Really? And apparently, and apparently this is like not unusual for the people that he hangs out with. Really? Yeah, the instrumentation is like, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know. But he's like, I don't know, I don't know, I don't know what he's hanging out with. Really? Yeah, the instrumentation and the calculating kind of sterility of something as a human relationship, right, is becoming more and more unframed. Right? Yeah. And he's, and I'm noticing with a lot of the people that I'm running into who like the millennial generation, whatever the next one is, is they really, the ability to hang in this coordinated, awkward, ambiguously, ambiguity filled thing called intersubjectivity. Yeah. Is there less and less coordinated and in so much of what's obvious to me, isn't obvious to them. Right? Yeah. It's really telling and I think, you know, of course, here in the Bay Area, we see the beginnings of what ends up becoming throughout. So it's like, I feel sad about it. Yeah, yeah. You know, my wife, my wife teaches at a Waldorf school and it's, it's very interesting watching. She just started her at Waldorf school, you go one through eight, and then you go back down to first grade again. And of course, the Waldorf methodologies, it's a public school, but the Waldorf methodologies are very tactile, very relational from the beginning. And it's, you know, what's so interesting is that these things were just normal not that long ago. And for the sake of other things, we have abandoned them without understanding exactly what we're doing to ourselves. That, you know, I really like what you just said in terms of, okay, so, so this, this new couple is going to have a relationship that will be mediated by Google Calendar. Yeah. And, and this, this very much gets into, you know, throughout the history of the world now we've had what, what is so generically described as development. So we have the, the underdeveloped countries or the developing world and then the developed world without given much thought to what that development is and what its shape is. And so, that's one of the things that I often run into in my profession as pastor, because pastor is one of the few remaining professions that, at least in small churches, not in large churches, in small churches remains rather undeveloped. So last Friday we were, you know, stripping the floor in the sanctuary and rewaxing it. And so I had a hand in that. And, and so when, you know, people will come to me with just about any problem that you can imagine. And so the pastor role is sort of analogous to say a parent role, because it isn't mediated or bounded. Whereas a more contemporary analogies, of course, let's say a therapist who we sit in this box. We have 50 minutes. There are, you know, you can say anything, but the therapist was going to be very careful about their own disclosures. Yeah. And, you know, how different from people will often watch my videos and they say, well, you're doing therapy. It's like, no, I'm doing something that's a lot older than therapy. Oh, yeah. What I'm mostly doing is listening. Even when you said like I could just feel, I could just feel when you said this, I could feel myself drop into this kind of deeper sensibility of, oh yeah, I was hanging out, I was doing the floors with them. I had a hand in it. This kind of notion of like getting in with people and like getting a hand in their lives and this hanging with somebody for long periods of time working next to them hammering and helping them with things and that level of involvement, less and less. I feel like most of that is being outsourced, right? Our sense of our hands, because one of the big things that I was thinking about is, you know, they talk about like, well, how the hell did we get frontal lobes? Well, it's because of our hands, right? It's because of our thumbs. And the question is, is like, you know, is it, was the, are the hands for the frontal lobes? Frontal lobes for the hands. And I think at first, at first they were for the hands. But as time goes on, less and less of the enactment in the, in the working with something, right, struggling through something. Being with ambiguity and like all that sensibility has become less and less and less. We don't even have buttons on our phones. No, no, even those are virtual. Right. Now we have to say, well, it seems like, it seems like we did a dyslexic move, right? It's more like the frontal lobes are taken over and dominated the whole thing, right? We no longer need our hands. So, so how did you make the transition from hands into talking? They, that's a great, it's a great question. It's funny because no one's actually ever picked up on that in when I've talked about. It's interesting to like, because no one's ever really like kind of picked up on that. This connection between massage and, and, and talking. So just that in itself, I think is kind of points to what I, I'm, I experienced with you that stands out to me, right? Of like this kind of sensibility of, I don't know, whatever that, you know, whatever it is that we're talking about. But there's. Well, and the reason I say it is because this is how we are. You didn't just, you know, when you were in Arizona at massage school, you didn't say, I'm going to develop, I'm going to develop circling and we're going to do this. I mean, my chances, almost everything, almost anything successful that we do, we usually sort of stumble into it. And it's from one thing to another. And, and oh my goodness, I didn't expect to do this. So I'm curious how this came about in your life. Yeah, exactly. Well, it's interesting because I've always had this. Well, both metaphorically and literally a good touch. Yeah, it's like, did you think that like to touch an object, right? The way you touch an object is, is a completely different thing than when you touch somebody, right? To touch somebody is always a communication. So it's like, so there's so many different levels that are going on and you can always tell a good massage therapist from a bad one from the moment they're very initial touch. Because it's like a really good one. They can just, just grab your finger and you feel that they're in consideration of the whole of your body. You can, you feel that your whole body grasped, whereas like somebody who's not, you're just, they grab an object, right? That's right. So that particular kind of tuning into something and being oriented around it, I would have to say, God, I could, if I, if I kind of feel back into it, there's a way I would say there's, there was, there was a way in which, so where I grew up, both my parents who are like, they're both, they're both extraordinary people. They're amazing people and, and they suffer from addiction. And so there was like a lot of craziness and like, you know, violence and all kinds of, all the things that come with addiction we suffered through when I was a kid. And I was an only child. And so there was a way in which, like I was often from a very early age was, I was kind of managing the fights between my mom and my dad, right? And so there would be this kind of way in which where I could kind of feel the way my dad pulled it into the driveway, I could kind of feel into like what kind of mood he was in. Right? So there's, there's a, there was a way where I think a lot of my resources were, were feeling into things, right? In such a way that where feeling into things in a way where I wasn't necessarily subjugating myself to the conflict. No, that's right. Of course, I wasn't very successful at that, but like, you know, kind of feeling into a mood, like being with all of my mother's hurts and all of that. So there was a kind of way. Your intuitions were earned. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. Because as a child in a context like that, it's survival. Totally. If not physically, emotionally. Oh, totally. So what you say doesn't surprise me a bit. Yep. So I think it's like there's something about, there's something, there's something about in there that had me kind of extend myself out, right, and feel into things. So there's something about the, my physical embodied orientation to it is, is, has, has a deep courtesy to it and like remaining invisible in some regard yet. Yeah, in deep consideration of the other. So I've never actually put, I've never really thought about it quite like that in the way that you, that you asked it, but it then actually kind of makes sense to me. I'd say that there's also something there about, one of the like really wonderful things about my childhood is my grandparents. Now my grandfather, my grandfather was something else, man. He was something else. He was, he came to, he used to, I don't know if this is true or not, he was like, he was, he was a storyteller, but incredible man. He came to, he came to the United States in 1928 and he used to say, yeah, I came here with only 50 cents in my pocket from Germany. It's from Hanover, Germany. And he was born, he was, he was born into a family on the farm right outside of Hanover, Germany. He had 17 brothers and sisters. Wow. Imagine that? And he, and he talked about like, he didn't want to get stuck on the farm, so he somehow escaped the family and he lived, he lived in the park, an apprentice under a tailor for a couple of years. And then he found a boat to San Francisco or to, to the United States. And that's how he got there. And he started something called, he started a business called Hoff Cleaners. And Chuck Kamisky of, you know, Kamisky Park, the Cubs, used to like, used to bring his clothes in to get dry cleaned and my grandpa did his suits and there's a whole historical piece there. And my grandpa was this really outgoing man, very, like very colorful, like this great sense of humor. And he was deeply German, right? And he was a strange father, but as a grandfather, he was almost like he, and he had a basement, I remember he had a basement, right, and he collected everything. And he collected mules and coins and stuff, like just he collected, he was like one of the top amateur photographers in the world. He filmed the first tiger fight ever caught on film in the Amazon. He's just a really interesting guy. And for whatever reason, out of all, like the cousins and relatives and stuff like that, he, he just kind of, he picked me. And he just basically picked me and he just, what I like to say is the part of him that like dwells in the basement, right, all of his creativity. He just poured all of it on me. And he had a three acre yard and he had, I remember he had wild geese, right, and he'd like he put me outside and the geese would chase me and geese are me. Yeah, they are. They are. Like, yeah, like, but there was a way in which there was a way where I remember he would pick me up from school, and he'd take me home until my parents would, you know, pick me up in the evening. And I had all kinds of learning disabilities. I'm dyslexic and no one could get me to do my homework. No one could quite get me out of my imagination. He didn't learn how to like to read till I was like 11 or 12. And so I would have all these rules of trying to get me to read and I, my grandpa would come home and he'd just take all these rules and he'd just kind of throw it down. He's like, all right, what do you want to do? And he just, wherever my interest went, it's like he just made space for it. He just like that's all of his interested in is following my imagination wherever my curate, he would just set up scenarios. He didn't care if I got glue on the floor. He would let me watch anything. And there was something about something about my relationship with him that I think if I oftentimes think about this, if it wasn't for him, I don't know exactly what I'd be like if I would still even be alive, you know. So there's this kind of a way it was a there was a reverence and a thinking and embodiment of I would say, what do you I think what he what he transmitted to me was a deep, deep, deep sense of wonder. Because he was an extraordinary and extraordinarily not curiosity, right, but wonderment, something like a lot more primary primordial and he just had this way of meeting the world where he was there was an like an openness to it. And there's something he related to me through that and I grew up in that until I was like, so we moved away to Arizona. What was that for you leaving him? Oh my gosh. It was. It was I would say it was that experience of leaving him. Probably. And what opened up for me in that is probably the thing that even has us having this conversation right now. Like it was I had an experience of like a kind of an existential ontological floor dropping out. My parents got sober and they they kind of realized that they couldn't stay sober in Chicago. So we moved to some friends lived in Cottonwood, Arizona, and leaving my grandparents. Now I had no conceptualization for it at the time. But what I started to have are these extreme panic attacks, like where I would just feel, you know, however, Vicky talks about like that where he talks about horror. Right. That kind of sense of like things aren't what what I thought that they were. Yeah, I would just go I would have like a like a bottom dropping out experience in this. And this this this icy cold feelings of dread that would come over my body and I'd start crying and I couldn't talk about why. Yeah. And of course, you know, there's nothing I don't know if there's anything one of the things they say the only thing crazier than. Active drug drug addicts and alcoholics are newly sober ones. I can see that. Yeah. So I'm just like, I have just no idea what's going on. I really at that point, I just didn't have any emotional safety with my parents. How old were you? I was like, I think it was like 11 or 12. Wow. Wow. But what this is what's really interesting and is then my parents got really involved in a. Yeah. Which is a religion of sorts. Total life makeover. I remember this moment because this is this is like a moment. I think it was we had just moved in and I'm having these panic attacks and I don't even know what they are and I can't talk to my parents. And I'm having obsessive compulsive thoughts over and over again. And I remember one day early when we first moved, it was either an AA meeting that they were having out on our front porch or maybe it was just like they had a gathering of the of the people that were in the fellowship that they were getting to know. And I just like went outside and just sat down inside the conversation. And I remember distinctly that there was like it was like my life was one way and then this happened and it was another way. I sat down and I just started to like tune into what they were talking about. And it was it's interesting because up until that point about every conversation I've ever had had been always talking about like kind of what you had what other people had what you didn't have what you're doing what they were doing what you should do. Right, especially in the Midwest like in the Midwest. And I remember going back to the Midwest and like my uncle I go back now my my aunt talked about like the Kirby vacuum cleaner she just got for three and a half hours right. It's like, particular. Yeah, those are the only conversations I've ever actually experienced. It was like a conversation that was unlike any other conversation and it was like it occurred to me like a different world. And it was the first time I had ever heard people talk about what it what had them experience what they were experiencing, like what had them see how they were seeing like that that that there was some there was seem to be presupposed that there's some there's some way that I participate with reality that that has it show up for me the way that it does. Right, there's this whole other world that opened up that was part of the conversation, and I experienced it as something completely different dimension almost. And, and whatever it was that they were talking about. And I remember that I knew had some connection between this bottom dropping out sensation that was going on with me. And I didn't know how I couldn't conceptualize it at the time but I just could feel it and I just was like, All right, I'm going to go there, and I like entered in that conversation, and I haven't come out since. So that that's, again, I mean that's so helpful I one of the things I loved about what john did with using an addiction with his video series is is understanding addiction, as you know this, what you lose is you lose agency. And so you had two parents who were struggling with addiction. I mean, the fact that you're alive at all. Well that's pretty good. Right, and you're, and the fact that you came out of that as a semblance of a whole human being highly attributable to your grandfather who, right. I don't know but I would guess that part of the reason he chose you was he had an understanding that you needed him. And, and so, and then your parents getting sober. You know you in a sense, you know you, you had to get sober to whether or not you had anything to drink, because again when when the parents are in that diminished state, their children, you know, they're they're they're along for the ride. Yeah, and, and so I can very much understand. You know I've known a lot of people who have come through a and a which you know obviously comes out of the Oxford groups, and that whole movement, deeply Christian movement. Oh yeah, and, and so I'm not at all surprised that. Gosh, so yeah, you got to get out if you're going to get sober a lot of people do you got to break those networks you need new networks and they got they, and they have to be, you know, they have to be in, they have to be in the church of a and, and they didn't have a young group but you needed to be there too so it none of none of that surprises me and then again, also to to understand, you know with the distance so I was this, I'm dyslexic too but not severely. But I, you know, to understand then, okay, massage that that makes that makes all the sense in the world. And then, you know, well, well, okay so the body. And, but now also the mind and the heart and the self and the, you know, it makes it makes all the sense in the world that in many ways to a In the pre developed pre industrial world. Obviously there were many. There were many sadnesses and sorrows that afflicted humanity. Yeah, in some ways, much of the much of the therapy was just simply built into the planet. You go out and you work that soil. Yeah, and you and you and and you grow the plant or you husband, the animal and you. I mean, so, so those rhythms and the life that are all built in and what happens with industrialization is that will will increasingly And I always had that with serfdom to a certain degree but now, in a machine world they literally become tools they become machine operators extensions of the machine and and and then also in terms of the mind body thing we just keep floating away from ourselves. And so the fact that we have many, many people who, you know, I've heard people say things like, well, well that person looks at home in their body and whenever I hear that I always think, where else would they be, but this is, this is exactly what's what's what we've been doing to ourselves and each other. Yes, and it's also I would say to that the connection because now you have me thinking about what is this connection between like touch and what I'm doing now and and I think I think maybe one of the one of it has to do with like listening. Because my one of the things my grandfather was he was a storyteller so is my dad, my dad's my dad's my dad's awesome. They're actually they're both still sober. They've been sober wonderful. Wonderful. They're awesome. Yeah, they're awesome. I'm, you know, the life after them being sober versus before it's almost like two different realities. Right. Right. However, my grandfather, he, I would listen to his stories over and over and over and over again, it didn't even matter. Right that he told me I've heard all of them 80,000 times but I always and that's something also to do with an old being the only child. I think it's hard to describe but I think that there's the relate your relationship with the adults around you. When you don't have other kids, I think that there's some kind of like something that goes on there that I, I'm not sure but I think it did for me, where I would every day when he would pick me up from school, right, like, I would hear him talk about stories, right over and over and over again, right. And, and I would show up for him and the same thing with my dad I would always I would bug him because I tons of questions all the time I was constantly asking him questions about this in his life and that in his life to hear the stories. And so there was this way in which listening. For me, was something that was deeply, deeply in my life, right. And so then when we, so then when we started to go and be in a well what's like what if you look at it well how do they do it. Well, you get together, right they set a context right. And then what do they do, they share. Yeah. And they share the most unbelievable things that they're not going to share any place else. Yep, exactly. Exactly. And so like, I would go to all the opening a meetings and like I do every way I all I wanted to do is be around these people. And so, starting at, you know, when I was 1112. All I wanted to do is be around all the people that were older than to me because I could start to hear and especially we got into a, they were stories that were like starting to be linked to these deeply personal things but also these transpersonal things. Yeah, and there's like just the ritual of doing that over and over and over and over again that has always like evoked such deep. I would say connectedness of, of just hearing, kind of like how incredible people are, and how incredible people's, anything that what it is is stepping in, into embody being able to through your listening being able to actually embody someone else's perspective and see it. See from their, from their perspective, which is the participating and seeing in that way is what grants gives the sense of presence. So I think I've just had a like a this, this connection between listening, really getting other people's perspectives and participating in that way is linked to this. I think for me that the, that orientation really allows something to come into presence and be filled with sense. And you can tell kind of the way I use my hands and stuff like this that it's very, it's very structural and like kind of getting a grip on something it's very very embodied has a lot to do with like listening and embodying and walking in someone else's shoes that allows so much more of the world to kind of show itself on deeper and deeper dimensions. Thanks, Paul. I had never quite really even thought about like explicitly made that connection between massage and listening and everything that we're talking about. This is a completely new angle. Thank you. That's why I think it's just helpful to that we tell our stories. Oh yeah, every time we tell it it's. Yeah, we see we see another aspect and even in the repetition of telling it. We discover new things. Yes. So, I don't know if you want to talk more about circling or I've kind of been pest I mean when we get on these conversations I kind of get into past remote and start probing but I don't want to be a be a one sided prober I don't know if there's things that you'd like to, we've got another half hour so so we've got plenty of time. Yeah, you bet. Well what I think it's one of the things about even just like what happened right here. Now is he like you're like, oh the massage school and hearing my story and then all of a sudden I'm the logos starts to gather more together right like the sense of just, you know we come in together in this conversation. Seems to like the logos comes in and kind of reveals both the ground and a new horizon. Right. And then the ground that personal but there's a way in which it's like you. You interested in me personally that personal connection that you have right that I can see in just your, the way that you talk with people right your interest with people. And then watching. This is one of the things that was going to ask you about to is that I've used it I've heard you use this term, a bunch of times, um, having conversation partners. Right, having conversation partners and it's always struck me as, as like having conversation partners, it's an unusual way of saying that. I never thought of it. It's just it's trucked to me because usually it's usually like you know when people talk about it's like, oh yeah, and a friend we had this conversation. Right. There's this like, yeah, me and my wife we had this conversation. But there's a way that you just kind of use the term I just wanted to kind of like explore this with you. Where you're like, it seems that you're connoting on some level that there's conversation. And that other people join us in it. And I, I, and it seems to be very related, I would imagine is very related to like all these people that you're meeting online. Right in the videos. I mean, I think that's the big take of that. That's like when you say conversation partners like, and what's been the impact of these kinds of conversations on you. On me. Well, part of the reason I use the word partners is because we're building something. And now especially that they're now, especially that I'm recording them and putting them on the internet, which is sort of a crazy thing. But we're, you know, just, just as we began talking about a human being is not just this, this physical creature, but it's this embodied, contextualized, storied being. And so with each conversation, we are in fact, we are building something. We're building something between us right now. Something's being, it's a continuation of the building in you. It's the continuation of the building in me. You know, it's, it's striking. It's striking that most of what we have about Jesus, which simply by virtue of texts is limited. But most of what we have with Jesus are his interactions with people. And interesting. You know, the, the, when I was so I grew up, obviously at my father was a minister. And my father. I had this weird by cultural growing up where the church that my father was was shepherding was mostly a black church. And then the ethnic group that I came out of, which this crazy Dutch reform thing that had schools. So I went to K through 12 with about 100 other kids that, you know, small kind of a small town within the New York metropolitan area, and then the black community. And so, where was I going with this? So, you know, this was, this is sort of the context in which I grew up. And this obviously then gets built into me. And so all of these stories get built into me. But Jesus in the Gospels. All the stories of all the different things that you. The Dutch immigrant stories the, you know, then then my father pastoring which meant helping people in all kinds of things. So, you know, once I got big enough that my father was so and so has to move. So it's like I'd go with my father and we'd use kind of the church suburban and move somebody's stove and fridge and you get into people's houses and and you'd see life from that side. So, so, so I grew up in this and then I go to college and it's obviously a deeply Christian upbringing and and very much learning faith by watching the decisions that my parents made for life. And then, then you go to college and when you're in college, you get to kind of think on your own. And so then I sort of start reading the Bible for the first time. And really with with different eyes because now I can decide if I want to throw it away or keep it. And I start reading the Gospels these stories about Jesus and they're strange because there's all these squabbles about dietary laws and healing on Sunday and all of these things. And it's like, what's what's this about? Why on earth have for 2000 years people been reading these stories and saying this is the most important book they can read. And this is this is utterly strange to begin to realize that the especially the Gospels are just once one interaction story after another. And, you know, some of the most interesting ones are sort of the one offs. So Jesus has his disciples, and that's a that's an interesting relationship between them because here's Jesus the Son of God getting frustrated with the disciples and say, how long do I have to put up with you? And he's only with him for three years. I've been with this church 21 years. So, you know, if God could get frustrated, well, I suppose we have a little bit of we can gain some forgiveness for some of that. But there's these stories like, you know, one of that I preached on a few weeks ago, where Jesus goes to the other side of the lake, which is a Gentile area. And he's this man with who is, you know, he has an unclean spirit. And that's a very deep term in the Bible. And when we say demon possessed, we kind of put it in a different frame when we do that. But he's he's living amongst the tombs, the village has given up on him. And I here in in this area of Sacramento, there are a lot of group homes, there are a lot of homeless people, I deal with people who are usually mentally ill and self medicating with street drugs all the time. And, and so I very, and I deal with a lot of unmedicated schizophrenics. And, and so, you know, when I read that passage, and I imagine that this man probably grew up in that town, and, you know, probably his mental illness, you know, and so they tried in the Dominican Republic, there was one, there was one home by some friends of ours, and we would go and have dinner with them. And we just hear somebody screaming and said, Well, who's yelling? Oh, that's the screamy guy. Well, who's the screamy guy? Well, we don't know, but the parents keep them locked in his room. Again, he's probably got some mental illness, and they don't know how to deal with them. So they keep them locked in the room and they shovel food in and you know, it's a third world country. That's how they're managing it. Yeah, so here's this guy, he's living by the tombs, they've tried to chain him, but he breaks the chains. He you know, Jesus comes off at the boat on the wrong side of the lake. And he re-enters the tomb. And he runs to Jesus and says the craziest thing, you know, he says, you know, get away from me because I know who you are. And then Jesus starts talking to him. And most of the conversation isn't recorded because probably the disciples are like, What the heck is going on here? We follow this crazy man around and the nuttiest stuff happens. We're fascinated with him, but we don't understand it. And then, you know, Jesus, you know, Jesus then talks to the spirit and says, What's your name? I am Legion for we are many. Don't kill us. Don't throw us into the abyss. Throw us into those pigs. And Jesus says, Okay, go to the pigs. They go into the pigs. And then the man and then the man is, you know, then all the villagers who are watching the pigs see pigs do very something unpig like the pigs, which a sane pig would never do this. The pigs, thousands of them run into the sea and drown. And so then the villagers are like, there goes the economy. And then they did this. And then they go and find this Jesus guy who came from the other side of the lake and his group of friends, along with this guy that they know so well, who everyone, the best they could do was banish him from the down and try and chain him and he's living in caves, which are probably tombs. And there he sits dressed and in his right mind. What was the last thing you just said? And there is this crazy man sitting dressed. Yes. And then his right mind. And so here are the people of the village. They just watched the pigs all drown themselves. They just see this guy who's now they've all known to avoid because he's a madman. But now he's sitting and having a rational conversation with this other guy who started this. And then the man who was, you know, possessed says to Jesus, can I come with you? And Jesus says, no, you have to stay here with your town in the community. And it's like, so here's a conversation. And so you read the Gospels and it's just one conversation after another. Well, what on earth is Jesus doing? Well, what he's doing is actually helping re-knit people together, not only in terms of their selves, but their towns and their families and their communities. He's actually re-knitting the world together. And it's all happening one conversation at a time. And yeah, there are the miracles and all of that. But you very much get the sense in the Gospels that the miracles are illustrations to the message that he's giving. Yes. And so why do I? Well, because, well, this is my craft. I'm a pastor. It's one conversation at a time. And sometimes the conversation is public to a room with people we call that preaching. Sometimes a conversation is a Bible study, me and about 10 people in a room. But often the conversation is like what we're doing here. And, you know, this is how, you know, I find it, you know, we began this conversation by noting that human beings need each other so deeply just to survive. Otherwise, we're not really human. And Reveke's, I mean, when I saw that video, I thought, wow, this is one of the best articulations of agape that I've heard where actually, and it's just true. It's the mother's sacrifice of herself and the father's sacrifice of himself that creates a human being. And your grandfather's sacrifice of himself. Yeah. Probably looking at this kid and saying, boy, the parents are struggling and this kid needs help and I'm going to pour my life into this kid. And that's how we live. That's how, you know, and so then also began at the beginning, we talked about, you know, why Christianity? Well, here at the center of it is a man who lives his life. He's saying the world's well-being at his personal expense and no child, no healthy child comes into the world without someone in their world pouring out their life into this child. And part of the reason, you know, it's so funny because we have this conversation about immigrants, you know, and I find the most sane people in America to be the immigrants so often. It's the Americans that are nuts. Yeah. Yeah. So, well, how do we connect? Well, I think it's the touch. Yeah. It's the meeting of, I mean, we're, a conversation that John Verveke did with Benjamin Boyce was, it's actually one of my favorite conversations of John's, where John talks about the fact, something that I've been thinking about for a long time. Well, what am I? Well, in many ways, the I that I associate with myself is this autobiography that sort of started with myself when I was like three or four, and you yourself mentioned a moment, Jung had a moment like this. I can remember a moment like this in my past where you reach a certain point of sort of self-awareness. You know, the autobiography has started, but then you reach a point of self-awareness and you begin to realize, oh my goodness. And in that self-conversation of self-awareness, you kind of locate yourself in the midst of other persons and in the midst of a world. And, and that's what we are. Now, obviously we began before that, but it was love that in a sense brought us to that point. And it was the sacrifice, you know, the good parent sacrifices themselves for their child in wise ways, because there are obviously the, there are things that look like sacrifice, which really aren't. And kids learn that eventually. My kids lately have been watching, some of them are home for the summer from college and they're watching Arrested Development. And you just watch that family and you just say, oh, we are such, we are so adept at falsehood to cover ourselves and, and try to achieve status cheaply and all of this. But no, so one, and so when I started doing this channel, you know, the first thing I thought, I was just fascinated by Jordan Peterson and what was happening around him. And I was fascinated by the fact that people were watching Jordan Peterson and getting interested in religion. And I thought, well, this isn't that strange. And so then I started making videos and then suddenly I've got all these emails and requests for to talk to me. And so I start doing, I start talking to people and I start talking to people on Skype. And then I realized after talking to a number of people, I bet you some other people would benefit by listening to the conversation. And so usually only about half of the conversations, people say, yeah, I'd be willing to share that. And then I throw it up on YouTube. It's like, well, see what happens. And then I, and then, you know, a bunch of people only watch the videos that I produce to talk about Jordan Peterson or Verbecky or whatever. But another group of people say, I always, I cut this from my mother because my mother said, oh, I only watch the conversations. And I thought, huh, this isn't that interesting. You know, she's, she's my mother loves me and she's proud of her son and all those things. But the videos where I ramble on about Jordan Peterson, but I'm not going to do that. But who is he talking to? Yes. What's their story? Yeah. How does that help me? Right. Right. You know, one of the things that I, I'm, one of the things I'm really interested in is looking at this phenomena, right? Because I think what we're doing or this part of the internet, right? Of where, where we're going to be, right? You know, you've heard lots of different people talk about this, but where for the first time, right? We, you're able to like have these long, meandering, difficult conversations that no one would think would tune into. Right. But it turns out that, that not only are people tuning into it, but they're, they're being affected in such deep ways. And so what I'm hearing you say actually, because it's interesting. I really appreciated the way that you, you just teased out, not just, not just the conclusion of the, of the Bible, right? Of the stories, but the structure of, of it. Like there's another level of like meaning that came out. I'd never quite looked at it like that. I haven't read the Bible a whole, a whole bunch, but like, I've never heard anybody could quite talk about it like that. That, oh yeah, that's what he does. It's like, Jesus goes around and he has conversations. And then it shows an impact to those conversations that seem to make things better. Right. Like just, that's a, that's a really, it's a really cool observation or a very cool thing to hear. And in some way, I, I mean, I think what we're inside of is one of the few places where technology is bringing something that is fundamentally not technological. Right. And I think has a lot to do with this, this experience of listening. And if you think about like the, like just the phenomenology of listening is just fascinating when you get into it. Right. Because, because listening, connecting to hearing, Heidegger kind of weaves the etymology all the way back into the original, like the oldest notion that he could find was that listening is very connected to sacred obedience. And if you think about it, obedience, it's kind of a strange word, but like when you think about to really obey something, like it's, you can't, you can't, you can't force the kind of like deep obedience. It's like, it takes all of your freedom, right. To deeply obey to something. Yeah. We're hearkening, right. To heark into something. And although it's video really, at least at this, at, at, with conversational form, it's really what you're doing is listening. And what, if you look at the phenomenology of listening, it's really interesting because if you look at just in terms of like sense capacities, right. Right. I can, I can, I can listen to you and I can, I can touch and still listen. Right. I can look around and still listen. Right. I can smell and still listen. But, but I can't listen to you and think. Right. It's really interesting. It's like, if I try to listen to you and you start thinking about the. Off you go. Yeah. All of a sudden I'm like, well, if you look at this, right. And then I think about the notion of like there's some videos and, and, and things I've listened to that I've gone back over and over and over and over and over and over again. Yeah. If you think about it as well to fully listen is to fully let you think the thought. Right. And then you're fully being obedient to the thought. Now, if you look at like for some thoughts, what it takes to be able to think that thought is actually like, especially when you get into philosophy and religious and these kinds of thoughts, right. In order to think the thought, in other words, to listen to you. Right. Some of these thoughts require me to step on a completely different pre-supposition. Right. It rests on a different ground that I'm not on. Such that like when I try to think it the first time I watch it the first time I'm like, I, I can sense an otherness there, a moreness there. Something's good there, but I don't quite get it. So you listen to it again. And you listen to it again. And at a certain point, and this is where I think listening becomes transformational. Right. Is that like at some point you in order you're able to like step on a different pre supposition. Right. That allows me to, oh, then think that thought. Right. And if you start changing your presuppositions, you start changing everything. Right. The way that you perceive. And one of the things I've noticed and I talked about this was John, this is part of our ongoing text dialogue. I had done an interview. And the person sent me the recording earlier and I don't think we talked explicitly about John or our conversation, just a little bit. And I listened to it. And I was listening to you. I was like, Oh, whoa. I said that in a way I've never quite said that. And that. And I saw the impact of these conversations I've been having with John. In in not what I was necessarily saying explicitly, but how the perspective I was coming from, and I didn't recognize it until I listened to it again. And so I like, you know, I texted him. I was like, Hey, listen, like I'm seeing the impact of our conversations on how I'm seeing. If you change it's funny. When you think about it, if you start to change how you see how you listen, how you think, how you perceive. Now you're talking about your whole, the way that you meet the world, the way that you act. Yeah. Yeah. I. So I'm kind of getting the sense of like, oh, whoa, you know, in so many different ways. Like listening to people like you, John, you know, all the different conversations that I'm involved in. The I'm being very impacted, right, through in a certain sense, harkening, right, and what it takes to harken and this is very mid much also my experience with reading Heidegger. Right. So when you read Heidegger, you don't really, you're not informed. Like, that's not really reading Heidegger. Like you read Heidegger because he takes you on a walk. Right. And you realize you realize that, oh, what he was actually doing is he's taking you on a walk around the lake. And then all of a sudden you start to realize that, oh, in in not understanding a word he said what it took to try had me stand in a place that he taught me how to see. He taught me how to listen and in reading Heidegger and then right when we were starting to do circling, right, reading Heidegger and doing circling. I had no idea why because I, I can't read like I'm, you know, so I don't know why I was like most things that you're talking about. I something seizes my interest in that. 20 years later I discover why I was interested in it. Right. Yeah. And then behind that is a whole career. The language trail is a whole religion or whatever. Yeah. Yeah. I just I, I, there's a, there's a, there's a way in which I see you deeply engaged in this as well. Right. Of like, I was wondering about what you think about that. I was wondering about this whole thing about this, this all of a sudden we have this dimension in our lives. As you're talking about, it's actually the, the, the dimension itself isn't new. Right. Like, we've been all that's all we've ever done is like talk and have conversations. However, strangely enough, we're having less and less of those. Yeah. Right. In the way that we're talking about it. Yeah. At the same time, there's a piece of technology that is is is is brought a deeper cut a deeper way of listening or the opportunity to listen at very, very deep levels to people that we wouldn't have otherwise. I, I think that's right. And I, I have since starting this thing thought, well, what the thing that most gratifies me, the thing I find most rewarding from my coming on two years of doing things on YouTube is that so so I was doing conversations with people and then the same people kept coming back to me for more conversations. And then new people, I couldn't have conversations with new people. And I thought, I'm a small church pastor. I've just started a very small church because I'm going to keep talking to these same dozen or two dozen people. And so I told them, I said, okay, if I've had two conversations with you, you can't sign up for another slot. And then they're all like, what do we do? And what they did was they started a discord server and they started YouTube channels and they're all having conversations with each other. And so what actually happened was, and I, because you realize very quickly as a pastor, you become a bottleneck for the community that when someone starts getting interested in the church, they want to meet you and get to know you and maybe be your friend and all that. But you're not really a pastor until they all get to know each other and have relationships with each other. Yeah. And so what happened was when I kind of put the kibosh on, okay, I'm putting a limit here, they all started talking to each other, suddenly, all of these new YouTube channels started and new meetups started and people are talking on the discord server. And it was like, huh, that's, that's because the thing is, if, if they're, if their growth is limited by access to me, I am actually now an impediment to their growth. Right. And so, you know, what I thought is that this, this YouTube thing is really a powerful instrument. And I agree with you completely in that. For, for a lot, in a lot of ways, it's sort of been, it's brought us in the wrong direction because people are, kids are watching YouTube instead of having conversations with their parents. But in this case, I think this is a redeeming use of it. Yeah. But, but also one of the things, so when I started making videos, one of the things, just as a pastor, I knew that the videos on my channel mostly are faces talking because see, because seeing each other's faces we talk is really important. Yeah. And when I started making videos about Jordan Peterson, I thought based on talking to people in my local meetup, a lot of people are watching Peterson out there and they have no one to talk about anything that they're learning with. And if you, and as every teacher knows, if you take something in, but you can't process it, either writing it out and your own words or talking about it, you're not going to learn it. Yeah. And so I decided that when I started making videos, I was going to watch his videos with people. Well, how can I do that? Well, I watched Twitch and people, I saw people are playing computer games and people are watching other people play computer games. What's with that? Yeah. There's tons of people doing that. And it's like, okay, well, we're lonely, we're disconnected. And even though this is, it would be far more fun to be in the room playing a game together, because again, generally speaking, women relate face to face, men relate side to side. Anyways, I thought I'm going to do videos where people can watch me listening to Jordan Peterson. And it sounds crazy. But I thought, no, because there are many, many people out there in the world that are all by themselves. And this is second best. But sometimes second best is all you got. Yeah, totally. No, I think you're right about, you're very much right about the listening. It's one of the things I learned. So you become a pastor and you think, oh, I've got all this information that I'm going to give to people. And in pastoral care, it's all listening. Yeah. In fact, I would say for me in circling and training people out of circle, most of the deep grappling with philosophy and these kinds of conversations, if anything, it's taught me how to listen. Right? All those all my version of those books back there. It's like, it's allowed me to it. Yeah, there's something about like, if I'm able to like, actually hear the author and get get these distinctions, right, because the more distinctions that you have, and the more you practice being able to make distinctions, right, the more you can hear, the more you can see, actually, it can only relate to something that's distinct, right? So this quality, I think one of the other things that I'm imagining that you're doing, especially you, because like a lot of what your videos are, especially the ones where you're, you know, that you're talking about where you're making videos of you listening and working out, Jordan Peterson, is on some level you're showing people, you're showing yourself grapple with ideas. And on some level, they're listening and getting the ideas with you, but you're also showing how to grapple with an idea and how to come and see in which is really I just I give you a lot of I want to acknowledge, I want to acknowledge what I think Christopher actually acknowledged you for as well, which is your, your willingness to go into these topics, and being a pastor, right, and being deeply Christian with a open mindedness, right, to explore, right, that to me is a it's an opening into that world, right, that I think is, I think is unfortunately rare, but I think you're you're demonstrating and embodying a possibility that that that that kind of that way of that way where you're not only not threatened by ideas, right, but but that there's there's a way in which the more ideas that you open to and more novelty that you bring in, it seems like creates a deeper ground in yourself, the more a more of a sense of solidity or security that opens to more novelty. And there seems to be that part of the energy and the feel of your channel is part of what's being displayed is this that autopoetic process, right of mutuality that is doesn't seem to be threatening you at all. It seems to be deepening deepening you. So I think you're like a really fine example. I appreciate that a lot. Well, I love what you said about the presuppositions and I hadn't really thought about it that way before, but you're right. And one of the things that sort of, it should bother me more than it does probably, but it really doesn't is that I really, I really, the breadth of people that I talk to on this channel channel really unnerve some other people. And I always find that unnerving fascinating because it's like, no, I don't know. But but you're right, because when you do listen to someone, and if you are actually listening, you do step up upon their presuppositions and inhabit that. And there is a fear that because you're right, our presuppositions are what locate us in this world. Yeah. And, and those presuppositions are, again, as we began this conversation, these are inherited, frankly, before we even start our own autobiography, they're inherited in our context and our parents and they might be that the faith that we inherit Roman Catholicism or Dutch reformed or whatever, maybe two, three generations old, but they're inherited in our context and our parents and they might be that the faith that we inherit Roman Catholicism or Dutch reformed or whatever, maybe two, three generations old, but they're inherited in our context and our parents and they might be that the faith that we inherit Roman Catholicism or Dutch reformed or whatever, maybe two, three generations old, but they're inherited in our context and our parents and they might be that the faith that we inherit Roman Catholicism or Dutch reformed or whatever, maybe two, three generations old, but they're inherited in our context and our parents and they might be that That's the whole point of your book. It's not a political book, but it's built in very deeply and very young. Yeah. And so, it's a, it's a, it's rightly a, a significant and and potentially hazardous thing to step upon someone else's presupposition and listen from there. that's the only way to connect with each other. And the terror of course is that we will lose ourselves. That we will, that the narrative thread that we are will break and we'll find ourselves lost. So, well thank you. That's a very big compliment. And I have to, in many ways I have to credit my father for this because I watched my father do it, I don't know if he did it consciously, but that was who my father was. One person who knew my father fairly well said, your father could get along with Hitler. And it's like, not that my father was anything but a bigot if you understand, the churchy bastard and the people he helped and all of that. But he had a tremendous capacity for non-judgmental engagement that didn't turn. I see some people with their non-judgmentalism, they don't have a core. But my father both had a core and knew how to engage without judging. And that of course is in many ways what it takes to do agape. What would you say was the difference that made that difference of, that he was able to open non-judgmentally to people, but in a way that he still had a core. I would imagine even like it exemplified his core. I think there's a lot of talk and then maybe John and I, we're gonna talk Friday, maybe we'll talk about this. We never know what we're gonna talk about for a talk usually. But there's all this talk right now about the problematic aspect of propositional truth. And obviously propositional truth alone as a part of the other three P's, the participatory, the perspectival and the procedural. I think part of it had to very much do with the Dutch Calvinism of our tradition. Because for all of the ways that this Dutch Calvinism bothers us in terms of its seeming lack of openness, what it affords for those who have it deeply, have it deeply built into their psyche is a radical openness. Because the core of my destiny is not finally dependent upon my performance, which means that I have been given something that I cannot lose. And that isn't to be used as license, but rather as a platform for agape. Because if I have something that I cannot lose, why don't I pour out that which I have for those who need? And my father lived that. And so I didn't know what I was picking up from him, but when people say things to me about me, I think I probably got it from him because he lived that. Yeah, totally. So and you, and I would imagine that there's like, you know, one of the things that is, I don't hear a lot of anymore is the notion of like mentorship and or apprenticeship. And I've noticed this in my class, actually I've noticed this in working with families. One of the things I do is I'll go into a family and I'll work with them as I may like basically move in for a week or two. And I'll just, and I have a knack for losing the guest in the house feel. I believe it. I totally believe it. In other words, people like let down. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And so. I totally believe it. In fact, they'll be upset if you leave. Why are you leaving? Yes. Exactly. It's so interesting because all of, because what'll happen is the dynamical happen, right? The reason why they have me there, right? And then I'll be in the corner, right? Sipping my coffee and they're forget I'm there. And you know, right before the dynamic like locks and loads, I'll be like pause, right? And then. I'll have them get, you know, like, you can feel the dynamic lift. And then the real tragedy is revealed, which is you have these people that are designed to love each other, have no idea who each other are. You begin to have the conversation. This kind of notion of like with a lot of them, one in particular, they were so isolated from each other. That I couldn't, there was no place that I could get, I could catch them because what are the magics of working with families like this is like, it doesn't have that, right? I'm just me and I show up, right? And I just kind of embed myself in there. And then usually most of like the intense activities like in the doorway, like in the car, we're out there for three hours because then these transition points is where all the stuff, the conversations that haven't been had, right, kind of happen. But with one family, they were so isolated from each other that I worked out something with the father where I was just like, okay, let's unplug the back of the house and just say that the power went out, which forced everyone to sleep in the living room. And so we all just welled in the living room and it forced everyone to like, to have to interact with you, to participate in that way, right? And one of the big things that was lacking is that everyone was so distant that the sons didn't have the, all of the walking along with their dad, coordinated activity of attuning, of like working with wood together, of like doing a job together. This way in which where you're not, you're not even like necessarily consciously talking to each other, but you're both in a context in which just the way that your dad orients, right, in some way gets into your body and your inner, and that in some way, that deep, that deep sense of attunement with each other, right? The participation is, I think, one of the magics of these conversations is on one level, there's what we're talking about, right? But on one level, the topic of what we're talking about, almost could be anything sometimes, because there's another thing that is transparent to us, or like not necessarily like front and center, is that all of the coordinated activities, it's so rich that I think is, kind of makes us mutually transform in some way. I agree 100%, just look at a marriage. How many times, how much time people spend together, not talking about do it, you know, but there, boy, there. I got to run, but you and I could talk all day. Absolutely. I have no question about that. You and I could talk all day long. Absolutely. Well, we will talk again. And maybe next time I'm over in the Bay Area, I'll shoot you a text or something and just let you know, and if you're free or something, we can, although people will be upset because we had conversation and we didn't record it for them to listen, but. So thank you so much, Guy. I really wish I didn't have to run. So good meeting you, my friend. So good meeting you. Okay, bye-bye. Take care, bye-bye.