https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=GpOdxYg1N6c

 There we go Well good to see you again Adam. Yeah, good to see you and we spoke about a month ago or so, correct? Right, right. And you were and you were just sharing how you had some thoughts after you watched my conversation with Nick Right. Right. So Nick talked about Kind of a vision from God, I guess you would call it maybe And I had a kind of a similar experience not you know, not anywhere like like his but Weird Most of them are. Yeah I'm losing my mind and you know, but it was it was completely so I think I should just go through I took some notes so I can just get it over with them. Okay, it's Okay, it's spit it out. Okay So I'll just take you through what happened I touched on it Or I mentioned Something happened in in the Navy when I was told me that in our first conversation so Yeah, I'll just talk about that. I Think God was trying to get through to me and I needed a little more than a kick in it in the butt So, uh, so I was in the Navy I was in training for submarines and Fell down a staircase outside and When I hit the bottom we got a traumatic brain injury and a seizure disorder so I had my first seizure then and They just kind of kept coming and they were trying to get me on medication and Nothing was It would help but it wasn't it was clearly not the right medicine. I was still having seizures and At one point the neurologist the civilian Kind of contract neurologist on base stopped showing him to work And Through it through this whole thing. I the Navy treated me very well and and took care of this and it's just it was just crazy circumstances and so So Well, she many I mean this is as a pastor. I know that the medical Doctors can do a lot, but they can't do everything and and often doctors It's it's trial. It's trial and error in many many cases, especially with You know something anything that has to do with the brain. It's just trial and error What else can you do yeah, yeah well, I I'm sure they know a little bit more but Yeah, and it and her her course her case load was huge. I mean if she was there is a clinic specifically for brain injuries on the base and I Think she was just overwhelmed and couldn't couldn't handle it. So so she left and that's when The medicine that was on Started I started having petite mild seizures along with hallucinations In it, you know alongside my like the the big, you know shake on the ground seizures So Yes, so that started happening and there was no neurologist to switch my seizure medication and we didn't I don't Think at that point we thought that that was what it was So the psychiatrist in the same office prescribed me like anti anti psychotics and That didn't do a thing If anything it made it worse, I don't know but but for For about the whole month of October and in 2013. I was just having these crazy hallucinations every Every once in a while and And a few stuck with me, but I'm just gonna talk about one Yeah, so so we I was in the car with my friend and and we're going around this bend and I see it a sailor kind of like in my vision in front of me and And then I went into a seizure in that moment and then in within that little frame of time time kind of slowed down and The guy across the street shot me in the head and as like the bullet was coming towards my my head and and that is it was like, you know going into my brain I Came to I Just got I got like knowledge of of All at once of like 20 letters in my handwriting like all in my all in my head at once and it was everything Everything I would need to tell everyone I loved throughout their life If I were to die at that point And I I've had some issues with depression Especially through all that process and After after watching Jordan Peterson's videos I I started to analyze it Because before it was I didn't think about it. I didn't you know, I didn't first of all, I didn't want to process it, right? But also I I didn't think it would be of any use to me So now the way I view it God was kind of saying like you're You still have something to do like you're still You know like you're gonna live the rest of your life out and Stick stick through it Yeah, that went a lot quicker than I thought it would Just like Shook my world like that month was crazy. I there was one there was this there was this like Predatory bird in my room and it would it was like I was laying in bed and I Was looking at simultaneously it like from my perspective and then from the bird's perspective and It like lands on a huge black bird lands on my chest and starts like opening up my rib cage Like looking for something And now when I'm still processing I think it has to something to do with like inner reflection and And something like that but There's when I was reading Jung's autobiography, which apparently from what I've learned now isn't quite an autobiography, but hmm, you know, I was struck by all of the all of the inter I mean the one of the takeaways I had from that book was you would I'd always kind of laughingly seen people interpreting dreams, but from that book I Derived an appreciation for what we can learn from Experiences like these it's not easy to know exactly what they're telling us or what we can know about ourselves from them, but it's You know that the brain is just such a I I Think I think part of what I've learned through this Year to half with Jordan Peterson is it is a deeper appreciation for The and this is exactly what I took away from that young book is is the the connection between the The outer story that both of us can both of us and just about anybody in the world can easily Understand you and I are having a conversation via this video chat. We've shared stories a little bit I've said some things about my life. You said some things about your life, but there's this there's this layer of Being is getting overused there's this layer of stuff That is is inside and outside of us. And so when I'm for example Working with someone who is suffering maybe it's depression Maybe it's they they have some other they have some other issues that are going on Psychologically socially, I mean it's it's basically it's all one thing And and so what gets manifest then through these Through these dreams through these hallucinations Through these experiences because when we use the word hallucination in our context It's a dismissive word Right Yeah, like it was a like a mirage or something, right? Like like it's of no value Right. Yeah, and then when Peterson says like when he talked and he when he talks about dreams and then you wonder why we have them Eight hours a night, you know, or however many hours a night every single day of our life It seems obvious at that point that there is something there To look at at least well and and what you know We all know from experiencing our dreams that they they are related to our lives and And even at a fairly facile level if you go to bed and you are anxious about something Well, you're probably going to have a very very very very very very very very very very very very anxious dreams Many of us have the experience of fever dreams. And if I have a fever If I have a fever in the night, I almost always know it because I'm used to the kinds of dreams I have when I have a fever so It isn't nothing that we're dealing with and and it might be that okay there's a traumatic brain injury or or even when I'm I'm talking to someone who is Who is struggling with Just about anything in their life You know, this was again the big takeaway from that autobiography I read of Jung where he's working. He's a young is a young doctor He's working in a mental hospital and the older doctors just basically tell him don't talk to all those patients. They're crazy and he's kind of like Listen that kind of the Thing So he kind of defies those doctors because they were taking a fairly materialistic, you know Well, that's it's there's brain chemistry that's wrong. It's we don't understand any of that they're all just crazy and Jung actually starts to talk to these patients and listen to them and begins to understand that this this is the the story verse as I call it and the the matter I mean this is all connected and Maybe we should pay a little attention And and our our our cultural context is so incredibly dismissive of So much of that because we have gotten so full of ourselves With respect to what we can do with with matter with chemicals and with all of these things right and and you know, even your experience now here you have your list and You're telling me this and I know that What sounds just like a few words to me? This is really big stuff for you Yeah, I mean it Like I honestly I don't think It was just such a profound realization I to make To interpret the way I did and I and I think that's the right way I don't really care what when anyone else thinks but It has given me such a strong I Mean it's changed my life like it's given me a faith that I don't that I know I would not have been able to have Any way else yeah, and and to me that doesn't speak now, you know I'm sure some listening to this video if we do publish it I'm sure some listening to this video would again be dismissive and say as as one could say well people have a lot of experiences and There are and I sit down with people who have experiences that are they simply don't co-relate to the rest of the world and In certain ways so that we as a community Pretty much dismissive there was a there was a woman who I have a lot of experiences with schizophrenics and in this neighborhood because there's a lot of group homes and there was a woman who was a schizophrenic and You know she was basically squatting on the church grounds for a while And we didn't have a childcare center so I could kind of get away with some of that stuff with some of the homeless people And One night she she calls me because she had my phone She calls me and gets my voicemail and I kept this voicemail. She like kind of leaves this three-minute screed about how She knows what I'm doing. I've got her family locked up in the Living Stones dungeon and That on the radio they know too So I'm not gonna get away with it. So I should let her family out of the dungeon and it's like I But so Living Stones Christian Reformed Church does not have a dungeon no, okay, I am not We don't even have a basement or in California Wow, that's right. That's right. We don't have a basement I've never met her family. I am NOT Keeping them in a dungeon or torturing them or anything like that And I know that as as sure as I'm sitting here talking to you but There's a reason That you know, there's stuff with her family the more I got to know her You know, I began having kind of that young experience listening to her. It's like alright, this is crazy But it's not only Crazy, right, but it makes sense Yeah, there's it's not just completely random what she's saying, right? It's based on her experiences and her that's right. Yeah And so, you know what you're describing and This is one of the things I appreciated about CS Lewis and learned this quite early on because my father loved CS Lewis and he read the Narnia Chronicles fairly early on I could hardly sit still but my older sister sat through all of them I was a I was 280 HD. Oh, yeah. Yeah Yeah, but but you know CS Lewis and in the line the witch in the wardrobe when You know Peter is concerned about Lucy because she's telling these stories of going through the wardrobe and meeting mr Tumnus and and the professor says well, do you know your sister to be a liar? Well, no. Well, then why don't you listen to her? well, well there can't be a wood in winter with a fawn through the door of the wardrobe and And The professor well the professor also knew something because of the magicians nephew, which is a prequel that Lewis wrote later Well, there's lots of things we don't know why don't we listen to each other Mm-hmm. And and I think part of the liability we've had culturally has been We got dismissive About too much and And and categorically Right because anyone listening to your story that you told before is your life Is your life but this might make Sam Harris a skin crawl is your life better with God you tell me Oh, yeah Yeah, and and and you know, sometimes I'll talk to people about you know Paul in the in the prison and Philippi that's a story in the book of Acts Where Paul has now been arrested for something you didn't need to be arrested by he didn't play the Roman citizen card He is in stocks on the floor of the jail, which means they basically set you down and they splay your legs in In these stocks which you know, you might do it for a minute say well, that's not so bad yeah, but stay there all night and so he is basically being tortured and What is he doing? He is singing songs of praise to God and The rest of the prisoners are listening because here's the thing if you're around crazy enough You know crazy But when you see this guy and he's happy in the way he is you say That's I'm not quite sure it's sane But it ain't that kind of crazy over there and I wouldn't mind having some of that crazy in my life. Mm-hmm and and that when I When I listen to people tell their stories like your story like Nick's story You know, I can't I can't I withhold judgment because well, first of all why judge Yeah, it's not like you have to make a decision on what I you know, no like how you interpret it. No matter No, and you can hold it You know, you can hold it open like Just not make a decision. Yeah on what you think That's right. And and from what I've now I've seen you through a very small window But you know you you sent me this and I get letters from people sometimes usually from jail or prison and Well, I get a lot No, no not from this Jordan Peterson thing cuz they can't get internet there Are you always gonna say no no, no, but from people that I've known through my ministry who? Okay, yeah in prison and right now I'm getting letters from a young man who was a He was a teenager when he was in this church and he goes to jail prison and he writes me and if you read his letters It's like this guy needs serious psychiatric help he just does and you can read it in his letters, but You don't show me signs of that. No, I could use psychiatric help None of us are as clear as we should be there can be perhaps but you know This is not this is not the act. This is this is not the workings of a crazy person. I Would say I'm pretty put together aside from Crazy month Yeah, yeah Pretty solid in in Reality I'd say and and there are signs that you can tell that you know, you're you're in a home Yes, it's clean You know Relatively relatively it's my mother used to have a little plaque up It said it said our home is clean enough to be healthy but dirty enough to be happy But you know I I you know and I appreciate you know I appreciate you getting back to me because wanting to talk more about this because what you know what Nick's video You know part of the reason I really wanted to share it is Nick feels alone, but he feels alone because of our culture Yeah, I was actually gonna say um If you want to put me in contact with him, that'd be that'd be cool Okay, cuz I live in New York and it's you know up states not as Not as secular as New York City, but it's still I None of my friends I can talk about this stuff, too Yeah, I mean I have I have this Instagram page Adam not orthodox that I share And I've met so many awesome people through that I Talked to Mason you talked to Mason Rete I Yeah, but we we talk every every few weeks on the phone on his lunch break. Oh wonderful She's brilliant. I feel so stupid every time I talk to him. I learned so much. Oh, he's a smart kid I'll tell you he's sharp. Yeah But yeah, I think that'd be cool to to you know have a little chat every once in a while with Nick and Whoever else and really But you know what what I'm saying is that as a culture oh, yeah, yeah, sorry this this This secular program, you know Sam Harris wants to talk about how religion has hurt people Absolutely, it's you know, bring your stack and I can add to it because a pastor I see I have front row seat of of how religion can hurt people no question about it. Oh, yeah No question about it. Oh, yeah at the same time. Well, let's talk about secularism and how people have experiences and and what we do is we We put them in a closet and we silence them and we shame them and we de legitimize their experience because we say Why well, it's because we as a culture are well, I can't handle that because I can't explain it Mm-hmm and and what that does then pastorally to people is Well, I'm one on one hand it it means that there's a certain level of society where everyone's pretending like these kinds of things don't happen, but then it also brings things puts things down into the underground and so then then there are things that that people whisper because they don't want to lose status because You know in your case, I mean People might have a little bit more sympathy to you because you had something physical that they could refer to Right. It's very tangible that the brain injury and and the medicine that the role of both of those in that I Think saves saves it from just being bonkers Yeah, whereas someone else who has a history of what we call mental illness You know, that's part of the reason there's so much stigma about it. Mm-hmm. And you know, so this woman who? Was not on her schizophrenic meds You know, and so she was homeless at that point she was disabled she had a really bad leg so she kind of limped around but you know there were times when she could be a you know, a really delightful woman and have lovely conversations and then There are other times when she'd be in the on the church grounds screaming her head off in the middle of the night yelling at the demons in her world and Just you know just She you know, she moved on and probably wound up in jail and you know got on the psych meds and you know, but our On one hand there's so often so little we can do to help people On the other hand even what might Maybe we could do we often don't do in California One of the things that happened a number of years ago was there was a whole bunch of patient rights Legislation that went through that, you know, we used to lock people away a little too quickly and now it's like you're free to be crazy out there and There are very few ways to And it's not healthy for them out there Alright, I met a woman in the hospital who? had Who doesn't doesn't leave the house? she orders all of her food once a week from a pizza and sub place and freezes it all and Was convinced that people were breaking into her house to film pornos in her living room Because she has such an immaculate living room Of course they would want to use that as a studio It's also and people get mad at me sometimes when I'll talk about this because some of the stuff is just so darn funny Go on I'm sorry, and it doesn't mean you don't have a heart for it. It's There's a sense of humor about everything I guess but besides so she you know, and she's she's on her own and The pizza shop hadn't heard from her in a few weeks and we're getting Stressed about it because this woman is this is where how she gets their food. She they know that and So she had she had hit her phone So that the people coming in at night couldn't use it And then she lost it she couldn't find the phone and then so she's running out of food and and It's just not a good situation because now she can't call 9-1-1 She can't she can't do anything and ended up being admitted to this hospital You know for what I'm sure something happened that triggered triggered it But but that was her state before that and and she's a lovely lady, you know, like Talk to her every morning and and Most of the time she's there but she does have this side that's that's Makes it hard to function out in society alone Yeah, and and so, you know one of the things I think about too is how So so as a society we've been evolving we've gotten less and less agrarian we've moved out of villages to Into cities I can think of a man growing up he would babysit for us sometimes He was pretty significantly back in this day. We called it retarded. It was pretty significantly impaired but probably early on in his life someone had taken him under his wing and he was cleaning up and working in a bakery and you know his whole life he had a job working in a bakery and He could learn how to do things and and And I think if he had been born in the 70s or 80s You know would have been on disability, you know all with the best intentions to take care of him But his life would have you know There there's there's no Peterson talks about this with respect to IQ there's no way to There's no way for him to contribute and be in community And I look at that I just think you know Okay, so we give them money right and no meaning. Yeah, no meaning And and okay watch television Your whole life, you know, there's only so much you could I mean, yeah, I I kind of So after that After that whole mess and I got it out of the Navy. I Just kind of like fell apart a little bit And just didn't feel safe like I didn't had this horrible death anxiety and So I'm not I was on disability and and wasn't leaving a house And There's only I mean it's it's a crazy amount of time when you don't have a job and you don't have Purpose when you and especially if you're Dealing with something like that or or even more serious And it's yeah, it's just really easy to fall into that pit of despair and and Yeah And and and they're so, you know almost everyone Has someone in their family Someone in one of their circle of loved ones who Has something that touches this And Or has or can relate to this, you know And I you know, I did a I did a show on I did a best of Freddie this week because Freddie I loved that That was great. There's there's some old shows that have Some real jewels in them. That might be a good segment everyone. So yeah Yeah, if Freddie, you know if it'll be a while before Freddie and I can make our show. I'll make a few more but you know, I One of the things Freddie has Is so Freddie's father and mother You know Members of the Christian Reformed Church from birth and then they met each other and then when they moved to Sacramento for his father's job They joined the Christian Reformed Church and and both both both of Fred's parents grew up in little rural California ag towns that had Christian Reformed Church And then they moved to Sacramento and but there weren't a lot of black folks in those ag towns and so then we got the Sacramento They had to get used to this much more urban, you know, significantly black congregation But you know, they made all those transitions and and so now because Fred You know because Freddie grew up in this church. It was baptized in this church There might he might not be living in a village But he was a little bit of a black man There might he might not be living in a village, but there is a village of people around Freddie that care for him That you know and I as pastor I do that as that's part of my job But for most of the other people in the church that don't that's not their job but they look out for Freddie and and they pray for Freddie and they take him out to lunch and they They give him their phone number, which I warn them about because we call 10 times a day sometimes. And he's calling so often because, yeah, he's got money and he's got medical insurance and he can't get a job because then he can lose his benefits. But then what to do with the day. And then if you're, say, so California closed the big mental institutions as most states and have these little group homes, which theoretically could be a far better thing, but in practice, you know, not a great system. And really, yeah. And so it's just it's just very hard. It's very hard. So and and I deal with a lot of homeless folks on the street. And. But you know, the world is life is hard. And even those for whom they're. Then then there are those for those who will never have a diagnosis. Well, except they keep multiplying the the mal the names for the maladies. But, you know, normal folks who can hold down a job and and get married and raise kids. Well, there's plenty of craziness and suffering in those spaces, too. And. Right. Maybe it's just easier to mask. Exactly. Exactly. And sometimes the kind of stuff that gets masked is is just as prone to suffering. I just started reading Andrew Claven's memoir. I heard him on Ben Shapiro Sunday. Yeah. Oh, and so far I'm about five chapters in. It's a lovely book. I mean, he's a good writer. He's a writer. Oh, yeah. Yeah. But it's a it's a lovely show a couple of times. Yeah. Talking about being writ, you know, and he was raised in the New York City area is about 10 years older than I am. So I can connect with some of the story. But, you know, what was it? What did Tolstoy was Tolstoy's comment about the family? You know, all happy families are the same, but every family, every miserable family is miserable in their own way, something like that, because there are just a million ways for everything to go wrong. Right. That's. Seems like there's there's I don't think there's any family that doesn't have something that's gone seriously wrong. Yeah. Yeah. In some shape or form. Yeah. Yeah. And I grew up, I grew up with both of my parents, just wonderful people. But they weren't perfect. You know, they were. I'm sure. Yeah. And, you know, I, I, I have no. I can take no credit for what, in my opinion, although some people in the comment section say I was terribly abused by my parents, given me all this religious BS. Oh, brother. That gets back to the health thing, because. You know, parents, the parents did the work, took care of their kids, you know, did all of this to to. Health is a. Health is a fragile thing. Mm hmm. That's true. But I appreciate you, you know, wanting to share. I wish more people would share their stories. And again, a lot of there's a lot of reluctance to because you lose status. Yeah, I mean, I was kind of stressing about this for the past few weeks. We don't have to post it, so. No, I'd like you to post. I'll give you the go ahead now. But it just seemed, you know. Seemed right. And it and. You know, your audience isn't in the millions. It's. Some people say it will be. I have my doubts. Hopefully it minds better. My video is long. I'm sorry. How are you? How are you doing on time? I'm OK. I'm OK. I get another 20 minutes or so. So if you got something else you want to talk about. Yeah. Well, I've got this stack of books. You've been you've been influencing my my reading list. So what you've been reading? The Lord in his prayer. And to write. OK. I haven't read that. I haven't read that. I haven't read that. I haven't read that. I haven't read that. I haven't read that. I haven't read that. And he writes. Wow. More books than I can read. What do you think of the book? I blew me away. I mean, it would. I bought another one. Oh, we're. He writes so many books because people buy them. I know. Oh, what was the other one? Oh, why? The book was about the good news and why it's good and why it's news. So that was that was I picked it up at Barnes Noble the other night was out there. Just because I liked this book so much. And it just went through the Lord's prayer and kind of gave me a little insight. Like I never knew, you know, you say we say us a lot in that. And I say it like I I mostly prayed that during the day. So while I'm washing my hands, I'll say the Lord's prayer. Well, that's a good that's a good habit. My priests recommended it. Isn't that great? I can see wonderful. It's the perfect length when you use soap, wash your hands, dry off, and then you're done with the prayer at that point. And you're a captive anyways. You can't fumble around with your phone. Yeah. Yeah. But so it's yeah. So we say us a lot. And I feel weird saying us like alone in a bathroom or wherever, you know, when I'm saying it and I'm not around people. But he says, I don't think I think this is. Yeah. But he says, you're when we're saying us, it's everyone. Everyone. Everyone. Whether they're praying it or not. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And that was I'm going to think about that a lot differently. As I say it now. Let me see what else I highlighted. There's this lovely way in which and this is something that I think the church tends to get wrong sometimes. The gospel. It's right there in the gospel. It's that Jesus dies for the world. And now. OK. And that actually gets played out. The Calvinists have been wringing their hands about that with the question of of can't think of the tulip now. Total depravity. A limited atonement. L. The question about what's what how does that work with respect to this? That's what limited atonement and the Calvinist question is about. But the idea that the gospel is always this is God's gift to the world. And then there's these universalist passages in the Bible that just as in as in Adam all fell and descend in Christ. All are made alive. All. But some passages are more particularist and other passages are more universalist and the Bible has both of them. And so give us this day. Give us us. Yeah. Everyone. That's right. Yeah. Not just my neighborhood. Not just my family. Give us this day our daily bread. And deliver us from temptation. Now in the New Testament there's some nuance on that too in terms of who is us. But that's that's actually part of the reason why I often ask in my videos when people say it's like the pause. Who exactly are we. Is that just one out. Is it limited. So really cool. Right. Yeah. Yeah. And and then I have screw tape letters and the problem of pain. And I read I read about half of mere Christianity. But it doesn't like like all this Sam Harris and Peterson stuff and that book I just find myself like I'm not interested in it anymore because it's I'm already past that point and I feel like super selfish thinking that like well I'm I'm beyond being an atheist now. But like it's just not something to care about anymore. Yeah. Well interest is funny that way and because what is interesting for us now and you know screw tape letters. Oh that's a that's a fun book. And it's a yeah. Have you started it yet. No no. But I was talking to a woman at church about it because she asked what I was reading and I told her this list and and she's like oh you have to tell me how you like screw tape letters. We should talk about that. Feature interests. So yeah. The problem of pain problem of pain when you read the problem hate to you know why is an Amazon or why why why is it you know Harper and Rowe you know endorsing my channel I keep selling books for them. No I know right. But to read Lewis's problem of pain a good companion for that one is a grief observer. Because wrote the problem of pain fairly early in his career as a Christian. And then when joy dies his his beloved wife. Oh you know and it's really interesting because of course Lewis lived through World War One and you know there's so many biographies of Lewis. Lewis has been such a fascination with so many people that just the books around Lewis make actually the corpus of Lewis books small small but so to read the problem of pain everything can be just kind of a little a little tied up tight and put in a bow in the problem of pain. But then when you read a grief observed that's where you know then you get pain. And so it's if if you are you're probably in a good place now to read the problem of pain. But if you're really struggling you'll find communion in a grief observed. OK that's where Lewis you know all of those all of those answers that he felt when he kind of felt like he had a handle on his life when his wife dies and he doesn't have a handle on his life. He pours himself out in a grief observed. So Tim Keller my favorite Tim Keller book is his book on pain and suffering and that's actually two books and he says that initially he says I'm going to go through the philosophical stuff about pain and the problem of evil and the deal with that philosophically. But as a pastor it's good to know the philosophical stuff about pain but it's usually not what people need to hear when they are in pain. Right. Yeah. I found just having like I don't know how I developed this or acquired it but just having faith in God's plan or way or whatever is a tasteful load off man. And I has done wonders for me. And again I don't know like it. Don't ask me how I would struggle to tell anyone else like here's how you trust in God. I don't know. But yeah. Now that's right. And you know Heideberg catechism you can look that up on the Internet. Lord's Day 10 on Providence where I you know and too and I'm blessed by my parents having raised me in the church and what's the blessing of having grown up in a healthy church with healthy parents and having this built into you early is that I remember there was a period of my life where things were really falling apart and through that time I never you know I always knew OK everything can go wrong in my life but I have a deep sense that no God is with me. And this is you know that's one of the amazing things about Christianity is that common religion says do good things should be rewarded by having good things do bad things or get punished basically karma. And the answer to that is Jesus because in Jesus you have three archetypal you have the perfect man who you know has a disaster of a life especially his last three years. It's true. It's the answer to the globe. I mean Job doesn't get an answer in a sense God tells Job you know I can't he doesn't even say oh yeah the Hasatana and I had a little wager on you you know trading places style. It basically says Job you can't handle the truth. So little puny brain person you know I will show you how great I am. Deal with it. But then Jesus comes and you know really opens up who God is in his heart. But that then exposes us to all of the unanswerable questions. If you're if your son asks for a fish will he give him a snake. Well we get snakes in life and so then we say Father you've given me a snake. Well Jesus was given a snake. So yeah. Yeah. Well here and then the last book. You're the Australian gentleman I think would like this on the mystery on the cosmic mystery of Jesus Christ by St. Maximus the confessor. And that's a recommendation I shouldn't even recommend it because they haven't read it. I've only watched a lecture on it and it's on my short list but. Oh OK. A lecture on YouTube. Yeah. Let me actually. I've got his name. So he's a professor somewhere and he's just uploading his videos like Peterson did. And there's this whole playlist he has on the early Christian. Really. Desert fathers and the early Christians. Early Christian writing and I'd like to see that because I don't know near part of the blind side of a Western Protestant theological education is it's woefully deficient on church fathers. Yeah. I. It's so strange. There's there's so much there. But the guy's name is Ted Sherman. And. Oh this clip I'm looking at I clipped out. He says he's talking about Maximus and what Max says about. This the second coming and and why the Earth Earth still exists and he says that. The only reason the the the the the the the The only reason the the the the world is still the way it is and we haven't seen the second coming yet is because holy people are praying. I'm going to butcher this but holy people are praying all the time that God won't. Won't end it so that. All can be saved because there's still some lost and you know first all it until we can. Save everyone I think is the idea that was a common so in Luther's time that was a common refrain to that there was a prophecy that went out that God was going to judge the world but certain group of monks had been praying and so God lengthened the time so. That's I thought I thought it was just a beautiful that he's got some lectures until we have faces which I think is is CS Lewis's best work of fiction Bayou Wolf. He's got Tolkien. I haven't gone through right. Yeah I haven't gone through most of his channel. I just searched for a lecture specifically on the on the book and found and found one but he's not and found and found one but he's pretty good. Maybe that's a different Ted Sherman. Oh let me see. He's. Oh no same Ted Sherman cool. Well I described. Good good. Yeah maybe I'll see you make a video on it. There's there's so many interesting people to make videos about. I mean I swear I could I could do this. I already make a lot of videos. Oh yeah. I've got many videos. There's too much. Yeah but you do a great job. Well thank you. I like them. I you know it's it's probably good. I can't make as many videos as I want. But it's we were there. There's there's so much cool stuff. Yeah yeah. And I'm just every time I find something like it like this is such a big thing to stumble across because there's so much content from him. You know it's like finding another Paul VanderKlaai. I remember I binge watched your channel over the summer. Just like everything I could get my hands on. Part part when when people tell me that part of the is like I feel this great weight of responsibility and I'm worried. I hope I'm not messing people up out there. No no I think I think the response you've gotten is pretty pretty good right. Well it's it's been deeply humbling and gratifying. I and you know so you look at this guy that you just mentioned and I'm sure he's a you know I'm sure he's just a brilliant guy and you know he's got a lot of experience. You know the three point three you know thirty three hundred subs on his channel. I mean there's no and you know PewDiePie has how many millions. I mean there's no justice to any of this. Yeah you know it's I don't know. But I it's I don't know. It's this whole thing has just been fun for me. And you know we had our last we had our meetup on Sunday and those meetups are just a highlight of the month because it's just so much fun. You know our friendships are developing between individuals. It's it's a lot like planting a church and except that it's I don't know where all of this goes. You know I'm I'm on my own little strange journey out of my hobbit hole. You almost can't even I mean you can't predict it. So why even write write try and figure it out and just plug along and write. Do what you're doing. Yeah. Why why stop. And yeah you know I'm going to try to I'm going to try to get a group together at church and watch one of Jonathan's videos on what he did about the icon of I forgot what the name of the last judgment I think. Yeah. Yeah I I got to catch up. Jonathan's been so helpful in a lot of ways. I really appreciate the work that he does and he's just such a he's just such a fun guy. He's a great guy too. I mean it just like meeting him and spending that the time with he's just a really genuine guy. And and I don't know if I told you this but he's he's just I've I haven't met his family. I met his son. He brought his son along. OK. And just that little peek into to that part of his life. His son is such a well behaved. I mean just like we're eating breakfast and and Jonathan's head we're having these really deep conversations at breakfast with this whole massive table of people and his son's just son just gets up. Jonathan didn't say a word to him and he just starts collecting people's empty trays and bringing them into the galley or whatever whatever. You raised right. Yeah. Good job. Yeah. Oh that's wonderful. So it was good. And I love that. I mean the videos that's definitely my highlight of of both your channels is when you guys talk it's always just really fascinating to hear you guys. Because you're coming from different perspectives but the same goal or the same you know. Yeah. Well I had I have a hope to I have a hope to maybe do a conference out here or something and find enough seed money to fly Jonathan out. And so we could we could meet face to face and maybe have some longer conversations on stage and that would be that would be a lot of fun. So and it's a stretch because you know my crowd fund that. Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah that's actually not a bad idea. We do that. I had a source for it would get getting the seed funding for things that my church doesn't if I had a big wealthy church I could you know set thousand dollars aside and we'll do this. But church doesn't have an extra ten thousand dollars to set aside. So right. I'm sure you have other projects going on too. Well we have very little projects it's mostly just trying to stay alive. So it's good. Yeah. Well thank you so much Adam. And yeah it was great talking to you. I will I will send this to you just to be sure. OK. That you want to post it and then I'll probably post it in a few days or so. Great. OK. So I'll send it to you. I'll send it to you. I'll send it to you. I'll send it to you. I'll send it to you. OK. All right. You take care. Yeah you too. Bye bye.