https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=H3XSGZYL76U

 Hi, this is Paul. This is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my Sunday sermon. Now, we've been looking at this little chart of the Church Year. The Church Year is a very ancient and widespread way of organizing a year. We live into calendars in many different ways. There's no holiday or public holiday for the Trinity, which probably surprises some of you and doesn't surprise others. Christmas is the holiday for Jesus' birth. Easter is the holiday for Jesus' resurrection. Good Friday is the holiday for Jesus' crucifixion. Ascension Day is for Jesus' ascension. Pentecost, the coming of the Holy Spirit. God the Father doesn't really have a day. Maybe you might think Earth Day would be a holiday for God the Father or maybe New Year's Day. But if you look through this little map of the Christian calendar, you'll see, well, this is kind of interesting. Now, electionary is a tool that some churches use quite a bit. We've been using it over the last number of months to sort of organize ourselves. And why does that help? Well, it helps the always have a bit of a buffer for competing agendas. The now of the news cycle of the stream of public events can, if we're not careful, dominate a preaching diet. The pastor's hobby horses, what the pastor feels passionate about. Some churches, the pastor, he'll get up and hear what he's thinking about this week. And maybe that's true of me to some degree. It's hard to avoid. Programmatic demands of a local church. These are the things that our church is doing right now. So the sermons are integrated into it or denominational giving demands. Now, as you can see, we're at the end of the liturgical year in some ways. And then there's the season after Pentecost, which is rather blank. And I will be going into the Sermon on the Mount next week. But there are, as usual, four texts that are given for the electionary. And those of you who know something about it might notice that when Pete offers a psalm early in the service, it's usually from the electionary. And so if I'm following the electionary, all those pieces sort of fit together. And many, many churches use this. And you'll notice the Old Testament has Genesis 1 and the New Testament as 2 Corinthians 13. That will be the parting blessing for this service. And so I'm going to be looking at two texts, Genesis 1 and Matthew 28. And some of you might very quickly recognize, well, Genesis 1, that's the creation story that Genesis begins with. And Matthew 28 is the Great Commission. What do those two texts have in common? Now, we are certainly living in apocalyptic times. And those of us following the news cycle or perhaps following the zeitgeist on social media have noticed, well, there's a lot going on. There's revelation. And there's the normal patterns of life have been disrupted for the last few months. Now, traditionally in the Christian Reformed Church, we often haven't done the electionary. There's sort of been a half-lectionary, which is the Heidelberg Catechism. And traditionally in the Christian Reformed Church, in the morning service, there would be a sermon. And in the evening service, there would be a Heidelberg Catechism sermon. And there are 52 Lord's Days. And so you can cycle around and around and around through the Heidelberg Catechism all year. And it's not at all tagged to holidays such as New Year's or Christmas or Easter or anything like that. Here, in fact, in the description on the slide, you can see the structure of the Heidelberg Catechism. And some of you might recognize it, misery, deliverance, gratitude. And if you look a little bit more closely, you'll see God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit. What are sacraments? And then two sacraments, the two sacraments that Protestant churches recognize, Holy Baptism and the Holy Supper of Jesus Christ. And then the gratitude section has guides for Christian living, which come from the Ten Commandments and the Lord's Prayer. And that's the shape of the Heidelberg Catechism. And for many years, it shaped the Christian Reformed Church. And because of this practice, it deeply impacted the Christian Reformed Church and the assumptions and the biblical knowledge that people would have. Part of the difficulty in many Christian Reformed Churches like ours, we don't have two services, one a sort of general service and the second a Heidelberg Catechism service. So I try often to sort of smuggle the Catechism in to the service and into sermons one way or another. Because in the Christian Reformed Church, we believe that the Heidelberg Catechism is a helpful summary of some of the doctrine of scripture so that people could get a chance to get to know it. Some who grew up in the Christian Reformed Church were schooled in it for four years and were taught to memorize it. Now, this is Holy Trinity Sunday, and so, well, I want to talk about the Trinity. And I want to talk about, do a little bit of teaching about the Trinity. And we actually talked about that last week with respect to the Holy Spirit. And they're sort of a relational prepositional aspect of the Holy Spirit that C.S. Lewis talked about in Mere Christianity. The Father is up there or out there. The Son is next to or besides. The Son is a brother. And the Holy Spirit is within, beneath, between, and through. And we talked about that last week. But now Genesis 1 begins like this. In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth. Now, the earth was formless and empty. Darkness was over the surface of the deep. And the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters. Now, this is a Christian translation, and so you'll notice the capital S and the capital S for Spirit. And you'll also notice the singular for God. And God said, Let there be light. And there was light. And God saw that the light was good. And he separated light from darkness. God called the light day and the darkness he called night. And there was evening and there was morning on the first day. And as you'll notice, that's the structure of Genesis 1. And it goes through these seven days. And there's a structure with each of the verses. God said, God said, God said, Let there be, let there be. And it was. And there was evening and morning. And God called, God names the things. And God says, well, it is good. And God, you get to the third day, and God saw that it was good. Now, I want to ask you this question from this passage, though. When Genesis 1 says, God, do you think, Father, why? Now, think about that. And I want to ask another question. Was Jesus there at the creation of the world? Was the Holy Spirit? Now, some of you might rush in in verse 1 and say, well, the Spirit of God was hovering over the waters. Well, some Jewish translations will talk about a wind blowing or a wind hovering. And of course, the Hebrew word is Ruach. And there are no capitalizations in the original text. So Christians are very much reading this with the Trinity in mind. Now, if you jump forward to first to Colossians 1, 15 to 19, and I read this passage, I want you to think about that question. The Son is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation. Now, it isn't saying the firstborn of creation, the firstborn over creation. For in him all things were created, things in heaven and earth visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities, all things have been created through him and for him. He was before all things and in him all things hold together. He is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning and the firstborn among the dead, so that in everything he might have supremacy. For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him and through him to reconcile to himself whether things on earth or things in heaven by making peace through his blood shed on the cross. Now, right away we can begin to see the complexity of thinking through these words, God, Father, Son, Holy Spirit, Trinity. Colossians 1 certainly sounds like Jesus was integrally involved in creation. Well, what does that mean? Wasn't Jesus also born of a virgin? The Holy Spirit seemed integrally involved in creation, at least that's how Christians have read it. And so when we say God created the heavens and the earth, what do we mean? And when we read the Nicene Creed, which again, often in that second service in the Christian Reformed Church, we would regularly read the Apostles Creed or the Nicene Creed and every now and then take a crack at the Athanasian Creed. We believe in one God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ. Now notice we believe in one God, comma, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, all things visible and invisible. We just talked about Jesus and all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only Son of God, begotten of the Father before all ages, God of God, light of light, true God from true God, begotten not made of the same essence as the Father. Through him, all things were made, and you can begin to hear some of these passages sort of ringing through the Nicene Creed. Now, part of what's behind the Nicene Creed is a very vigorous conversation using the philosophical and linguistic categories available in the time of the Church Fathers to sort of try to figure out what on earth are we talking about when we're talking about God. Now, one of the things that scholars in the 20th century began to really explore was that the God of the Bible is different. Sometimes people will say things like, well, we don't worship Zeus or Thor, so why should we worship the Hebrew God? Well, right away, if you read the Hebrew Bible, you'll notice that it's a very different book, and the stories are very different from mythologies. They come out of the same worlds, and so they're conversant in the imagery of one another, but Genesis 1 is very different from every other creation myth. A Jewish scholar named Ezekiel Kaufman did quite a bit of work on this and noted that whereas most creation myths imagine sort of an impersonal space that he called a metadivine realm that had rules which governed the gods and the monsters and the titans and all the various elements of their creation mythology, and somewhere along the line, these gods and monsters and titans usually had some kind of sexual union or perhaps violence, and through those, well, the world was made, and there are often multiple myths by which the world was made. But the story of the Bible is very different. The story of the Bible is, on one hand, feels a little secular because the sun isn't a god and the moon isn't a god and the sky isn't a god and the ground isn't a god, sort of like we see in Egyptian texts, but these are all functionaries, these are all creation, and the creator god stands apart from them. Now again, Christians say, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, all three, our god, coeternal, stand apart from the creation, yet the relationship between God and the creation continues to sort of baffle us. Because the creation does not exhaust God, but God is close to the creation. In Genesis, God calls the world into being with purpose and for purpose and declares that it is good. It isn't simply a product of chaos, it isn't a product of violence or sexual union. It is God creating the world on purpose and for purpose. Now, the Apostle Paul in the book of Psalms will quote pagan poets, in him, God, we live and move and have our being. Hmm, so are we within God? No, not exactly. And what we find is that we struggle with the language. And so, what do we do? We turn to the Bible and we look at, for example, Isaiah 6. When Isaiah goes into the temple, the angels cry, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord God Almighty. The whole earth is full of his glory. So there's a deep relationship between them that we, to this day, struggle to figure out. God is not within the system. God is the creator of the system. And I've, again, used this illustration before. Tolkien is the creator of Middle Earth. Can Frodo find Tolkien in Middle Earth? Not unless Tolkien writes himself into the story. So Genesis 1 continues and what we see in Genesis 1 is that, in fact, the sea monsters, things that would have been familiar to the mythologies and other competing myths, are present in the story. Now, most of you reading your English Bible struggle to see this because it's sort of smeared over in the English Bible, especially a lot of particular translations. But if you read it in the Hebrew, it comes to life. And so I scanned a whole variety of English translations of the Bible and sure enough, it's a little bit more vivid in the Jewish translation Tanakh. God's led, let the waters bring forth swarms of living creatures, the birds that fly among the earth across the expanse of the sky. Now notice that the waters are bringing forth these things at the command of the Lord. And then verse 21, and again, if you read it in the Hebrew, well, this is talking about Leviathan and these sort of map onto these monsters and sea creatures that other nations would have known in their mythology. God created the great sea monsters and all the living creatures of every kind that creep with the waters brought forth in swarms and all winged birds of every kind. And God saw that it was good. God blessed them saying, be fertile and increase, fill the waters in the sea and let the birds increase in the earth. Now pay attention to that because when we get to the ground, this is going to come up as well. Now this part in the sea, and God said, let the land produce. Notice how it's parallel. Living creatures according to their kinds, the livestock, the creatures that move along the ground, the wild animals, each according to its kind, and it was so. God made the wild animals according to their kinds, the livestock according to their kinds, and all the creatures that move along the ground according to their kinds. And God saw that it was good. And God said, now a change. Let us make mankind in our image, in the image of God, in our likeness so that they may rule over the fish in the sea and the birds in the sky, over the livestock and all the wild animals, and over all the creatures that move along the ground. So here we have the world and all these animals. And then mankind in God's image. And again, there are deep mysteries in these words that I could go on and talk for hours and hours and hours about. And some of you church people who with good sense don't care to wade through my hundreds of hours of video online, a lot of us is exploring, trying to get our minds around what on earth is the Bible talking about here. So God created mankind in his own image. In the image of God, he created them. Male and female, he created them. It's just God's image is not in masculinity or femininity or males or females. Male and female, his image is there. And that's caused a lot of conversation about, is it in the union of male and female that we discover something about God? God blessed them and said, now here it is, remember this from the waters, be fruitful and increase in number, fill the earth and subdue it. That's directly from the previous verse about the waters. But then this new thing, rule over the fish and the sea and the birds of the air and over every kind of living creature that moves on the ground. So humanity has this special role in the midst of God's harmonious and good creation. And God saw all that he had made and it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning on the sixth day. Thus the heavens and the earth were completed in all their vast array. By the seventh day, God finished the work he had been doing so that on the seventh day he rested from all his work. Then God blessed the seventh day and made it holy. Because on it he rested from all his work creating what he had been done. And that resting again, as we've talked about in previous sermons, that resting is the inauguration of the good creation, yielding its glory to God. But we fell and we keep falling. And we don't know what to do about it. We try this and we try that and it seems we can't get a handle on it. Colossians continues, once you were alienated from God, we were alienated from God, alienated from his creation, alienated from each other, Men and women at strife, races, nations in strife, families in strife, cities in strife, strife, that's been the story. And begins with our alienation from God. And we're enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior. But now he has reconciled you by Christ's physical body through death to present you holy in his sight, without blemish and free from accusation. If you continue in your faith, established and firm, and do not move from the hope held out in the Gospel, this is the Gospel that you heard and that has been proclaimed to every creature. Notice that. Proclaimed to the birds, proclaimed to the sea monsters. And in fact you'll find this in some of our hymns. The Gospel is proclaimed. Well how do the animals listen? How do the birds listen? Well, it's proclaimed through our speech certainly. It's also proclaimed through our action. This is the Gospel that you have heard and which has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven, of which I, Paul, have become a servant. Misery, Deliverance, Gratitude. Matthew 28. When eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had told them, they saw him, they worshiped him, and some doubted. Now, I mentioned before, this Trinity thing took a while for the Church to sort of put into words. And by the Council of Nicaea and other Church councils, well, they had learned a lot of Greek and philosophy and all of this stuff. And so they were using that language to try to not only comprehend but articulate what on earth is God? The Triune God. And this begins with the strange man, Jesus. How to talk about him. And the one people in the world that wouldn't worship a man, well, some of these Jews start worshipping Jesus. And now if you read the Greek, they're falling down on their face. You always got to prostrate before God. You got to be careful not to say the other word that is very close to it in English. And of course, they might have to fall down and do obeisance before a ruler or something like that. But right away, and Matthew has the honesty to say, but some doubted, they're working this thing through. What does it mean that he died and rose again? What does it mean? The kinds of things he said. They acted probably without thinking like he's God. And later started speaking of a Trinity. But who is this God? And then Jesus says something audacious. Then Jesus came to them and said, all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Is that the authority that spoke the world into being? Is that the authority that can command the sea monsters all? You know, a lot of people say, well, I just can't believe in the virgin birth or the miracles or the resurrection or things like that. I think Jesus was a wonderful teacher. Well, I'm going to tell you if a teacher stands up in front of you and says, all authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me, you better pause and ask yourself what kind of a person would say such a thing and if they could actually demonstrate that they could back it up. Does a mere sage say this? No. Now I'm switching over to another translation, the one with the boxes and the lines underneath because, well, this is where we can sort of follow the verbs. All authority in heaven and earth has been given to me. And now this verse 19 and 20 is tricky because everyone sort of hears it in King James English. But the Greek underneath is a little bit different because you'll notice that the things with the double boxes around them, those are the main verbs. Now, therefore, notice go with a little asterisk and with another little asterisk, make disciples. But disciples isn't a verb in English, it's a noun. Oh, but it's a verb in Greek. So how should that sentence be rendered? Well, a lot of people have tried it a lot of different ways because this challenge of translating Greek to English is by no means unknown. The Greek is clear. It's not a question of the Greek. It's just how can we talk about it in English? I'll offer to you discipling as you go. Discipling as you go to all nations, baptizing, see there's another participle. See, go has those lines underneath it. Going, baptizing, that's usually how we render those in English. Discipling all the nations, going, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Now here right away in this passage, you see the lectionary people sort of knew what they were doing because as some people say, we can't find the Trinity in the Bible except in solution. The critical building blocks are there in the Bible for the Trinity. But, well, sort of like seeing Jesus risen from the dead, we're confused. We don't know how to think about it. We struggle for the words to say. And so Jesus gives that command, discipling. This is what you're to do. You are to disciple. What does it mean to disciple? Well, Jesus discipled you. You disciple others so that you become like Jesus. You become like him. So discipling, going to all the nations, baptizing, we talked about that a bit last week, in the name of, and right there. Not just God, not just in Jesus' name, including the Holy Spirit, baptizing them in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. They're raised to new life. That's what happens in baptism, ritually, dramatically, liturgically. Their sins are washed away. They're raised to new life in the name of God, the Creator God, the God who started the story, the God who made the world. In his name, meaning with his name on them in some ways, as his possession, just like God named in Genesis 1, the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, teaching them, well, this is back to the discipling, teaching them to observe everything I commanded you. That's what disciples do. Disciples obey their master. Disciples live out the life of their master. And so, well, we're going to start the Sermon on the Mount next week, because we're going to be observing and hopefully learning to obey everything he commanded. And behold, I am, I am, now this rings stronger in the Gospel of John, but I am with you. I am is with you. I am with you all the days until the end of the age. And that's how the Bible tells time. And again, if you've been following my sermons, you know that. We have this present age, the age of decay, the present evil age, and then the age to come. And things will be a little different then, but he carries us from one age to the next. And the age to come has already begun with the resurrection of Jesus, and we're moving into that age. We have a holy personal God created the world, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. His image-bearers fell and keep falling. And only the God-man can rescue the world. You can read about that in the Hudebert Catechism, why he had to be God, why he had to be man. And they're working through the formulations of the Church Fathers to try to render that in language that high, late medieval Europe could perhaps understand. And we pull that language into the modern era, and we continue to work it through. Discipling we go, baptizing, teaching, but not alone. Do this in remembrance of me. It's not just the words on the page. It's not just the thoughts in our head. It's not just the things that we easily connect onto with baptizing and teaching and going. It's the breaking of bread. Because in this sacrament, what is a sacrament? It's sort of like, it's a sign and a seal. It's sort of like a portal. It's a portal into the heart of how Christians are to be. On the night he was betrayed, that happens in the Age of Decay, he took bread and he broke it. And said, this is my body broken for you. And the wine he took and said, this is a new covenant in my blood. Do this in remembrance of me. Be me in your place. Because if this image bearer above the animals, below God, if this image bearer in their falling could wreak such havoc, What can happen when the image bearers once again bear the image of the Creator God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, who made it all.