https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=P2Wh1pG0EH8

 All right, Tripp, you and I have spoken via email and such, but we've never spoken at least live in this way before, so it's good to have this opportunity. Yeah, I know. I'm excited. I've been watching your videos for a long time, so it's a pleasure. Well, I know you a little bit, but why don't you give a little bit of introduction to yourself and then we'll get into your story. Yeah, so a little bit about myself. I live in Seattle. I have a wife, two kids out here. I moved here from North Carolina probably 11 years ago, I guess, this year. So I grew up in a really small town, North Carolina, Presbyterian. PCA was the denomination, so a very conservative branch of Presbyterian. So yeah, that was kind of my life growing up. My dad started a school out there because the public schools in North Carolina were really bad. And so it was a private school, started kind of out of the church. So starting in fourth grade, it was kind of like a classical Christian school. It ended up being pretty big. And then I went to college out there to Duke and then out here to work for Microsoft at the time in 2008. And that's where I met my wife at church and we got married soon after. And now I live out here in Seattle. Okay, what kind of church did you go to? Actually at the time we were going to Mars Hill because I had some friends from college that were out here and that's where they were going. And so we met in like a small group at Mars Hill. Mark Driscoll's church. Mark Driscoll's church. Oh, we could have some interesting things to talk about. I would love to have conversations with you, especially given some of his more recent comments about Calvinism and that kind of stuff. I don't know if you saw those. I think I heard one or two whispers about he's changed his tune on some things. Yeah, now he's now now Calvinism is the theology for little boys who lack dads. Oh, really? And are looking for father figures and that kind of stuff, which I find really funny coming from Mark Driscoll because the culture of the culture of him being kind of that father figure, that disciplinary and that kind of stuff is very was very much his thing. Yes. And so it's funny coming from him to hear him say that. And obviously, I disagree with it. But but it's funny. It's just it's kind of rich coming from from that. But so what's his latest stick now? Well, no, he's down in down in Phoenix. I guess he has a church down there and like Scottsdale. And so he's been I mean, it didn't take him long, you know, before leaving Seattle to start a church down there. I forget what it's called. But yeah, now he's now he's kind of repudiating all the things that he did up here. But in as harsh a terms as he. And I was like, dude, you're the same guy. I don't I don't know what to say. Harsh, harsh is just his thing. It really is. He can't get away from it. No, it's his temperament. It's his personality. Whatever he does, he'll be harsh. That's exactly how it will be. I always find it interesting that, you know, I've so I don't talk about this much on the channel, but in in terms of recent American church history of the seeker movement, which is the suburban boomer, you know, consumerist ethos. And that then learns, you know, leads to the emergent movement, which is a reaction to it. And there's really in my mind, there's two there's there's two there were there were two polls to the emergent movement. And that was Rob Bell and Mark Driscoll. Right. Yeah. They you know, and they both founded churches named Mars Hill. Yeah. Rob Bell had one in Grandville, Michigan, in the old Grand Village Mall, an area of the country I know. And and which is which is about as Dutch reformed place in the country you can find. And a lot of people from the CRC were attracted to Rob Bell. And he had you know, he was on he had relationships with Cross from Calvin Seminary, with with Richard Mao, you know. And so here he is in Grand Rapids. And he's kind of, you know, flings off in Oprah land. And you have Mark Driscoll goes to Seattle, one of the most, yeah, unchurched cities in the country starts this harsh Calvinist church. And I remember one I remember Ron, I remember John Piper talking about Driscoll at one point. Piper just never really trusted him because he's like, you know, something's going to you know, he's too young. He hasn't hasn't been tested. Something's going to go bad. And yeah, well, yeah, no, I mean, it's a guy. Right. So I mean, part of my backstory also, I experienced some of that with my actions after I moved out there, but my old church and school that that I'm from, it was very much a similar situation where the pastor was, was very much kind of the hellfire and brimstone, you know, Calvinistic, typical pastor. And there's a lot of pride and arrogance and that kind of stuff that went on. And but then there was, there was greed and there was a bunch of other things. And it ended up going into a whole different direction after, after I moved out here and it just kind of, I mean, it affected my family obviously, and that kind of stuff. To the point that my mom lives with us now, she moved all the way across the country to get away from it. Really? So yeah, it was a, it was a bad, it's a bad situation whenever people go into ministry and feel like they, like they are owed something or they own like the ministry that, you know, that they're a part of. And that's one of the things that I actually really like. When I was in college, I went to summit church and JD Greer was the pastor there and it was a lot smaller than that it is now. He's now the, the president of the SBC. And one of the things that I like about what summit does is they, they're, and JD said this to me at the time is like, you know, cause he's a really good preacher, really charismatic and that kind of stuff. And so it's easy to build a cult around that, right? To build a church around a personality. And so like he used to get really kind of bummed and upset when people say, Hey, if something like you're great, like this is all happening because of you and that kind of stuff, you're, you know, and that kind of stuff. And he's like, it, it scares me that if I left the church wouldn't go on that idea. Right. And that's what you saw with Marcel, right? It Mark, Mark's gone that cults gone and now like the church is gone. And that's, that's really, it's really sad. Yeah. Yeah. That's a, that's a, I mean, it's easy to tag this, this dynamic to American consumerism and celebrity culture. But this, this has been a, this has been something, this has been something in the church for a long time. You know, in, I remember one, it was actually a Calvin Semproff. He did quite a bit of work in the patristics and he noted that in many ways, church fathers were in some ways, celebrity pastors. And, and it was John the Baptist. He was a rock star pastor. That's right. He was, he was, and this is why, you know, early on the, the, I mean, the, the thing I'm most, the thing I find, the thing I am most pleased by seeing in terms of all this crazy stuff and this little thing for the last two years for me are all the sub channels and the conversations. I, to me, that's the, that's really the value. And I don't care if they only have less than a hundred subscribers and most videos get 50 or 80. It's, it's the relationships and you know, it's, it's, it's always the relationships that, that tie people together. And then it's the networks that form. And, and to me, you know, that's churches of churches about that. It's this, it's this growing network of relationships and you need institutions that, that support it and institutions are very useful. So that's, that's, to me is a very important dynamic. So, Yeah, I know. I completely agree. I think that's what makes a church like kind of last generation after generation or not is the community. It's not the person, cause the person's not going to be there forever. That's right. So if you build it around that person, then he's not going to be there or it'll be, or it'll be much different, right? If you build a mega church of 10,000 or something like that, and then the guy retires or something like that, you know, what are you going to do? Maybe the church still exists, but it won't exist the same way. And, and you're going to lose people and that kind of stuff. And they're going to find the new celebrity pastor that they like to, to listen to and everything. If you don't have the community kind of as the glue. Yeah. Well, let's, let's get into your story a little bit. So did you, did you basically, have you stayed a Christian your whole life? Have you had some ups and downs? Yeah. Well, I mean, ups and downs for sure. I don't have a conversion story. So I grew up in the church. So there wasn't a time where I, there wasn't a time when I would consider, have considered myself not a Christian. You know, there's times where I was walking more with God than not for sure. But, but no, I don't have that, that conversion story, which is why I like Calvinism and that kind of stuff makes sense to me. Cause it's like, I, there wasn't like a time where I made a choice, you know, in terms of my faith or I doubted really in that kind of stuff. I've, I've been angry at God before and that kind of thing, but I never like doubted his existence or, you know, the truth and the gospel. So yeah, it wasn't that kind of a thing for me. I think I, I, I was growing up both in a, in the church and then, you know, the classical Christian school, it was, it was a lot of, it was a lot of theology and philosophy and that kind of thing growing up. And so, no, but I don't have a conversion story. Interesting enough. My dad, whenever he and my mom got married, weren't, he wasn't a Christian. And so he, but my mom grew up in the church, my sister grew up in the church. None of us really have that kind of conversion story. And my dad is, my dad is interesting. My dad does have a conversion story, but he's the one that I think that struggles the most with most with this faith of all of us. So, and I think actually Calvinism really, my predestination really is a hangup for him in some ways because he, he always asks, like, I sometimes I wonder whether or not I'm one of the chosen ones or something like that. And I was like, I think you're thinking about that wrong. But it's like a hangup for him. So he's the one that struggles the most with his faith for sure. But the rest of my family and my granddad is a super strong Christian husband. I mean, he's 93 now. And so he's, so he's kind of like an anchor in terms of that. But yeah, so, no, I don't have a real great conversion story. That's all right. Neither do I. How did, how did you find your way to my neck of the woods? I mean, I, we, I think we first started just chatting on Twitter. Yeah. Well, the, I think the magic of YouTube recommendation videos. So I was really into Jordan Peterson, especially when he was doing the biblical lecture series and that kind of stuff. And so I just, I just found it a fascinating conversation. And so I think you were doing commentary videos on those. And so I wandered across one of your videos talking about it. And then, and then I followed you on Twitter and yeah, so that, that's how I did it. It was, I had been following Jordan Peterson ever since the bill C 16 things. I thought, oh, this is interesting. It's got a Toronto professor refusing to say these things and causing a stir. And so I kind of knew him from that, but I didn't really delve too deeply into his work until I saw the psychological significance of the Bible series. And I was like, oh, this guy actually has some interesting ideas. I had, I had touched on maps of meaning, but that's a, that's kind of a dense read and I didn't have like a huge background in terms of Jung and that kind of stuff. So I just like, ah, it's not really for me. I'm kind of like this guy, but not that interesting. But then he started doing the Bible series and that's, that's really when I got into it and that's how I came across your channel. What, what interested you about the Bible series? It was just, I liked that he was, first of all, I felt like he was taking the story seriously in terms of their importance in a way that a lot of even, even girl. Oh, I lost you. Oh, sorry. Can you hear me now? I can hear you now. Yep. Okay. I felt like he was taking seriously. Yeah. He was taking the story seriously in a way that I thought that even growing up in like a fairly conservative, very literalist, um, reading of the Bible, uh, we didn't, um, in some ways. And so like, like the fact that he found the story of Cain and Abel, um, and he was really pitching how significant and good a story that is and that kind of stuff and how it means something to you. And there's a reason that this story stuck around, um, is really, was really interesting to me because we kind of always trivialize the story. It was like, Oh, here's the story of the first murder, right? Um, and the significance of why that story laughs and why it was structured the way it is and all the things that are going on, everything else like that. I just thought here's this guy who I wouldn't consider a Christian taking these stories, these Christian stories and these Jewish stores really, really seriously, um, and trying to like extract as much meaning like that. That to me is exegesis, right? That's, that's, I'm trying to let the text speak and bring out what it's trying to tell me. Um, and if, you know, in a way that I thought that obviously, especially in Genesis, uh, uh, the more conservative Protestants kind of trivialize it and trying to make it a history book. Um, and you know, not that there's not any history in it, but that's not really why it was written down either. Um, so that's why, that's why I thought it was really fascinating. And he had a bunch of interesting ideas. Um, and just the idea of like going to the Bible and saying, well, why this story, right? Why did this story and why is it like kind of that dense and, um, of a story and that kind of stuff? Once you start going down that road, you start to think, man, there's a lot of stuff there that you wouldn't have seen before. You could have just like just read over it and glossed over and be like, Oh, here's a boring section. I'll just get to the good stuff of like Abraham and Isaac and everything else like that. And so I thought it was really fascinating that he was taking it way more seriously than I see Christians take in a lot of ways. And that's what was interesting to me. So what's your, what's your take on the status of the, uh, of the Jordan Peterson movement now? Yeah, it's hard to tell because he's, you know, I mean, I wish you would get back to the biblical series. It's what I find the most compelling from him. Um, you know, 12 rules is, is, you know, it's fine. Um, I don't find it as, uh, interesting. It's hard to tell though, because of the whole like health issues with his wife and that kind of thing. And so I feel like it's kind of thrown a, um, kind of a pause in that. And so I, you know, I, it's hard to tell like whether or not it's, it's petered out, or if he's just like, I'm, I'm resting for now because I've got more important things going on. Um, but I wanted to get back to the biblical series. I think, I think at least for me, those speak way more deeply to like the things in our culture that we've lost in terms of being able to, uh, extract meaning from our lives and that kind of thing. Then, um, then talking about the more political things. Um, and so like, I didn't like, I didn't like the, I mean, I thought it was a fine video, but like, I wish you would stay away from like the democratic, like commercial things. And I guess I was like, I don't, I don't care about that. There's like, like it's a fine video. Yes, that, that would have been great, but like that's, that's not what you're, that's not where you're most compelling. That's not where you're most, uh, helpful to people. I don't think. Tell me a little bit about being growing up PCA, going to Mark Driscoll's church and then living longterm in Seattle. What's, what's that been like for you? Yeah. So growing up PCA was, you know, we're the kind of the frozen chosen, right? With the, we're, we don't, uh, it was very, what I didn't like about it, was it's very, it's very intellectual. It's very systematic theology. This is what we're going to give you. And that kind of stuff that I didn't feel like the community was really great. Um, and it was very, it was very much almost just like a lecture series with like modern, but not too modern music. And so then I came out here and it was almost, you know, I went to college and I came out here and I had friends that were going to, to Marcel. So I went with them and I was like, Oh, well, at least if you're going to do the modern music, do modern music, don't do this like, well, it's modern, but it's like, you know, early nineties modern. Um, and so that's what was interesting. And I thought that Mark, I did, it was kind of, I mean, obviously it was a culture shock moving from small town, North Carolina. It's a Seattle in terms of just how differently people view the world and their lives and Christianity and their faith. And so Marcel was kind of like one area where, okay, well, at least this guy's, he's not just going along with, um, the current, right? It is very easy to go along with the current in Seattle. You just have to stay away from certain topics and that kind of stuff. And it reminds me, I don't know if you saw it was a while ago. I think Joel Osteen was doing a, um, an interview on like good morning America or something like that. And so, and he was asked, uh, do you think that homosexuality is a step? I've seen that clip. And you can tell he doesn't want to answer the question. Right. And so like that's, that's a lot of like, whatever you think about that particular topic is not my point is that there's a lot of don't really stand behind your convictions publicly in Seattle. Um, that because there's so much pressure to just kind of blend in and stay away from those topics and those kinds of things. And, and I kind of liked Mark in so far as like, that's not his personality. In fact, it's, it's kind of the opposite. He's kind of like, I'm going to, I'm going to go out of my way to be controversial here. Um, and that was part of his appeal. So there's might've been a little bit of rebellion on my part in terms of just how much I enjoyed that because I did like the fact that at least this guy's not going to kind of like Peterson, at least this guy's going to say what he thinks. And he's not going to pretend and that kind of stuff. And I did like that. Who was that Mars Hill? Just, just because I never visited there. I didn't know much about the congregation, but looking around who was, was it, uh, um, my, my, I had a, uh, my sister and brother-in-law for a while lived in Carrie, North Carolina. And my brother-in-law called it a relocation. Um, you know, a containment area for relocated Yankees. What is Mars Hill a containment area for relocated Calvinists? Yeah. I mean, I, what's interesting is that his biggest draw by far worse college students. Um, and so like he had a huge following. So my wife was going to Seattle Pacific university at the time in Seattle, a ton of UDUB students. Um, and so he was really popular among especially young male college students. Um, and so that was, I mean, there were a lot of young families and that kind of stuff, but it didn't seem like he was drawing a ton, um, from any particular outside group and that kind of thing. It was almost like, I mean, I think there's a certain, there's a certain truth even in this harshness to like guys looking for a father figure. Um, and so here's this guy telling you to grow up and, you know, and lose, do a lot of sale, like similar things in different language than what Peterson does. Um, and I think that I think that there was a thirst to that. I think that that's one of the reasons that he did draw so heavily from that group. And so then it, then just became like a center of gravity, right? Now everyone wants to know what is this church about and that kind of stuff. And then all of a sudden, once you get that kind of gravity, then it just pulls people in and everyone's curious, right? So, yeah. Yeah. Well, it'd be cut. There's gravity is the right word. You get a critical mass and then you just, you just keep attracting and it, right. It's to create its own, its own weather and all of that. You think there's a, so, so do you think there's a relationship in some ways between Mark Driscoll's popularity and Jordan Peterson's popularity? I think so. Yeah. I think that, you know, because Driscoll was fairly harsh on young men, um, in terms of, you know, sleeping around and all this kind of things, not having a job, um, being more or less useless, um, it's a society and everything else like that. And so like he did talk a lot about it's your, it's your responsibility to God to not do those things. Um, and so there, there is a parallel there and I haven't really fleshed it out, but I do see a lot of similarities, both in terms of the disproportionate amount of young men that are drawn to each of them. And the fact that that's a core part of both of their messages. That's a core part of every single Mark Driscoll sermon was you need to take responsibility for, um, for your own sin. Um, and you need to repent and you need to turn the other way and that kind of stuff. Very much like idea. That's very interesting. I hadn't, I hadn't really thought about Driscoll much in terms of the Jordan Peterson dynamic, but, but talking to you, you know, you can, you can really see, it would be interesting to do. It'd be interesting to do some, you know, I know you're, you're, I know I know you're interested in starting a meetup and curious about that. It would be interesting to know if, if there were similarities in that community, although that I, yeah, I think that they would be. And I think that a lot of the draw would be kind of disaffected Mars Hill, uh, you know, um, men, um, in particular, I think that that would be part of the draw, um, for a meetup here in Seattle would be those, those guys that are the, now, there, there's kind of a hole there, um, in the city. And, um, that's never really been filled. It does feel like SIPT, uh, a part of Seattle kind of emptied out whenever more cylinders kind of dissolved into the ether. Um, and so yeah, where the, the church really hasn't recovered here. Um, in that sense, um, it's been, it's been fairly interesting. Uh, we just started a kind of a church plant, but yeah, the churches, it's really, it's the, there weren't new churches that, that kind of sprung up to take its place. Um, a lot of these people are just completely unchurched now. Um, a lot of people that were members there, went there for years, every week, that kind of stuff. Once that happened, now, I know so many people that were, that were Christians that, you know, we're in our small groups and everything else like that, that just never go to church anymore. They're so furious with the church. Really? Yeah. Yeah. Because they angry about, well they feel betrayed. You know, I mean, there was a lot of, you know, kind of not just how, you know, Mark treated a lot of people badly in terms of other pastors and elders and that kind of stuff. But then there's all these like weird rumors about like how the money was spent and how much he was making and everything else like that. Um, and just a lot of lack of transparency about what was going on. And then all of a sudden it's like, we're great, we're great. Keep donating, keep coming to church and all this kind of stuff. And then all of a sudden one day it's just gone and now the buildings are sold and everyone's just kind of like, okay, we're out. And then you just get up and, uh, and then you just got up and kind of left town, he and some other pastors and that kind of stuff. He just like, okay, I'm not in Seattle anymore. I'm moving to Scottsdale peace. Um, and I don't know, like you could see how, okay, well I thought this guy cared about us, you know, uh, I thought that these people, these pastors, these elders, we thought that they cared. Um, and, uh, and they just kind of, they just left us with nothing, no church to replace it, nothing at all. And so I think there's a lot of people that are really sore about that. Um, rightfully so. Yeah, no, I, I, I totally get where they're coming from. Um, I don't think that obviously I don't think the answer is to not join a church. Um, but, uh, but I, I could get why you would, the whole experience would have tainted your, um, you know, your view of the church and going to church and being a part of it and everything else like that. So now they're, now they're kind of the nuns, right? Now they're, I don't really have a religion and that kind of stuff. So yeah, in certain ways the church has never really, um, recovered here. And I do think that that, that would be kind of, oh, part of the draw. I think some of the same demographics, some of those same people might be interested in, in Jordan Peterson. I mean, he sold out here whenever he came. Um, and that, but that is one thing that I do think is different about Peterson is that if you met Mark Driscoll, you didn't really get the sense. If you meet Jordan Peterson, you get the sense that he actually cares about you. Yeah. I mean, it's a very strong sense that this guy actually does care about you as a person. Like he has his own life and everything, but he wants to know about your life and he wants to know what's going well and that himself with Mark. It was a very different, uh, interaction. It's not that he was rude or anything else like that, but you just got the sense that like he was more important and, uh, he didn't really, you know, yeah, join our church, get involved in all this kind of stuff. But it was really more kind of redirecting of it be a part of this thing that I built. Um, and so that is a very different thing. And I wonder whether or not that could be kind of a gateway and be like, okay, you can have some of this, some of the same things about meaning and responsibility and some of the stuff that you did like about Mars Hill. Um, but there's a way of doing it with actually caring about people too. Um, and so I wonder whether or not that would, that would appeal to them. Well, as I said, you know, as we started the conversation, it's, it's about, you know, it's about one of the things you learn as a pastor is that if people are coming to your church and a lot of people come to my church, but if people are coming to your church because they like listening to your sermons, if, or because they like your personality or because you're friendly, if the relationship is between me and that person, well, it starts out that way because I may be the gateway into the church, but they're going to have to build relationships with the other people of the church. And that's what a church is. Otherwise, it's a lecture hall and someone talking. And this is, this is also part of my, um, my, and my feelings of ambiguity about YouTube because YouTube is in many ways, a, a screen and someone giving a message, but it's, you know, there's a screen between you. And that's why I say what's, what I, what I feel most gratified by are the relationships that I see people building between each other and the, you know, what looks like at least some sort of community developing. And that in some ways is the difference between a pastor and a preacher. A preacher gives a message, a pastor, hopefully builds a group of people. One of the first things a good friend of mine said when I moved to Sacramento, he was one of the first non, one of the first people, my church called me. So of course I met the people in the church, but one of the first non church members, he eventually did join the church. But I, he said, well, what do you do for a living? Cause guys, I was asked, I said, I'm a pastor. He says, oh, you know, pastors are kingdom builders. They build their own kingdoms. And that, that is about the, that is about the worst thing that a pastor should hear about their profession. That, that pastors are in it for the money, for the fame, for the glory. And was, was Mars Hill non-denominational? Yeah. It was part of like the acts 29. Um, that work, but yes, non-denominational. Yeah. We wanted, we wanted a denomination that can't put the bite on us in any way. The SBC is very similar. I mean, the SBC is kind of a loose affiliation and that kind of stuff. And that's what I did for all its flaws. I did like that about the, the PCA church, um, is that there's a presbytery and, um, they, they are actually in charge and they can take your church away from you if you're not doing the right thing and that kind of stuff. So at least there's theoretically somebody now, whether or not they exercise that authority often enough is I think a separate question, but, um, but yeah, at least there's, at least there's some institutional power there, right? Yeah. Yeah. I, I'm so, cause my experience too of, I mean, as a pastor, what you really do want if your church closes or something like that is that, you know, folks would find other churches that they would, and this leads to sort of this, this American situation where people say, well, I'm a Christian, but I don't really have a church. And it's like, it's, it's, it's, I don't, I really just don't think that works. No, I completely agree. I have some, some really really close friends that I grew up with back home. Um, and they're, they're still, they would still call themselves Christians and all that kind of stuff. They, they do not go to church ever. Um, kind of intentionally. And yeah, I just don't, it's like, man, I think you need a church. You need to, you need to take the sacrament and say you need the community. And if you don't have that, then I don't know in what meaningful sense would you say you're, you're being a Christian in that sense, you're just kind of living your own life and you have a set of beliefs, but okay. Um, you know, like James said, you know, I'll show you my faith by what I do. Um, what are you doing other than going to work and coming home? Yeah, really. And hanging out with some friends. I don't know. Like that doesn't seem like church to me. It's like affiliation with a sports team. Well, I like the readers, you know, it's like, you ever go to a game? No, not really. I watch them on TV. Oh, cool. Exactly right. Yeah. So now, um, you're, if I recall correctly, you, I mean you and Esther, I mean you and I, and Esther are going to have a talk and I'm not sure what, what your idea is about that. If we're going to talk about the Reveki stuff, but you're interested in Aquinas. Yeah. I, I Thomas Aquinas is by far my favorite theologian. Yeah. That's a very unusual thing for someone who grew up PCA. Yeah, it is for sure. Um, so actually the, um, kind of the, the, the English and philosophy profess, uh, I'll call him a professor, the teacher at my classical Christian school, very much into Aquinas. And so he actually, he's, he's finishing up his PhD now, um, on the Eucharist and kind of a Thomistic metaphysics of the Eucharist, um, and, and, uh, communion. And so, so he was really into it. He's the one that introduced me, uh, to the Summa and everything else that Aquinas did. And so, but I was also really interested in philosophy and Aristotle always appealed to me as kind of a, as a philosophical framework. Um, and so, uh, you know, so that's when he said, well, if you like, if you like Aquinas or you like Aristotle, you should read Aquinas. And so that's where I really got into, uh, Aquinas. And so, um, but yeah, I, I was really into Greek philosophy. Um, and I, I wrote my, my thesis at, at Duke on, um, on, uh, the, kind of a Neo Aristotelian view of mental causation. Um, because I, my studies at Duke were a philosophy of mine and that was my, my master's been the computer science and computer engineering. And I do artificial intelligence research now. Um, and so it was kind of a, it was interesting because we did some, um, kind of proto evo psych as part of my curriculum, um, before that, that field really took off. Um, but it was some of that same stuff, some cognitive science, some neuroscience and that kind of thing to, to try and reverse engineer the brain. And so, um, but that, that's my academic background. And so Aquinas is my, is my favorite. Um, but Aristotle was my field of study, um, in the philosophy realm. Okay. So, um, you've heard my group A and group B. Yeah. What do you think? I think it's an interesting way of categorizing. I, and what's interesting is even in the old Testament, um, you do have different words used for God to denote different things. And so it's almost like the, the Hebrews were even struggling with this idea of this one word to denote this one thing. And sometimes the attributes of God are, and Aquinas talks about this a little bit, but sometimes the attributes are God are talked about as if it's a separate person from God or a separate being. So the holiness of the God and, you know, all those kinds of things. And so I don't mind it as a framework. Um, I, I don't think, uh, obviously Aquinas and Aristotle would say, God's simple. He's not composed of parts. Um, and so we wouldn't say that there's two different gods or God has one part that's, you know, God number one and one part that's God number two. So, uh, Aquinas would say, no, not that, but as a way of talking about it, I, we need categories and God's big. Um, and you know, we, we're gonna, we're gonna, you know, put, uh, um, our own ways of, um, of viewing him. So as part of like a linguistic way of talking about it, I don't have a problem with it. I think it can be useful. And I think that actually a lot of people, a lot of people do get the sense it seems of God number one and never really experienced God number two, I think. And so I think that's one of the reasons that karma and things like that, that, uh, makes sense to some people in ways that God number two, that personal God that's going to enter interact with in your life and that kind of stuff, because he wants to have a relationship. Some people never, they don't have that experience, but they do. Well lost again. And I need to stop playing with my air pod case. I think. Um, yeah. So I was just saying, I think that's why things like karma makes sense to some people. It's kind of like they're, they're trying to come up with a way of talking about God number one that is like current, this grain to the universe and that kind of stuff, um, without God really interacting with me. So, um, and obviously Aristotle very much had God number one, um, and his, you know, prime cause, his first cause, um, itself on cause you could say, well, yeah, that, that does start to sound a little bit like God number one, but you didn't have God number two. Um, so anyway, I don't mind as a, as a framework of how people think about God, obviously, I think that God number one and God number two are the same, but. Oh yeah. Well, so do I. But now, but group A and group B, group A are our things properly things that we colonize and manipulate and, and you know, work, where's my cell phone stand where, you know, this is, you know, we drew elements out of the ground and we molded them. And that, you mean, I'm not a panpsychist. I'm going to talk to JP about that coming up at some point. Um, but then group B are, uh, agents, conscious agents, um, things that do colonize. Now you're working in the area of, um, you know, artificial intelligence. Um, so our, what, what is a person? Yeah. Okay. So I'll give Aquinas's a brief answer to that. Uh, a person, a person would be, uh, an intellect, um, something that's, that's conscious that can, that has agency. Um, and it's possible to have intelligence without agency. Um, and, and that's what, that's kind of where artificial intelligence is right now. There's a certain amount of intelligence, certain amount of learning that these machines do. There's no real agency though. They can't choose to do anything other than what they, um, then then what the, the electrons tell them to do basically in the, in the machine. And so you would say, well, um, a person then would be something distinct from that. It would be something that an intellect and intelligence that actually did have agency that could choose to do one thing or another. And it's through will, um, to use a termistic term, um, that you would choose to make one decision or another. Um, so you're, you're not set on a track, um, in other words, um, whereas, uh, depending, I like it's very deterministic in an artificial intelligence system. I, for a certain number of inputs, I will always get that output. Um, it's complicated, but it's not complex. There's no way of getting anything else, um, other than what I, um, what I put into it. And people are agents. Yeah. I mean, I think you would have to say that. Um, I think that it's, it's an interesting conversation, um, though, uh, because, you know, we would say, well, I'm, I'm a Calvinist. I believe in predestination. I also believe you have agency. Um, and so, uh, it's, so I was like, yes, yes, all of this, but the Bible talks about this too, right? And so, um, the Bible talks both about, uh, you know, ways in which, you know, they said, you know, God says to Cain, you could, you could overcome sin if you wanted to. Um, and then, you know, Proverbs says things like, well, a man steps are one from the Lord. How am I supposed to know where I'm going and that kind of thing? And so you have both of these things at the same time, even in the Bible. And so I would say, yes, I would say you have agency. Um, but your brain is doing things that you're not fully in control of too. And I don't think any, like, you know, from a neuroscience and cognitive science standpoint, I don't think you'd get away from that. I think the interesting thing about the Aristotelian or the Aquinas, the Thomistic standpoint is that, you know, you are a combination of form and matter. And so you're not actually, you don't have actually these separate substances. So I actually would in a, like Aristotelian framework, I would expect your to see all the neurons firing in your brain that would actually cause you to pick up the cup and that kind of stuff. Um, and so I would expect to see the matter doing all those things. I wouldn't expect the matter to just start doing things for no reason and that kind of stuff. I would, I would, I would see that chain of causal material causation in that system. He would also say, yes, but why is it behaving that way? It's because of the form of you. And so that's your soul. And so that's your, that's your intellect and will and everything else like that. So for, for Aristotle and Aquinas, they're not like completely separate. Um, they're kind of intertwined and enmeshed in a way that, uh, that I think that the Cartesian models is different, um, where you have the body and your mind is almost like a puppet making your body do things. And, um, and Aristotle and Aquinas is not like that. They're, they're very much the same substance in that sense. So is my, is, does my agency reside between my ears or within my skin? In a way you would say it would be particularized there. Um, and so your, your soul is instantiated there in that sense. And so that's why I like to, to Aristotle and, um, and Aquinas like the Gnostics and the kind of the Platonic ideal of, well, well, my soul is the good part. My body's the bad part. And I can do without that and that kind of thing. You're like, no, no, actually, your soul is instantiated in your body. That's, that's in some sense where it is. Um, and you know, it's not physically located, uh, in the same way, but that's where it's residing in a certain sense. And so that's where you can make sense of things like, uh, you know, Aquinas's views on the Eucharist, uh, like communion, where you would say, well, the body and the blood are there really is there. It's not separate. Um, and so, but that's, that's where that, that kind of medieval and ancient Greek philosophy would play itself out. So yeah, I would say, no, you can't separate it out. Your brain is not just this meat sack that your soul is. This is you, this body is you. And I think that that fits in really well with Christianity too, that in the resurrection you get a real body, your body, it's not, you're not reincarnated into your real body is there. Cause that's necessary. That's who you are. Um, you don't get around that in Christianity. And I think that fits in really well with Aquinas and Aristotle. That sounds good. That sounds good. That sounds good. Is, is soul, the soul have substance apart from this thing that I am, my nephesh? No, um, it doesn't have substance. Um, so you in that framework, uh, your substance, uh, would be form and matter and the form we would say is the soul. So your soul would not have substance by itself. It's part of a substance. And so, uh, no. And that's why, like kind of the, um, the picture of the saints kind of groaning in heaven, because they're in some ways incomplete, um, make some sense there. And so it's kind of this mystery of how can the soul remain without the body, because in the system you're like, no, it can't actually like it stays. Um, it's that's where it's particularized. And so it's almost like a miracle of God that your soul, um, survives to get this new body, um, in that system. And so that's why it makes sense to me that you're like, Oh, I feel incomplete. I'm not, I'm not really here and that kind of stuff. And I want my new body, um, in the, in the new heaven and new earth, it makes some sense in that system. Okay. Interesting. Interesting. Well, that's, well, that's cool. Um, I've badgered you with questions. Um, and anything you want, anything you want to bring up with me? Sure. I do. Um, it might be kind of a personal question, but it's related to some, some things that I'm, I'm going through right now. Um, your eulogy for your sister, um, I thought was really great. Thank you. How would you, what would you tell me? I mean, how many months has it been since that? It'll be one year this November. What would you tell yourself like now looking back, like if you could go back and tell yourself something then, um, have you learned anything? Has your perspective changed at all? Um, would there any be anything that would be helpful for to tell yourself back then when you were kind of going through it? Oh, when I was going through it, I think before my sister, I think one of the things I learned, um, and this, this sounds so cliche, um, you know, I make, I, I'm much more disciplined about talking to my, well, I had already, I'm much more disciplined about talking to my mother and my sister regularly because I live across the country from them. And one of the, one of the regrets that I have is that my, my younger sister, so my older sister, the sister that died is my younger sister. And, um, she, she was very busy. She was, she was a Christian school teacher, loved her work. Um, very important teacher in that school, leader in the community, you know, huge outpouring when she died, her death was sudden. Um, you know, I wish she had taken better care of her health. Uh, I wish I had, um, I wish I had, uh, had, I wish I had insisted on more contact, more regular and disciplined and, and, and routinized contact with her. Um, you don't, you don't expect your, you know, no, nobody expected her to die of a heart attack instantly. And so at the same time there wasn't any, there weren't any outstanding issues or conflicts between myself and her at all. And so there's, there's no sense of, you know, sometimes when people die, there's unfinished business. There wasn't any of that, which is good. I just wish I had spent more time with her. Um, in terms of the grieving process, no, um, you know, we, we as a family continue to grieve. Grief is a, grief is a funny thing. And this gets into the question of what people are and what we are. And I, I, you know, it's not, again, this also sounds cliche, but sometimes cliches develop for, for reasons. Um, I, I don't know, I don't know how this would be for me if I didn't have a vibrant hope in the resurrection. And when I hope, when I say hope, I don't mean that as kind of a weak American hope. I mean, it as a more, um, fibrous New Testament hope. And in that, you know, I, I see a lot of people and some people that I'm very close to or whom they need to pour everything into this life from zero to 53 or 80 or a hundred. They need to, they need to see every place in the world. They need to try everything. They need to realize all of their dreams. They need to cross everything off their bucket list. And, and there's a, there's a basic hedonism under there and there's a, there's an implicit definition of life. And now, obviously if someone doesn't share my view of the resurrection or the, the renewal of heaven and earth, well, then I'm an idiot because I'm not taking, you know, I'm not trying to redline my life so that I, you know what, um, you know, visit Bob, Holly and, um, you know, what whatever's on people's bucket list, jump out of an airplane. Um, we're to be pitied above, above all men, right? Because I do believe that this, you know, what I, I can, you know, and I am by no means the most sacrificial man, um, or I've lived the most sacrificial life, but part of the reason that Christianity and a vivid view of the resurrection. And I, when I mean the, this was the one, when you were talking, when you and Esther were talking to Adam, I was listening to that conversation and you guys keep, you guys kept focusing on, you know, what happened, you know, at the moment outside the tomb. I heard your conversation with the other pastor. Yeah. Where we got goes after that because, you know, Jesus, you know, Dyrus's daughter and then the young man coming out of the village, Jesus, Lazarus, Jesus brought people back to life, but the resurrection is a different category. And as, as Lewis notes quite eloquently, he doesn't miracles or one of his other places, the resurrection is actually about creation 2.0 and the next, the next iteration of God's plan. And, and that's really, it's, it's that dynamic, you know, it's, it's not that Lazarus comes out of the tomb and oh, I've got, you know, you know, let's hope Martha invents cheesecake. So I get to taste some of that. Um, no, it's, it's, it's the new heavens and the new earth and it's further up and further in. And it's, and, and so, um, when that faith and a rigorous belief in that affords all of the, affords all of the, the moral goodness that Christianity has exhibited throughout the ages, which is, you know, care for the nobodies of this world. It's true humanism where you can, you don't need to be a functional human, a functional hedonist in this world to grab everything you can, like, you know, like you're on some five minute shopping binge in Walmart. I mean, that's how, that's how, in a sense, the secularist context is leading people to live their lives. And okay, if you want to get environmental on us, the planet is paying the price for our greed and our, well, you know, I've, I've felled a few trees here, but no. So I, I don't have, I, I really, I really feel for people who don't share this hope and I want them to share this hope because I think it not only is emotionally satisfying and a, and a buffer against grief and loss, but it also affords generosity, which this world calls irresponsible. So, you know, and, and so when my sister died, yeah, I, you know, the eulogy, I could, I don't want to say anything. They're not listening anyway, but with a death like that, that communities in shock and they're angry and you have to give voice to that anger. And of course I shared some of the anger, but, but, what was anger directed to? Well, it's just, I think it's just the natural human emotion of loss. It's, it's, and when Jesus stands outside Lazarus's tomb, if you look at that Greek text, he's angry. Well, why is Jesus angry? Doesn't Jesus, Jesus set up the situation. He dilly dallyed. And at considerable emotional cost to his friends, Mary and Martha, you know, Jesus set that thing up and people are like, well, God wouldn't it's like, I don't know, read the Bible. You know, I'm sure Stephen's family would have preferred that Jesus dip in on Paul a little earlier. You know, God, God in the Bible, and this is my capitalism, God has the prerogative to play rough with us. And, and I think in this kind of nice Americana, we imagine that God's ultimate what's at the top of his hierarchy should be niceness. And no, not at all. And, and nothing, nothing about nature and nothing about this world would lead us to believe that that God is nice. So, that was Lewis's point, right? In the problem of pain was that, you know, in some sense, the resurrection and the promise of this new heaven, like Jesus coming in the resurrection introduces the problem of pain because otherwise there's nothing that would give us any indication that we should have a comfortable, nice life and that kind of stuff. It was that act of love that makes us think, well, now we've got a problem. Now I've got a really loving God, but then I also have a God that, you know, puts me through pain. And so in some sense, the resurrection actually causes the problem instead of solves it. And, and that's what a natural, natural, you know, looking around in nature should tell us, yeah, act like you're on a 80 year shopping spree and fill your basket with everything you can and be a hedonist, eat, drink, and be merry for tomorrow you die. I had a con I had a conversation with, he didn't want it recorded or anything, but a young man who was basically saying, you know, I look at Peterson, he says, do what's expedient. And then I listened to the celebrity atheists and they're like, you know, suck everything you can out of this world. So, you know, and whatever shape that is to any of us at whatever stage we are in life. Well, okay. How's that good for the planet? So, you know, Yeah. I mean, it's the foolishness of the cross, right? Why would you willingly go through that as opposed to get everything you can? And that's why I actually like the, you know, if you read, you know, Job in the Hebrew, like the ending of job where he gets all the stuff, like the language is different, almost like it was added, you know, later. And so like the earlier parts of job, I was like, almost, I like it better where it just ends where God shows up and he's like, listen, idiot, what do you have to say? And Joe was like, you're right. I got nothing. You know, like I have no, I have no right. Like God does have that prerogative and he exercises it sometimes. And so I, the reason that I was asking that question, I know we only have a couple of minutes, but, I don't have a, I don't have a conversation at nine, so I'm fine. Okay. Okay. Cool. The reason I was asking that was, you know, very recently, a couple of weeks ago, my wife and I went through a, went through a miscarriage and really unexpected and that kind of stuff. And I like, I like what you, that, that anger, you know, that you experienced like there's sadness, but then there's mixed with anger and everything else like that. Like that anger, I felt really viscerally in a way that I don't think I ever have. Like, and like, you know, we talked about it a little bit in the randos reading with when we were going through a grief observed the second one, where, where Lewis is saying, you know, I don't think I'm in danger of not believing in God, but I might be in danger of believing some very bad things about him. And, and so that was the first time in my life that I really felt that. And it reminded me kind of of the anger that I heard in the eulogy that like, I am angry and, and in some sense, in a sense, we should be angry. We shouldn't pretend like that's not painful and that's not real loss. And it doesn't matter because we have the resurrection. So don't worry about it. So that kind of stuff. So the resurrection does provide hope, but at the same time, it doesn't take away the pain either. Really? Like we're still experiencing the grief. And a lot of times I feel like, like Christians want to pretend like, Oh, we have no pain and my life is perfect. And that kind of stuff. It's kind of the, the Instagram version of Christianity, right? Where we're only putting out the good stuff and none of that. Don't get that from the Bible. Don't get that from the Bible. And I know you as a pastor, you're like, you don't have that view of the people that go to your church or anything else like that. But a lot of times I feel like that's what we do that we're just like, and even in talking to people about it, they're like, Oh yeah. You know, we had one too and you know, don't worry about it. And that kind of stuff. It's almost like, let's not talk about the pain. A lot of times let's, let's hide it. Okay. If you want to talk, go to this group. Like we don't want to talk about it. We don't want to express it. Hey, I'm actually kind of angry at God right now about this. Yeah. Well, and I, you know, it's a loss and anger is the appropriate, is the, again, Jesus at Lazarus' tomb, he's angry. You're like, why are you angry? Well, because death is ripping apart the fabric of Shalom. And anger is absolutely appropriate to that. And you know, miscarriages, I, so my mother had a miscarriage between my older sister and me and don't talk about it much, but I know about it. My grandmother, my mother's mother had had my grandfather and my grandmother and my mother's side had three girls and the, they had had a miscarriage or a stillborn or something. And it was a boy. That story carried down. And so, you know, there's been a movement lately to memorialize miscarriages in a more rigorous way. And I think, you know, you can go overboard on that too, probably, but I, I think it is a loss and I don't think we need to be embarrassed by that at all because the, I mean, that child entered into your family in a way, you know, as children always do before birth, just, just watch, you know, just watch couples when they discover they're pregnant and, you know, the excitement and the anticipation that's real. And it's absolutely something to be celebrated. And when it's lost, it's absolutely something to be grieved. And yeah. And that's one of the reasons that we, we ended up consisting on doing genetic testing to find out the gender, just because we didn't want it to be kind of an abstract thing. This was a, this was a real person. And so I think that I, that's why I think that in doing that and making like kind of abstracting out the pain and that kind of stuff and not talking about it and, and everything else, we actually do disservice to what we hope for too. Right. Because we need to draw a strong distinction between what is today that we all know is not right. But like, especially in our comfortable kind of Western lives, we can kind of pretend like everything's pretty okay, but we all know it's not. But I think that what Christianity, I mean, what we need to do as Christians say, no, no, it's not actually okay. The pain that you're going through is meaningful and it's real and it's ever present. And that's one of the things that Peterson always talks about. And so that's, that's one of the things that in his talk with William Lane Craig and, and Steven Pinker's wife, I can't remember her name right now. One of the things that I thought was compelling about Peterson's opening there was like, no one ever quite, you can't question meaning when you're in pain. It's, it's there. What you mean is, you know, what we're really asking is there any positive meaning? And that's where Christianity comes in and be like, yes, there can be, and there can be like a hope in the future that you don't have now. And yeah, so I think that that's, that's one of the things that, I don't know. Like I think that we, as, as Christians, we want to kind of indulge in this modern kind of American, you know, dream of make everything comfortable, avoid the pain, avoid uncomfort and that kind of stuff. And we center our lives around doing that to the point that, you know, we'll, we'll just not talk about things that are actually painful to us. And so, I mean, I don't know how many eulogies where you know that they're in pain and they're not expressing it really. Yeah. Yeah. Next week, I'll do a service for a really dear saint who, um, you know, was a good friend of mine. And he passed away last week, um, or two weeks ago. And you know, his wife, his wife told me, she says, she said, you're not allowed to wear a suit for the funeral, for the, for the celebration of life. And, and I said, okay, I'll, you know, I won't wear a suit. I'll wear something happy, but we will, we will laugh and we will cry. And that's, that's, that's what we do. And you know, Christianity is a strange, is, you know, it's a strange religion in that unlike at least some of the readings of Buddhism I'm most familiar with, you know, it isn't, it isn't about the abolition of suffering. It's about the employment of suffering. And I, and I think not in an unhealthy way. I think suffering plus meaning makes joy. Joy, joy often has, and I think the fullest joy has elements of suffering within it. And Lewis obviously got at some of that with, with sense such, and sort of his longing. Now that might be a little too close to, for Vickie's nostalgia for, for a Verveckis comfort, but, but joy is, and we experienced that in, in almost every movie we go to, we would never go to, we would never enjoy a movie where, oh wow, there's a perfect family. They're living a perfect life. Everything is turning out great. We end, we watch that and we say, oh, that was dumb. That was, I've wasted an hour of my life, but, but here's, here's a trial. And here's suffering, but there's meaning. And here's striving and here's longing and here's consummation. Now this is something we can live into. Yeah. A hero's journey where the hero never struggles or anything else like that is not a hero's journey. We don't, we don't find it compelling. That's, yeah, I don't know. And so I'm just thinking about this more. And you know, other painful situations that I think that people go through and they, they don't want to lean into it. They want to distract themselves from like experiencing the pain. And I don't know. I think that the church, I think the church, I'm just trying to think about it from my own church. Like how do we do a better job of like not encouraging people to do that, to actually have conversations and, and like admit when you're angry and in pain and that kind of stuff, and for whatever reason and not treat it like an embarrassment or your, your life sucks. Mine's great. Let's not talk about it now. And I don't know that that's just kind of the feeling that I'm getting. And so I heard it in your voice and your eulogy that there was real pain and anger. And the anger is what I think that I, I almost never hear people really express, but I know they're feeling it. And I don't know why I hear sadness. I don't hear anger a lot. That's there's some church culture in there. There's some American culture, American culture. And, and I, you know, one of the things that over the years I've had to come to terms with is there wasn't a lot of anger in my house growing up. My father was not an angry person. My mother was not an angry person. When my parents fought, we as kids didn't know it because they tended to, tended to, tended to fight, I think with silence and avoidance, rather than heated engagement. And so anger has been something that I've had to sort of come to terms with, but anger has its place. And I think as Americans and especially Christians will tend to, we're, we're, we're bad at anger partly because we're bad at everything that's powerful. And anger is powerful. It's, it's, you know, when I, I know some people for whom, but many people who have been hurt deeply or have suffered significant trauma, they prefer feeling anger to sadness because sadness is vulnerable and anger. You put up an internal, you know, there's a moral defense of self-righteousness. There's a flood of, you know, hormones and adrenaline that makes you feel powerful. So people who have been hurt and traumatized often default to anger, but anger is dangerous. And I was in, I was in my local supermarket the other day and a homeless guy came in and, and he started having a confrontation with the, the front manager of the store. And you know, I just thought this is gonna, they're going to call the cops and you know, all this stuff is going to happen. And then he had his bike and I could pretty quickly see that I've done a lot of stuff with homeless people. So he, he worried about his bike. If he leaves his bike outside the store, he's in, he's got $2 that he just panhandled. He's there for a beer. And he, and I said, would you like me to hold your bike? Yeah. So then I could hold his bike. So then he could, you know, go get his beer. And he's 17 cent Jordan. He didn't have the tax money for the beer. Someone else had to say, oh, here's the tax. So, you know, it sounds crazy. The pastor helped the man buy his beer. So he, but you know, otherwise the option is, you know, another trip in the back of the police cruiser and then he's probably going to lose his pops. I got there the bike and you know, and so just, okay, he's angry. Let's not be too afraid of his anger. Let's see if we can understand what his anger is about. And maybe we can just do some very small steps through this thing. And we did go a win. And, and so, no, we, we've got real issues with anger and that's, and the church hasn't modeled, hasn't modeled it well. And I think this again, part of what has come into American church culture is the culture of mice in church. Yeah. And it's interesting for me because my dad was very angry. And so our, our family's very confrontational, except for my mom. She's, she's the nicest person to ever meet. But my sister and I and my dad are all like highly confrontational and angry. Did you ever see the movie Inside Out? Yeah. Yeah. So I kind of want to write just like an article in the theology of Inside Out, but, but like, I do feel like there's, you know, everyone has his emotions in this movie. Everyone has all of the emotions, right? Joy, sadness, anger, all this kind of stuff. But there's a dominant one that the others kind of get filtered through. Yeah. And that's what it's like for me. It's like my sadness does get filtered through my anger a lot. And, and I see a lot of people just, it's almost the exact opposite to the extent that you never see their anger. It's just, it's just either, I just want to act like I'm happy all the time or I'm comfortable with my sadness, but my anger never comes through or I never want to admit that I'm angry. And I don't, it's, it's bizarre looking at it from my perspective because I'm the exact opposite. You'll see my anger much more than you'll see anything else. If you hurt me, I'm not generally going around a raging volcano, but if you hurt me, then you're going to get angry. I love that graphic. That was a great, great scene. But yeah, that was, I don't know. I, yeah, I think that the niceness in church, and I think that's probably one of the reasons that Driscoll probably appealed to me a little bit. I did like, he was not afraid of the anger. And the anger was actually like very prominent for him. And I didn't, I do not like nice church culture just in general. I don't, I don't want to be it to be too antagonistic and like needlessly, but at the same time, I don't like the niceness of it. And that's where I do like Peterson. Like he's not, he's a nice guy. He does care about you, but he's not going to lie to you either. He's going to confront you when you're, when you're doing that kind of stuff. And that's why I like that. You know, when we met him, you know, he'll give this whole lecture about like, you're screwing up, like to what extent are all the things in your life that are bad, your fault, right? You need to ask yourself that question. So he did his whole lecture in Seattle about that. And you know, kind of playing off Sultz and Easton and all that kind of stuff. And, and then, you know, afterwards, you know, we go up there and meet him and actually our, our youngest was 10 days old at the time. And we brought him to the lecture because my wife wanted to go. And so we go up there. We're talking to, we're talking to Peterson and, you know, he, he's like, he's surprised that this little 10 day old baby is there and that kind of stuff. But then he just totally turns his attention to my wife and just asking her about how she's feeling and how many kids do we have. And like, you can tell he's like genuinely worried because this is, this woman just gave birth like a week and a half ago and that kind of stuff. And you can tell like in the midst of him, like telling us all to like, you know, come to grips with the fact that we're, we're in some sense responsible for all the suffering in the world and all this kind of stuff. Also really caring about someone through that. And I think that like, there's a way that the church can do both, but we're, we've totally abdicated the former and we're just talking about the latter. Let's just be nice to people and tell them we love them and that kind of stuff. But I don't know if that's actually being loving so much as just kind of not, not actually engaging with people. Yeah. Well, and, and you know, I, Jordan Peterson is a human being just like the rest of us were Calvary. So we know that we're all broken and in different ways, but, but Peter, people who say that he's, he's a, he's a con man or a nut job or a charlatan. I just, I see plenty of con men, nut jobs and charlatans, and it just doesn't strike me that way. Does, does he do everything perfect? Does he get everything right? No, but you know, I was, so when my sister passed, Jonathan Peugeot sent them a note and said, you know, and I, you know, you know, even the way that I got that interview with him was sort of backwards. And, and, but he sent me a very, he sent me a very nice email. And I thought, good grief, dude, you're, you know, you don't have to pay any attention to me if, you know, it's, but, and, and again, the, one of the things that, that I was most, that I've been most impressed by is, is that I, again, as a pastor, I know what it's like to shake hands after church with a hundred or 200 or 500 people. And he, you know, that VIP crowd of a 160 people after an event, he, he, he had a way of making everybody feel like he was present to them in that moment. That's powerful. And, and I do think, you know, he's, you know, he's, he's got some, there's a, there's a, a former professor, Quentin Schultz of communication at Calvin College, who did a little video on, you know, what should Jordan Peterson do better in terms of his communication? And, and one of the things Quentin Schultz said, you know, was be less angry. And I thought, well, that's probably true. Cause sometimes when he comes across with certain issues, he can, he can come across as shrill and angry, but at the same time, in a lot of ways, I think he's modeled an ability to, um, you know, anger, anger is, is a card that we have in the deck and it's a legitimate card and there are times to play it. It, um, you know, if it becomes the filter for everything, well, then there are other problems, but it's, it's a part of us. And it's a part of God. Yes, it is. Yes. Um, and what I think it, when he employs anger talking about say the suffering in the world and that kind of stuff, it seems to me to be entirely appropriate, um, to express anger that way. Sometimes in the interviews if he's having like an antagonistic interview with someone and he comes across as angry, then that's not good. But mainly because I think the other person's also coming across as angry and now we just have an angry interview. And so I actually think he does better. The other person's being angry and incredulous and he's just kind of like laughing. I'm like, yeah, I'm an interview. That's what was great about that is like she's really angry and like, he's just like, I think this is silly. Yeah. Um, yeah, I don't know. I think, yeah, I guess, um, yeah, in terms of the, um, I think that one of the things that Peterson does though is he leaves open. So he's talking about all this anger and suffering and that kind of stuff, but he's leaving the door open at least ontologically to there being some like deeper things. So he's like, I'm just talking about the psychology here, right? I'm not saying that there's not like an ontological reality behind this, but I'm just trying to talk about the psychology, right? I appreciate. And that's where I like, I come to verveky and you know, we can talk about the investors of like, he's, he's like cutting the knees off of like, he's going to hit his head on an iron ceiling. I feel like, um, in, in some ways. And that's where I, I, I think it's useful to talk about the psychology and the cognitive science and that kind of stuff and the mechanisms of meaning making. I think that's useful. Um, but that's where my critique would be of, of verveky. And so I did want to ask you like, why do you like him? Like what, what is, no, no, it's not that I think that there's any things not to like, but like what is most compelling to you about his project? Well, when I first started, well, so Struan who you can meet in the discord server was strong was, was he, he was one of these, you know, it's you take your, he sent me emails early on and he's always sending me ideas that he's got. He's got some really interesting ideas, but then he was very clear. Oh, you got to watch this verveky guy. And of course that was with his boot, his Buddhism and cognitive science. The sound was kind of crappy. Um, and I listened to some of it. The sound was so crappy. I couldn't really process it or use it. So I was really happy. He started the other. Um, I, Don and his work has given me very similar to Peterson. I mean, anybody, if you've watched my channel at all, you know, I'm addicted to information and learning. I love learning and I'm a lifelong learner. And for me, partly, I think because of my dyslexia, um, and perhaps partly because I learned the violin and the Suzuki method in first grade, first grade, I'm, I'm a real auditory learner. So I can consume and process a lot of, of audible material. I noticed verveky right off the bat with the, with the early episodes was giving me some helpful framework for understanding the, the, the psychology behind a lot of religious practice, religious practice included in religious practice that I was familiar within Christianity. Um, CS Lewis has an excellent essay called transitions at Vine. And, and I think that that's a helpful key in terms of understanding. You know, we all, we're all, we all share this mechanism and these mechanisms and the, the shamanist shamanist dynamics and all of this, I think, um, and the language and the vocabulary he was giving me, I mean, there's four ways of knowing, you know, and they're all four P's, you know, propositional participatory procedural and perspectival. Um, you know, give me four P's of course, perhaps pastor Paul's alliterative attention. That's right. So, and I found that to be very helpful. He's just given me a lot of really helpful stuff. So that's one thing. Um, just in terms of his, his personality, but he's quite different from Peterson. He is an academic and Peterson, it's kind of more of a preacher. Um, but, but I also could, could sense very quickly with, with John that he's and, um, he's open in that he wants to have conversation and he wants to have dialogue and he wants to, you know, what, so I talked to John Van Donk and John Van Donk and always John Van Donk's kind of become this coach for me. He's always pushing me to the next thing. And I'm kind of a rut person. So it's kind of like, I like my meetup. I like my, I don't want to do anything different. I don't want to start anything new. Let me just sit with my nice little group of people here and enjoy it. And John Van Donk won't let me see. So it's like, you know, so he says, you know, basically Paul, what you've got here is, and this came through with our conversation with Dobe. This is the outer court. This is the court of the Gentiles. This is the outer court churches need the space partly because John, because of his own personal story sometimes feels very much in that outer space. And he says, how are churches providing that space for people who say, I don't believe in God. I think I've got real issues with Christianity. It makes me angry. I've got all of these issues. And where's the space within the Christian world for us to have productive, respectful, meaningful conversations. And that I care very deeply about. And what I, one of the things I see in John Vervecky is someone who also cares about that. Of course, this is close to a little bit about his own story. If you watch his conversation that he had with Guy Sendstock, I'll be talking to Guy coming up in the next week or so as well. But you know, John had a very, um, difficult experience growing up in whatever Christian, you know, corner of the Christian community he grew up in. And that's been part of his, his formation. And so, Yeah, I was going to say like, whenever I hear him kind of reference, uh, like his, his, there's an anger there, uh, for sure. That I, that I detect like it is like some hurt. Yeah. Yeah. Like, he's not happy about his experience. And I feel like there's, there's, there's definitely some baggage there. It seems to me. And so, you know, Peterson, Peterson postures himself as an agnostic. I mean, he's going to, he's going to leave the metaphysics alone and talk about this psychologically. Um, and I think part of that for Peterson is because of, and this isn't telling stories out of school. I mean, because Peterson has shared a lot of his visions. Peterson, Peterson is one of these people that has, you know, that gets visions and has unexplainable experiences. And I think for Peterson, it sort of leaves the door open. John Verbecky, you know, is very open. I'm a physicist. This is my box. Now I, I don't necessarily share, you know, I have, I don't necessarily, I'm not contained by that box like he is, but what is true in that box is still true. And, yeah, I agree. I have to work through those issues. Yeah, I agree. And I think that that's where he is useful to talk about the mechanisms of meaning making and that kind of stuff. Like there is a reason why we share some of the same practices across religions and that kind of stuff makes total sense that, that we, that we would do that. Um, to me though, it's a me, I guess it's kind of like the rules of good gameplay. So if I studied all the board games and I said, well, what makes a good board game and that kind of stuff? Um, and you would say, well, the rules need to be intelligible. There needs to be a certain amount of randomness in the game and, but it needs to be orderly. You know, we can come up with all these rules of mechanisms of gameplay, but I still need a reason to play the game. Um, and so I feel like in just reducing it down, um, while that's useful, you can't make a good game without it. Um, I also think that we need a reason to play the game. And I don't think that that's why I think that there's not like atheist churches on every corner that sing hymns and take a sacraments and do all that kind of stuff. You can do all the stuff you want, all the ways that we make meaning and all this participatory stuff, but like there's not, there's not a truth there. You can't just build that on any truth. And that's where I think that that, that's would be kind of where I'm not sure where he thinks he's going to get to. Um, but I mean, in terms of when we just talk about the meaning making, uh, and the mechanisms of it, I do think he's helpful. So I was just wondering why you thought like what, what grabbed him about you. And so it seems like it's partially that impartial. You want this, you want this Gentile space for these conversations between Christians and non-Christians. Yeah. And I won't use the word Gentile. I will with Christians, but, but, because, but I think, and, and so, you know, he, and Sevilla have talked about, you know, this little corner of the internet. And, and so John is very upfront about, so, so sort of Jonathan Peugeot and I are over here as the Christians who say, we think Christianity is still a viable option. And John is like, I don't really think so. And, and we can lay those cards on the table. And I frankly think that approach is super helpful because I mean, you asked before about, you know, how can we do better with anger in church? Uh, I think modeling is almost always the best, the best number one thing people ask me all the time, because you give me parenting advice, be, be who you would like your child to become because embodying it, all of those ways of knowing all those four P's, um, be, be, you know, again, it's a cliche, be that change, but that's, that's really powerful. And so I'm super excited about the, um, you know, and the opportunity to talk with John and John has been very open. So I'm going to have a conversation with Christopher Maestro Pietro coming up. I'm going to have a conversation with, with Guy coming up. And so John introduces me to other people he's having a conversation with. So he is very much interested in opening this space. And I'll tell you something, um, in terms of not so much Peterson, Peterson has always been sort of, you know, he'll talk to Bishop Barron, he'll talk to me. Peterson isn't really shy about talking to religious people. The other cats in the IDW, um, you don't see Brett Weinstein or Eric Weinstein. Well, Eric Weinstein had a conversation with a rabbi. Um, you know, not, not the kind of, not the kind of rabbi I'd be more interested to hear him having a conversation with. He had a conversation with a safe rabbi. And so part of what happened with the IDW is, you know, about as far out as they'll go, as they'll talk to Don Hoffman or Rupert Sheldrake or one of these guys who's kind of over there, but having a conversation with a, with a Christian who has, you know, has solid credentials in terms of making supernatural claims about the resurrection, all the, the rest of these IDW characters, they don't want to go there. Peterson will, but John Vervecky is, Hey, let's, let's have conversations with ill religious people. And for a long time, you know, academia sort of, we're going to close that door to these people. Well, you can go to church, but you better not take that too much into our academy. We're going to, we're going to steer free of that. But, but John's open. And so I, I really want to celebrate and encourage that. Yeah, no, I think that that is interesting. I hadn't thought about that, but I see this, I see something similar with like Peter Boghossian and that kind of stuff where all of a sudden he's having interesting conversations with like evangelical, like Southern Baptist kind of, you know, that kind of stuff. And I was like, I'm hoping he will have one online. We have talked on the phone and, but he of course had, you know, he had the kind of experience no one wants in that he kind of got kicked out of his church. And, and so he and James had been fighting that fight. So, you know, part of what happened, you know, part of what's been happening and, and Trump is a, Trump is a symptom of that. Peterson is part of that. We are in a space right now where there's, there's real movement culturally and there's opportunity in that chaos. And I think there's opportunity for Christians to, to make their, make their case. And, I, I, I have always, so I had a conversation yesterday with a guy that I'll, he gave me permission to post there. The recording is a little, not real great, but will, I will post it. And, you know, this guy was kind of interested in Peterson sort of from the union thing, but you know, he thinks, you know, he thinks my Christianity is just a whole load of BS of talking to people like that. In fact, I, I think in some ways, a little corner of the internet can kind of be a little too nicey, nicey. I'm from New Jersey, so I don't mind mixing it up a little bit because I, you know, I don't mind having a good argument and leaving those friends. That's kind of a Dutch thing. It's something that I like. So I'm not gonna, you know, someone comes and tells me just I'm full of crap. I'm not offended by that at all. I kind of like it. It's a challenge. So. Yeah. Well, and, and that's what I think that I do think that there's, there's a good case to be made. I always use the, the Netflix example. So Netflix, they had this like mail order DVD business, right? Yeah. And so we had that for a while and they killed off their own business because they thought that streaming was the future and that kind of stuff. Like they disrupted their own business and no one does that, right? No one kills off their own business because they think, you know, they, they usually go the blockbuster route where they get killed by someone else. And so I do think that there's, there's value in engaging in these kinds of arguments with people who do think we're crazy and that kind of stuff. If nothing else, to just figure out where are we falling, where are we missing something? And you know, so yeah, I'll make my case. And I think, I think it's a good one, but, but then, you know, there's a lot to learn as well. And so I think that there is valuable to have these spaces. So that, no, that's good. I, I, I never thought about that with John and the rest of the IDW and their conversations that hadn't struck me before, but I think you're right coming to think of it. Ben Shapiro would be the one other person that I've seen have conversations across that, but obviously he is religious, so he's not going to be afraid of those conversations. So I, you know, I, and I think, you know, it's fun because when you listen to John's series, if you, I mean, John's a lot harder on Sam Harris than he is on Christians. Yeah. Because if you, if you begin to understand the cognitive science and this, some of this, some of this shallow, some of the shallow new atheism, it just, it just doesn't hold water. It's never held water philosophically. It doesn't hold water in terms of science. You know, I can, I can, I can appreciate and respect someone's, someone's skepticism about God. I think, and again, I think C.S. Lewis in the first chapter, the problem of pain lays that out better than I hear atheists doing. So if from nature, I had to come up with a loving God, can't do it. So how do we, how do we come up with a broad belief in a loving God? And in a sense, it's similar to empty rights argument for the historicity of the resurrection, because you would not have expected this belief to arise in this way and get this kind of traction unless something, something happened. And even Bart Ehrman has to come to that point. Well, some, they saw something, but it can't be this. Why Bart? Well, because that's my a priori belief system I am bringing to the conversation. I'll have to tell you, I'll have to tell you in our, in our next chat, my Bart Ehrman story, cause I took his class at UNC. Yeah, because, I mean, there was this thing at Duke and UNC students can take classes at the other university and get credit and that kind of stuff. And so I decided to take Bart Ehrman's New Testament class. So next time I'll have to tell you my Bart Ehrman story. I got him in class Monday. All right. Well, this has, this has been fun. And I wanted, I know that, you know, you and I and Esther are going to schedule conversation, but I wanted to have a conversation just with you first. Cause, cause Esther's of course a force of nature. I wanted to get to know you so that once she blows into the room that we don't just sort of, you know, I say that in all love. I know that she, she really, I mean, when I told her to stop colonizing my channel, I mean, it was, it's just that she's, she's a force of nature. That's just, I know it's funny. I think that, you know, Esther, and I don't think we've talked about this. I think that Esther wants people to see other interests that she has because she got so like kind of well known internet wise because of like Peterson tweeting out her articles and that kind of stuff. She has like a lot of interest in art and music and a lot of things and fiction. She has really interesting. And honestly that's a lot of what Esther and I just talk about offline is, is not even like the stuff that, you know, we, we got in touch with originally is a lot of that kind of stuff. And so I think that's where I think Esther wants to have more conversations about these things, just to have like, cause this is a big part of her life. And so anyway, so I think, I think it's what she's trying to do, uh, colonize you. I know she is, but she, she, she comes on strong, baby. Oh yeah. I know she's a, she's got a, she's, I mean, a lot of people don't realize how young she is. She has a bright, bright future ahead of her and she's going to do some great things. I have no doubt. I have no doubt about it. I mean, she's brilliant and she's, she's, I mean, to be able to write like she does at her age. Wow. That's I, you know, when I read her stuff, I think, wow, what are, what a writer she, Yeah. No, that, and that's, that's an art. And that's why I think that it makes sense to me that she's into art and music and fiction and poetry and all these kinds of things, because like you can have good ideas, you can make good arguments and that kind of stuff, but the writing ability is, is really, that is an art. That's something that you can't just do. Um, but anyway, yeah, I think that, um, that will be interesting. Maybe we can argue with her about Molanism or something too. I'm not going to talk about Molanism. I just, you know, I, I just say, Hey, look, this is the thing. If you, if you read Ephesians, I see divine election, but clearly the rest of the Bible considers us agents. How those things fit together. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. That's not good enough. That's why people ask me when people ask me, do you believe in free will or predestination? I'm like, yes, I believe in both. Dreaded compatible lists. Well, Tripp, this has been wonderful. So thank you for your time. And yeah, we'll schedule, we'll schedule what we have to schedule for, you know, with Esther and then we'll, we'll, we'll see how that goes. Okay. Sounds good. All right. Take care, Tripp.