https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=Vy7lBj7ywjk

 Hi, this is Paul. In the Rando's conversation by What Authority, where they're talking about the rise and fall of Mars Hill, Sam talked about the evangelical civil war. And I think I'd like to talk about that. And I saw a comment in today's video, you know, compress it down to 20 minutes. And it's like, yeah, I'd have to do three hours and then 20 minutes. So what's the evangelical civil war? That's the things that we do to women episode. That's the Joshua Harris, like, complimentarian, egalitarian thing. I thought that one was extremely one sided and I didn't understand why. I think that he got some feedback and to his credit, like some later episodes, he brought in some other some other people to talk about, you know, it in a slightly different way. So I think he's trying to respond. But I mean, that episode kind of told me what I needed to know about like, yeah, this this is like, this is you have an angle and you're going with it. And I think you're right. We are. Okay, right there. Right there. What Tripp said, you have an angle and you're going with it. I hear an agenda, I hear a spirit, I hear something moving under the water. And I want to turn away from it. That's that's what we do. Also, I mean, you see this in like the Southern Baptist Convention, some of the infighting on who's going to be president and what stances are they going to take like the Nashville statements and various things on marriage equality and women's roles in the church and various things. I think that this is this podcast is hitting on all that that it's hitting on that nerve and in a really profound way. Okay, he's answering the question why the rise and fall of Mars Hill is so popular? Well, because Christianity today, as it so often tries to do just tries to get right at the chaos and order boundary right at the boundary of the line of demarcation in the constant struggle within at least a perceived community. We're going to have to talk about what on earth evangelicalism is, at least this perceived community and and Mark Driscoll and the issues that emerge there are part of that. And again, this shouldn't come as any surprise. Driscoll, Nadia Bolz Weber, Rob Bell, all people right at the forefront of the emergent movement, leaving the seeker movement and splitting. As I've mentioned before, the emergent movement splits into progressive evangelicals, young, restless and reformed, and then and then neo neo sacramentalists. Yeah, yeah. It's yeah, I feel like to describe what I feel like the Civil War is briefly that hasn't really started yet. But I think everyone knows that maybe Fort Sumter has already happened. And and what we mean by a civil war here, not an American Civil War, but institutional splits, church splits, the dividing up of churches in the evangelical world, one of which is the Christian Reformed Church. Sides are are polarizing pretty quick. It's something and this is another reason why it's so kind of weird and rich that Christianity Today is hosting this podcast. Because like a little bit background Christianity Today Christianity Today is basically the publishing arm of the Billy Graham movement that is still around. Right. It's in Wheaton, Illinois, right next to Wheaton College, right, which right next to the Billy Graham Center. And Willow Creek is just, you know, up the road, which is sort of like the archetypal founder of American suburban mega churches that started in Chicago. Right. And it's like Christianity Today was so immersed in that world that that that was its like audience, that was its history. But now that world is splitting. And like, I don't know how to say this any more briefly than it's really splitting more or less along Trump lines is is that the same way that the American suburbs sort of flipped from lightly red to lightly blue in the 2016 and 2020 elections. Well, that's having an effect on the politics inside church. And there's basically like a light blue and a red side of American mega churches. And there are all sorts of questions that polarize along that like egalitarian gender roles, complementary gender roles, women in church office, no women in church office, slightly friendlier stance and LGBT questions, not a friendly stance, critical race theory, kind of no critical race theory, right? Like all of these questions are splitting and it's just almost perfectly a Trump question, really. At the end of the day. And that got quite a bit of attention in the video from Sam. Obviously, for me, this is pertinent because my denomination is also greatly feeling the effects of it. My mother probably picked this up on Facebook sent me CRC leadership search begins the Christian reform church has to replace the president of Calvin College, what used to be the executive director of the denomination now rebranded general secretary of the denomination, the number two position in the denomination, which has what's the title of the number two position, director of chief administrative officer. So there's a search team for that and also an executive director of Canadian ministry. All of these positions in the Christian reform church are coming vacant. I was on the executive director search team for the last executive director search, which took place after a resignation dismissal of a friend of mine who was the executive director of the nomination. It was fairly dramatic. Fair amount of acrimony caused a fair amount of soul searching in the Christian reform church at the beginning of the 20 teens. There were listening community committees all over the denomination. There were all kinds of papers written about purpose and structure and what the Christian reform church needed to do. There was a sense of what the Christian reform church really needed. This was sort of at the at the end of the seeker days in the church with the Christian reform church really needs is is someone like a senior pastor for the entire denominational structure. Now, the Christian reform church is sort of a two part system. You have your ecclesiastical structure of councils, classes and synods, and then you have your denominational structure, which receives money from these to do ministry on behalf of ministry towards all that sort of thing. I call it sort of the the the cyborg. It's kind of a cyborg. It's not really like the organic church, but it's much more bureaucratic. Is it is it like a business? And there's always sort of these two sides. It's kind of borg like in the Christian reform church. You have the the organic structure, which is the church itself with its three main assemblies. And then you have this additional denominational thing. And the denominational thing is always sort of the center of some fighting. There are agencies that do mission work, publications, media ministry, diaconal type ministry of relief and development, these kinds of things. And the now your general your general secretary is sort of over the whole thing, but doesn't really have any power to tell churches what to do, has some power to direct matters that are are undergoing in the denominational structure, not the organic church, but the more the business end of things, the ministry end of things. But even that is pretty strictly stipulated by Senate, which sits atop the ecclesiastical structure. And the Christian reform church is going to try to conduct a another search process. And since again, I was involved with the last one, I know what that's like. What is astounding is to try to do something like this. After we've had two consecutive synods postponed slash canceled because of COVID in the midst of one church in Grand Rapids, ordaining a lesbian deacon. The another other churches in that class is basically saying, we're we're kind of affirming now. We're not going to we're not going to we're not going to follow CRC guidelines with respect to LGBT things. You've got probably one of the most strategic classes of the Christian reform church that within which these churches are that has basically signaled we're probably not going to do anything about these churches, which sort of sets up the RCA, the reform Church of America fight. Meanwhile, the reform Church of America just had a synod and that denomination is unraveling with a sort of a new sort of denomination. A lot of these denominations that are forming now are sort of denominations light. They they're not terribly ecclesiastical. They're much more sort of business oriented. They usually have lighter assessments on churches and to the guys running that new denomination, one was a classmate of mine in seminary and the other and who I worked with when I worked with the denominational whole missions outfit. The other I worked with the other from the reform Church of America, who I worked with with various projects with reform Church of America. They're starting this new denomination. And so now the Christian reform church will well challenges for the church include aging membership of many congregations, young people leaving the church struggles over such issues as human sexuality, which ended 2022 will address next June. And I wonder because the challenges for this search team, even though it seemed back in the early 20 teens that the challenges our search team faced were significant, nothing like the context of this search team. The last executive director of the denomination resigned over tensions between the structure between the United States and Canada, where a binational denomination. Yeah, that's all of this taking place while the Christian reform church in many ways is polarized by this evangelical civil war. I'm going to eventually get to an article that appeared in the Atlantic by Peter Werner, but I want to do a lot of setting up before I get there, because if we just jump in right into the middle of the civil war, I don't think we're going to have a lot of good perspective on it. One of the phrases that is arising now is big Eva. What is big Eva? Big Eva is big evangelicalism and sort of big pharma, big business, big tobacco. It's sort of a populist way of of claiming corruption via size. But it's rather interesting when I look at what big Eva is, evangelicalism isn't really an ecclesiastical structure. It's fundamentally a marketplace and it's a marketplace of ideas in which. Christian churches, independent non-denominational churches and small denominations are sort of subject to the increasing powers of celebrities. Parachurch institutions like Christianity Today that continue to shape the population far more than local churches do in many cases. So I found this video, which I hadn't watched. I hadn't noticed this person before, but I just searched big Eva on YouTube and this was the first video that came up yesterday when I said that I am more interested in disagreeing with believers than I am arguing with non-believers. I found that statement very interesting because what's so fascinating is many of the celebrity atheists are more interested in arguing with other atheists than arguing with Christians. It's like after 9-11, Christians and atheists wanted to get into the mix in the public square. Now both sides are sort of turning towards their own to fight new battles within instead of battles outside. And that is because sincerely I care. I care first and foremost about the church. I care about truth. Now, another thing that's interesting is that I don't I haven't watched any of her other videos. She's got one hundred sixty six thousand subs on YouTube. This video has sixty thousand views. I've talked a lot about the disruption of the church and the dislocation of the church as platform. And this is a great example. Is she part of big Eva? Now, she's going to mention Francis Collins, John Piper, Tim Keller. A little bit, a little bit later, we'll talk about David French, Christian, Kristen, Cobes, Dumais, lots of big names. Are they big Eva? What is big Eva? And kind of what it is is, well, I'm going to sort of look at them and say, well, it's like big tobacco or big pharma. It's a way of sort of communicating and insinuating that that these are establishment people and we are plucky little rebels who are going to stand against the empire or the First Order or whatever new Star Wars thing we do. But another piece of this game, though, is, of course, the identity game. And part of what makes the identity game so foolish is that if you want to play it, well, if you want to, let's say, counter something from Black Lives Matter, find an African-American to speak it. If you're charged against evangelicalism is that it's misogynist, find a woman to be your spokesperson. I mean, identity, identity politics is so low resolution and so foolish in that way. It's so completely able to be undone if your if your facile way of determining truth is the demographic of the spokesperson rather than actually what they have to say and any sort of analysis within that. They're about us being united as much as we can in the things that are true. Now, that, of course, is going to be the topic of conflict. What is true? He's if possible truth at all costs, whether that means one side or the other, accepting rebuke or correction when necessary. Well, I have many disagreements with what is typically referred to as big Eva. So if you don't know what that is typically referred to, well, it's a new phrase, so she's going to explain it to us. As you've heard, it's with what is typically referred to as big Eva. So if you don't know what that is, you've heard of big tack, you've heard of big government, you've heard of big business, big pharma, there's also big Eva. And that stands for big evangelicalism. A lot of you already know that, but I'm guessing a lot of you don't. I remember hearing that or seeing that on Twitter a year ago or two and think things are moving fast. You know, what the heck is that? And then I pieced it together. Big Eva represents the corporate bureaucratic part of evangelicalism. So even now that is very interesting. Now you might look at Christianity today and say, well, they're the corporate bureaucratic part of evangelicalism. They're not that big of an operation. John Piper, Tim Keller, Francis Collins, isn't even a celebrity. Well, I guess kind of a celebrity because he's been on TV talking about COVID and he was an Obama appointee and you know, on and on and on and on. And I'm not going to get into the whole business around Francis Colin right now. There's just, you can watch the rest of this video. She'll tell you all about things and there's plenty to look at, but my focus is on, well, it's if we want to sort of sneer against something, let's call it big, and then we set up this little mental narrative of us pluggy, rebel, upstarts, and we're going to take down the evil empire. Very American, very American mythology to sort of invoke. evangelicalism last as a part of the Protestant faith and not even the political label evangelicalism, but kind of like the institution, the people at the top, big Eva. And what's amazing for that is that there is no evangelical institution. Evangelicalism is a marketplace and that marketplace is basically at the mercy of all sorts of pressures, such as size, money, influence, et cetera. So that'll be an idea aspect to it. There'll be a financial aspect to it, et cetera. But again, the sort of, you're setting this up as if it's the church of Rome, which there's something with a lot of money and structure and hierarchy that you can point to, but evangelicalism is fundamentally a marketplace. It's typically these are some characteristics of people who are just like establishment evangelicals. That's one way to say it. Okay. Establishment. So that you've got establishment Republicans, you've got establishment Democrats, and you've got Tea Party. But then of course you have movements and it's sort of in Donald Trump, you had a revolution within the Republican Party. And was Donald Trump now establishment Republicans? No, because other Republicans are against him. On and on and on and on. Typically anti-Trump, anti-abortion, pro-Biblical, sex and gender, pro-critical race theory. Ah, see now we're making labels. So let's hear it again. And pro-Biblical, sex and gender, pro-critical race theory, and pro-social justice. Okay. So critical race theory and social justice. These are now the, the bug bears that we have to worry about. More the former head of the theory and pro-social justice. Russell Moore, the former head of the ethics and religious Liberty Commission. That's the policy arm of the Southern Baptist convention, Tim Keller, pastor, author, Beth Moore, and others kind of in that crowd are part of big Eva. Okay. So they're not part of any individual employer. They don't sit at the head of any particular organization except Tim Keller. Well, now he's retired. What they tend to have are audiences through platforms such as publishing. Now this is interesting because Beth Moore through publishing, Russell Moore actually was, you know, had a position in the Southern Baptist conference where he's no longer a part, but he has a following because. Um, major, you know, he will get, he will get written up in Christianity today. He'll be able to, if he writes something Christianity today will publish it. And so it's just helpful to slow things down a little bit and ask, okay, what are, what's constructing? What are constructing these principalities? These are people who are believers with whom I agree on on the vast majority, the vast majority of things or agree with on the vast majority of things. Tim Keller in particular, I've learned a lot from, I recommend a ton of his books, meaning of marriage, reason for God, every good endeavor. Gosh, I could go on and on. He has really helped me. His writing, his apologetics, his theology has really helped shape my faith in a very fundamental way. However, I also disagree with these people politically. And please, I just got to say this disclaimer, even though I know that. Most of you understand this whenever someone publicly disagrees with someone, there will always be someone in the crowd who says, why are you attacking this person never in this entire podcast? Am I going to attack the people that I'm talking about today? Now the definition of attacking gets pretty slippery, but you know, she just gave a pretty full throated endorsement of Tim Keller, but obviously we've got some relevance realization going here and it's, it's about politics. Okay. But is it about politics? I mean, this is everything is sort of in transition now and everybody's sort of trying to feel their way around. Everybody's doing relevance realization, trying to figure out, okay, what's, what, what, what's really going on here? What are the differences? What matters? What, what are the critical differences that, that really determine who we're for and who we're against in what context? But public ideas or ideas articulated publicly are fair game for refuting publicly as well. They. Amen. So make sure you don't give me a copyright strike when I post this on YouTube, please. It might still disagree with the things that I have to say. That's fine. I am not maligning them as people, but I will quest and there's another great contemporary turn. I'm not maligning them as people. And she isn't, I mean, again, I'm not trying to take cheap, cheap shots at her at all here. And I'm just, I'm just looking at how we negotiate these conflicts, how we, how we, how we conceptualize them, how we sort of create things in yesterday's video, you know, we had, um, uh, Jonathan Sachs, how we create things with our language in, in order to sort of do relevance realization together and sort of play this drama back and forth to in some ways embody and suss out truth and, and participate in this drama as we go through history. Jen, some of, or one of the things recently that they have put forward, and I'll specify what that is in a second, but another person that I would include in this group is David French. He is a Christian attorney. He's a writer who has written recently a full throated defense of some of the basic tenants of critical race theory. I think I talked about that on my podcast when he did, and I went back and forth with him on Twitter about it. Um, in my opinion, he is very lopsided in his criticism politically. I have met David French. I think he's a very kind person who has done a lot for the defense of the first amendment and has written a lot of very insightful conservative stuff over the years. One day I'd like to have him on my show to discuss some of our disagreements. People. And that was an amazing comment too, because look at how status works. Will David French take. Ali Beth Stuckey's call or invitation to be on her show. Will he appear on Fox news or MSNBC or CNN? Uh, will, I mean, he's part of the dispatch, you know, kind of a group of writers. And so again, evangelicalism is a marketplace. It's it's fundamentally a marketplace, a network of relationships and ideas. And that's part of what has made it so potent on the American religious landscape and so nimble and fast in terms of. In terms of managing a highly contentious landscape. And this landscape has been contentious again, that George Marsden will come up in this conversation, this landscape has been contentious since the end of the American civil war and, and basically there are times when things are higher and things are cooler and, and the lines where we differ, you know, it's what's amazing is that this fight over critical race theory is what three, four years old. And look at the ways in which it's just fragmenting things all over the place. On, you know, in our camp on the evangelical right, give me a hard time forgiving him the benefit of the doubt. Not that I think I'm in like some authority or anything like that, but I do. Like I will. You've got a platform, a significant platform. So what are your credentials? What kinds of credentials do you need to have a YouTube channel? Oh, you just need a Gmail account. And a little bit of charisma and maybe improve your equipment. I'm on my way up. Let's be like a muppet. You guys are going to mean that to death. And again, I'm not critiquing here because all of this is part of the, the sort of critique we normally do. Remember a few videos ago, excerpts from Jonathan Heights, happiness hypothesis about gossip. This is sort of how we keep checking on each other. We keep looking at each other. We keep watching what each other does and we don't just do it individually. We do it communally. We do it. That's basically the definition of spiritual. There's there's stuff moving her and moving David French and moving Tim Keller and that there's stuff moving all of this and we are the sort of the physical pieces who are, who are, are being moved around by it. We'll constantly give believers the benefit of the doubt in the same way that I hope to be given the benefit of the doubt. I going back to kind of what we talked. You've got my benefit of the doubt. If you care, I've got a smaller YouTube channel, so I would not be part of big Eva. I guess I'm big PVK all by my lonesome. About yesterday where allegiance actually lies. I want to be extremely charitable in my disagreements with believers. But the thing is, is that the Trump era, Trump himself really kind of broke a lot of people in big Eva. Ah, and so now, you know, we had this little discussion was Sam, right? Here he is again. Here's Donald Trump. It's also interesting how this language develops because once I heard big Eva, it was like a whole thing, bunch of things just sort of click in. It's, it's a new, it's a new word, but I, I already know what it means. Even before I learned the word, um, I already know the landscape. I'm already set for it. And, you know, we've been watching this evolution of, you know, first it was, we didn't know what to call it. And then suddenly critical race theory and James Lindsay is out there. Okay. Critical race theory. Now what note to call it. But then, you know, you do enough meddling with critical race theory and things begin to get really complex because it gets philosophical and you have to get into history and the Frankfurt school and all of that. And, and then woke ism, a woke ism is a much easier term. We can, we can use woke ism because you don't have to feel like you have to open a philosophy text or, or is it Marxism or is it not Marxism? But if we just call it woke ism, then suddenly we have a word for it and a handle for it and, and we can go from there. The way Trump himself really kind of broke a lot of people in big Eva. The way. And broke a lot of people in big Eva. What does that mean? Broke relationships between people that seemed solid and well, what did Trump reveal? Trump was in that sense, apocalyptic because suddenly there was a revelation and suddenly people took sides. Trump was, Trump was a stumbling stone in some ways. Boys, this is going to get me in trouble with some people, but, but just watch how this happens because this is how we work as human beings. This is how we figure things out together. This is how we suss out the truth. And then we go down roads and then we come back and then we speak publicly. And, and, and this is how we make the sausage. Trump himself really kind of broke a lot of people in big Eva, the way that it broke a lot of people in general, especially on the left, the Trump era did some weird things to evangelicalism in general, but the top dogs in big Eva decided that they were going to take the side of pro-social justice, anti-Trump. And there, now she's clumping some things together and language is just, is just all over this thing because words, words get appropriated by one side or another and they take on new definitions and they mean different things. I mean, we're, we're just watching this thing happen in real time. To take the side of pro-social justice, anti-Trump, and there really grew the spirit of condescension, it seems like. Oh, now that that's key. The condescension is key because. It's interesting, isn't it? And this is sort of the, this is sort of the heart of populism. One of the things that Trump did well was, well, in some ways, what the Republicans managed to do was recapture elements of the working class, which is pretty amazing when Romney, of course, had the 47%. Now Hillary Clinton, of course, had the basket of deplorables. Now what is being sensed here is that Russell Moore, Tim Keller, David French, these people are now eggheads, intellectuals, smarty pants, and they don't, they're, they're out of touch with the, the salt of the earth or Russell Moore, Beth Moore, they're out of touch with the salt of the earth kind of people down at the bottom who, who, who see from below up now, boy, this is, this is just rich and complex and it's, it's all happening before our very eyes. And to what degree are we doing it? To what degree are we participating in it? And to what degree is it just being done to us? Most of the time that they were going to take the side of pro-social justice, anti-Trump, and there really grew the spirit of condescension, it seems like, mostly exhibited on places like Twitter and in podcasts and things like that. Social media. And I would say there was also this embarrassment articulated and expressed by Big Eva toward fellow Christians. Ah, so, well, you know, I, I'd really like to, now evangelicalism is, is a funny thing because, you know, especially in the Christian Reformed Church, am I really evangelical? I don't know if I want to be, because it has this, it has this, this connotation that goes far beyond it, it, it, it reaches what, what do we mean by this word? And well, who really are the, the good side in this? This podcast and things like that. And I would say there was also this embarrassment articulated and expressed by Big Eva toward fellow Christians who did hold sincere reasons for voting for Trump and for questioning secular narratives surrounding things like systemic racism, police brutality, social justice. I mean, after George Floyd happened, people in Big Eva were so quick to jump on the secular Black Lives Matter narrative about systemic racism and police brutality and had no interest in looking at the data or questioning the popular dogma coming from the mainstream left. Like they just had no interest in the facts whatsoever. Now we've got sort of a moderate, we've had no interest in the facts. Um, again, this is just fascinating because she's, she's in some ways doing, she's not working from a script. She's speaking off the top of her head. She's and YouTube of course, is, is a brilliant platform for this, where I can in some ways share something of my spirit with you that's unscripted and it's spontaneous and I'm, I'm thinking out loud as I talk to you. Was it was really crazy. And that was, I think kind of a fault line that was a, that was a fissure. That was something that I. Okay. Now we have a fault line, something that opens up out of the ground. Certainly took the more controversial, less mainstream stance on that. Okay. Now we're getting a sense of, well, what do we mean by big Eva? Well, I'm going to use some other language. We, there's this ascendant morality. There's this ascendant narrative. There's the people in power. What do you mean the president of the United States doesn't have power when it was Donald Trump or now it's Joe Biden. Well, there's a sense in our culture that there's a, there's power in the culture, power held by let's say the mass media, power held by the creators of the stories that we mostly imbibe and power held by the Apple corporation and the, especially the tech corporations that are, that are woke and woke friendly. In other words, there's very much a culture war dynamic, very much a social struggle, and even if your team has the presidency of the United States. They don't have power. Now again, see things through a, a, a Nietzschean, a Nietzschean lens. Well, what we all want to be the victims here. We all want to be the plucky underdogs. We all want to be the rebels because the plucky underdogs and the rebels, you know, fighting against power. We're the, we're the ones who are pure of heart. We're the ones who are seeing clearly. We're the ones who have facts on our side. We're the ones and you know, on and on and on we go with this. Put me in opposition, not purposely, but just consequently. I didn't want to be your enemy. You made me be your enemy by, by saying those base, by saying those wrong things that you said. Now this dance right here. Now some of you might be really annoyed by this point because you feel you're on team, should I keep forgetting her name? You're on team Allie. You're on team Allie and, and, and this is she's singing your song and she's taking your side and this is exactly what's, what's happened to you. Now, when we get a little bit later, Rick, Rick doesn't like it. If I use the whole screen, cause no Paul, you shouldn't use the whole screen. Just use that little box. So when we get to Werner's article or Wenner, Peter Wenner, when we get to his article, he's going to kind of take the same posture. You know, it's, it's, it's, it's these, it's these people who have elevated Trump. These are the, these are the reasons for the split. I didn't, I didn't cause this divorce. I didn't want the, I didn't want the fight to happen. It was, it was the other person. They made me do it. This is, this is how we fight. Against the people who are so quick to latch onto everything that CNN said about, you know, systemic racism and social justice. Oh, my, my adversaries are, they've been, they've been duped by, they've either been duped by Trump or they've been duped by Fox or they've been duped by CNN. My, you know, they're, they're not, they're not victims of power like me. I mean, big Eva, I'm a victim of power. Notice how the structure of the conflict remains the same, even though both sides quickly jump into, into the victim narrative. And then very quickly, the, you know, the plucky crusader Christians must reclaim Jesus for, from his church. Wow. Wow. That's deeply Protestant, isn't it? Because, because no, the, the established, so, so what's, so what's big Eva to, let's say the people that are, that she calls big Eva. No, big Eva are the mega churches and the mega churches that have lined up with Donald Trump and the mega churches that won't wear a mask and the mega churches that are resisting vaccination and the mega churches that are, are listening to social media and not to the, the government. And well, wait a minute back when the government was run by someone else, we weren't supposed to listen to the government then, I mean, can you blame people for being confused? In the United States. And I think they did so in a way that is not biblical. Even- Ah, another key evangelical. It's not biblical. I don't know if you caught it, but Sarah in the rise and fall of Mars Hill, Rando's conversation at one point said, I don't, I don't even know what people mean when they talk about something being biblical or not biblical. And so I think that they are worth, these ideas are worth continuing with. These disagreements are worth talking about. I think these agreements, disagreements are worth talking about, and I'm glad you're talking about it. And that's why I'm talking about it. Cause at least, you know, at least we're talking. And I don't want to minimize, I don't want to minimize the concerns of people on the other side of those issues to share my same faith, but- See, and so she's trying to play fair, but- I do feel like big Eva minimizes the concerns of conservatives like me. Okay. But now what's interesting about big Eva is again, if you listen to Russell Moore, who was no longer part of the Southern Baptist convention, he would say, big Eva is the mob that drove me out. And she would say, no, big Eva is, are these authors, these celebrity authors and who are, who are writing pieces that everyone reads, they're the, they're the spiritual shapers and there's a, there's a division in the, there's a division in the colony. When it comes to things like critical race theory and social justice theology and Joe Biden, if you want to know- Joe Biden? What I mean by those things, by the way, if you're thinking, define your terms. I have done so many episodes on social justice theology and critical race theory. Those are probably the things I have talked about, maybe the most frequently in addition to abortion and gender ideology. All you have to do is type in those- Okay. So things are lining up here and, and now we have lines between us where we can sort of know who's, who's on our side of the line and who's on the other side of the line, even though these weren't the other lines that used to be important because we used to be on the same side of the, of those other lines. But now we've got other lines between us. Those keywords and relatable on YouTube, wherever you get your podcast, they'll come up also, Ali best sucky.com click podcast, click category. And I have a Patreon. There's cat. Oh, we haven't posted that video yet. I mean, grim gris. Gris for these things. So you can go listen to all those episodes to know exactly what I'm talking about. But big Eva claims the biggest threat we hear from people, you know, like Beth Moore is Trump ism and, um, white nationalism or Christian nationalism. And while big Eva does tend to agree. That for example, abortion is wrong and that gender is male and female, according to Genesis one nowadays, you will often find them a little bit quieter about it. Now we're getting into some of the Georgiancy stuff where we're going to, we're going to forefront these things and we're going to, which is of course. Why selection is always a part of always a part of agenda. Talking instead about nuance and empathy and, you know, not wanting to be divisive dancing around these subjects for days rather than just saying, well, but we've had a fair amount of nuance in this video already. And now dancing around. And what is clearly true according clearly true into the God who tells us that he is love, like there is definitely this, well, there's a lot of empathy in the love word, um, could have said the truth word feeling. Not just among big Eva, but also the people who profess to be, you know, progressive Christians that they can out love God by not saying what the Bible says is true and what the Bible says is false, what the Bible says is good, what the Bible says is bad. Okay. So now what the Bible says is true. The Bible says false. And now of course we have a certain approach to the Bible in this. A whole lot of hubris and it's hubris. While big Eva may personally hold to many of the same views that I do in the last few years, especially while Trump was president, it seems like those common stances have taken a backburner publicly in exchange for a whole lot of mushiness in my opinion. It's okay because hey, Trump, you know, evangelicals, generally speaking, liked Trump's Supreme court appointments. I remember after Trump was elected, um, somebody fairly sardonically wrote a conservative pundit, is this the conservative you were looking for? And, you know, so, you know, nuance on all sides, many evangelicals were pretty quick to say, I would have rather had, um, um, a certain other Republicans who ran, but Trump won the nomination. So, et cetera, et cetera. Secularism, honestly, when it comes to political and cultural issues. So this is leading to what I want to talk about with these people. I guess I, I shouldn't be surprised when I see someone like Russell Moore, Tim Keller, and David French publicly praising, almost tripping over themselves to praise someone like Francis Collins, the former head of the National Institutes of Health. Now, of course, Francis Collins wrote a book and why, why was Francis Collins celebrated? The language of God, Francis Collins wrote a book, The Language of God. And in the, now we've got old fights here in the modernist fundamentalist fight. Francis Collins for moderates was sort of a success story. Why? Because here was a, a doctor and a scientist who was nationally known, a celebrated doctor and scientist who became an evangelical Christian, wrote a book about his, the way that he dealt with science and the Bible, um, rose to prominence in the country, was appointed by, uh, Barack Obama, was kept in his position by Donald Trump too. Um, you know, it had a big part in decoding the human genome process. Here is a world-class scientist who was also a, now we'll do some other buzzwords, Bible believing Christian. That's like gold. I mean, James Ture is in some ways the new Francis Collins because that's those tribal games, but now France, and again, I'm not going to get into Francis Collins thing because I quite honestly haven't looked at it. I've read an article by Rod Dreher on it and I know Esther's been talking about it. So just, just go look at that and decide for yourself the elements of his transgression, but basically, no, okay. Okay. Well we're against cancel culture, but Hey, let's, we're about to cancel Tim Keller, Russell Moore and David French because they haven't sufficiently canceled Francis Collins. Isn't that sort of what we're doing here? And again, I really don't, I'm not emotionally bound up in this fight, but all I want to pay attention to is the stuff we don't see the stuff we do automatically, the stuff we do without a lot of reflection and you know, Tim Keller was a good guy, Russell Moore was a good guy, uh, David French, all of these guys were good guys. They were against abortion. They were, um, moderate when it comes to science and religion things. They were crunchy believers who believed in the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ. They were, they were all the things that we wanted people to be on our team until some of these new lines got drawn and now they're on the other side. And again, maybe they're on the other side for you. That's fine. But I want us to see the dynamic because I think if we can see the dynamic a little bit, maybe we can have a little bit more reflection about this and maybe do a little better talking to each other about this. And I mean, I don't have, I don't have any feelings one way or another about Ali Beth Stuckey. I, I honestly only found her because I heard big Eva tossed about somewhere. And I thought, Oh boy, it's a buzzword. It's going to become a holy word. Got to find out who's talking big Eva and bang my response to John Piper, Tim Keller and big Eva. Hmm. What's going on? So on Twitter, somebody posted what I didn't remember. Maybe I might've retweeted it three years ago, but was basically a piece where the Sinclair networks were warning people about misinformation and social media. And a couple of friends who are more astute at politics and media than I am. One of whom is, um, you might recognize the, the, the, the label there. I won't out anyone here or docs them. This video is now over three years old. Local news has been dead for a while. It is now just a corporate mouthpiece with local puff pieces. Disasters added in for some flavor. People don't care about local anyway. National is where the religious centers lie. Hmm. This was an NPR story where the video actually came from. And it's quite a dramatic video because you have all these local news people and they're all reading from the exact same telecop prompter saying the exact same message because, well, this is big media. This is Sinclair holding the strings. Now it's a little harder to place on. Tim Keller, Russell Moore, David French, critical race theory. What, what exactly is holding the strings? Now I made this video about the piece that Mark Galley wrote where he said, well, basically the strings that are holding people are their desires to be affirmed by big media, by blue church. Hey, fair enough. Um, and I think when we look at these fights, we should ask ourselves, what are principalities and what are powers? Now, lately, I just recently, my wife, Rick and I had a conversation about how women hate wires. And for years, my wife at home was telling me you promised some day there wouldn't be wires. And so finally she said, I'm done. I've had it with wires. We can buy a new TV if we have to. We can. So then the, the old Panasonic plasma, which was a really great TV went away and the, the OLED came in the house, the smart TV without wires. So I could stream everything. But then I needed to, I didn't really want to pay $65 a month to the YouTube TV or, or local Hulu or any of that stuff. So, Hey, what do you do? You get out the old antenna and you get a little Amazon recode and you get a little Amazon fire stick and whoo-hoo. Now I get free over the air TV. To my wife complains, this doesn't look quite as sharp as some of the other stuff we watch. Wires. Anyway, so I'm watching local TV news again, and I know I'm getting old because I want to see the weather. You only have to see the weather half the year in Sacramento because the rest of the year it's always sunny and warm. But now we have rain that comes through, which we really need. So local news, sports, weather, local disasters, you know, the fires, the floods, but what is local news? Sac B is a shadow of what it used to be. Sac B when I moved here was a really thick paper. Now Google and Facebook have all the advertising. Everything is sort of sucked up into the heavenlies in terms of local news. Is it, is it really Sinclair that's, that's moving this or is it really principalities and powers that are pulling the strings? Well, what about, what about Trump? It's Trump or it's Biden or it's critical race theory, but we don't even, we haven't even, you know, we call Kendi or D'Angelo are Kendi and D'Angelo founders of critical race theory, embodiments of them, or are they mouthpieces of a larger spirit, which is wielding and owning and moving us all. So when, oh shoot, where's the link? Nuts, I hate it when that happens. Um, Oh, there's the link. After I made my little video about Jonathan height and Jordan Peterson, Adam friend did, who's a big follower of both of these guys said, have you ever seen like the first time they talked on TV? And I said, no. And so he showed me that video and it's worth watching. Excuse me. It's worth watching. And now joining us on the line from New York, New York, Jonathan height, author of the right. New York, New York center of the world. Just mind why good people are divided by politics and look at young John, all young and fresh and his hair's not all gray yet religion. He's also professor of ethical leadership at New York university, Stern school of business. Jonathan, it's good of you to join us on TV. Oh, tonight. How are you? Oh, very well. Thanks, Steve. Glad to hear it. Well, very good. Thanks as well. Let's say the dude is just seriously nice, isn't he? The scene for your book and what it's about. We start here. Imagine a very small rider on a very big elephant. Take it away. Sure. Um, so I'm a social psychologist and I study morality and, um, uh, my early research was on how people make moral judgments and I would give people, uh, moral dilemmas or moral scenarios in which someone did something, let's say gross, but harmless, like a family that ate its pet dog. And, uh, I love his little stories. Now we're talking about moral judgments here because what we've seen from Ali about Stuckey is that, well, these people were my friends and now they're, now they're on the other side of a line. And this line is really important. And what gets really interesting is that, you know, when Peter Bogosian talks, what did he, what did he call that? The great, um, that's conversion or inversion or something like that. But basically, you know, Peter Bogosian for a long time, well, we're fighting Christians, but now we're going to show up with the most biblicistic Bible believing hardcore conservative Christians and stand against the Wokesters because they're the ones that are the real problem. And you know, Ali Beth Stuckey, well, I, you know, I don't want to say too much about Tim Keller and his, his marriage book, and I've promoted his books before. And, you know, he's, he writes really good stuff, but he's on the wrong side of the line when it comes to critical race theory and, and, and social justice and, and some of these things. So this morality now keep the elephant and the rider in mind. After it was killed by a car in front of their house, harmless, like a family that ate its pet dog and, uh, after it was killed by a car in front of their house. Again, I love his little stories. And people would generally have an instant reaction. Um, they know it's wrong. They react with disgust. And what's interesting now, I don't think Ali Beth Stuckey, it hasn't quite got to disgust yet, but there's a formation that has happened and it's wrong. And so part of what you see her doing, and this is what I do in my videos too. She's thinking out loud. She's, she's talking it through. She's trying to, to the rider on top of the elephant is trying to figure out, okay, where are the new lines and how are we supposed to know them? And, and now this is all vital human thinking. And we, as we get a little bit later in this video, as I bring up some other examples, we do this for a reason. And then when I would cross examine them and try to get them to say why it's wrong, uh, they would often hem and haw and say, well, I can't really think of a reason. I just know it's wrong. This is how we are. Um, so I put this together with a lot of other research that was happening in the 1990s, uh, showing that our minds are pattern matchers that make very quick judgments. Okay. In other words, well, Tim Keller, the patterns I saw from him before he was on my side, but now I'm seeing patterns from him and he's on the other side. This is, this is how we do conflict. Within a second, usually. And then we recruit our reasoning afterwards to justify what we've just done. Okay. So this is about critical race theory and you can get into a huge debate about what does critical race theory mean? But I'll, I'll leave, I'll outsource that thinking to James Lindsay or to Robin Giangelo or to whoever I see is on my team. And well, that's a lot of what we're doing here with this evangelical fight is that we have to outsource our cognition to others. And that's in fact why we have these tribes. So we can outsource our cognition to others. Well, I can't write as well as Tim Keller and, and Russell Moore was, you know, at least before we split up with him, he was doing things and Beth Moore, boy, she was doing those, those, those great women's Bible studies and you know, here I'm a, here I'm a young blonde woman who's making her way, building a meet, building a media following. And Beth Moore did this years before. Beth Moore was a, was a prototype of this and David French, he was a, he was a war, he was, you know, formerly a soldier and he, he was a lawyer and now he's a journalist. And so we, we outsource our cognition to our allies. And then of course, something happens and well, now they're on the other side of a line and we've got to be very nuanced about where there's all of these reasons why they're still on the same side of the line as me, but they're on the other side of this thing. And so, well, what are we really doing? It's relevance realization about a particular thing where we're sort of practicing what Jonathan Haidt calls gossip, but I wouldn't say this is, you know, biblical gossip or however you want to phrase it. I don't, I don't think we're sinning. What we're doing is as a group, we are working through the spirits and the principalities and we're trying to figure out how to make it in this world. Because we're also not just trying to figure out just good, bad, right or wrong now, we're all sort of leaning into the future because we're looking at something small and we're saying, I think if this develops, it's going to become something bad because Tim Keller is not a bad person. Russell Moore is not a bad person. Beth Moore is not a bad person, but, but I'm afraid they're leading the church in a bad way or Ali Beth Stuckey. She's, she's, she's one of these social media people who are, um, she, she's part of the other side's big Eva because she has a big channel and, you know, some in the Christian Reformed Church, I'm sure see me as part of a big PVK because he's got a channel and, and he has, you know, he has a couple of thousand people that listen to him, which is maybe more than, well, I know it's more than the All One Body channel has, but, you know, here we are. This is what we're doing. This is how we do it. So the metaphor I used in my previous book, The Happiness Hypothesis, was that the mind is divided into parts like a rider on an elephant. The rider is our conscious reasoning. It's pretty small and impotent, but it acts like it's in charge. Uh, and the elephant is the other 99% of the mind, which really runs most of our behavior. Now, if we move that to politics, what's wrong with the explanation that most of the reason why people make their decisions, whether it's voting or what candidates they like or whatever, is simple pocketbook stuff. Pocketbook, plain and simple. So for the last 50 years of the 20th century, social scientists told us that human beings are basically selfish and that we make our decisions based on what's going to get us the most stuff. Now you'll hear that reason a lot. That's a, that's a powerful vulvarism. I think the Republicans in the United States realized that this was wrong long ago. Ronald Reagan made very effective moral appeals about American greatness, about the kind of country people wanted. Uh, the Democrats have stayed on this idea that, look, we're going to give you better policies that will give you more stuff, vote for us. Um, and the voters still have never really gone for it. Politics at the local level is pretty grubby and it's pretty much don't do anything that's going to lower my property values. But at the national level, politics is more like religion. Um, we circle together around sacred values. They're not selfish values. They're ideological. They're moral values. And so it does a lot for us when we can paint the other side as being selfish and ourselves as being selfless. And in many ways that folds right into the victim narrative. And again, all, uh, Tom Holland, this is the deep penetration of Jesus in Western morality. Again, take a look at this tweet. This video is now over three years old. Local news has been dead for a while. It's now just a corporate mouthpiece with local puff pieces, disasters, added in for some flavor. Huh? What's going on? What's going on? It's, it's in the upper register. It's in the heavenlies. We vote nationally based on. Well, based on what? Based on what? That's how we're judging from afar. We're doing all of this dead reckoning. Now, whether, as, as I've mentioned in some earlier videos, whether Tim Keller's church is actually doing anything more or less with respect to race or the poor or anything else than to the other big Eva, all those mega churches and their flags and their Trump voters and who are, well, you walk into a lot of those churches, especially the Pentecostal ones, and they're at least as diverse as, as anything Tim Keller has on and on and on and on and on. All this language is signaling. And this is part of, it's part of, part of what continually pushes me to push against these patterns because we're just making these straw men. Because I've been to plenty of churches on the left and churches on the right. And truth be told, I don't think a lot of the good that they actually do in terms of mouths fed and people embraced really, really differs that much. In fact, again, if you look at James Wellman's book, Evangelical Churches, these, supposedly selfish, bigoted, gun, gun gripping, flag waving churches in many ways outperform mainline churches that want to sort of mediate their benevolence through well-meaning not-for-profit organizations, which are fine too. I mean, there's, there's room for all of this. But, but watch, watch what we do with this. Well, local, well, local is actually quite contextual and practical. National, now we're dealing with big values and we have to, we have to come up with terms like big Eva or, or big media or big government or in order to somehow get a handle on what is way up there and not terribly granular right here. I loved what Hans said in my conversation with him, absurdity, and he takes this from SART, absurdity is the divorce between actor and setting. And I want to use a story of a colleague of mine. Keith Manus was a couple of years ahead of me in college and then seminary. And he was a, it's kind of a big man on campus. He was involved in student government. He was in many ways the kind of, the kind of young Christian leader that the denomination would really in many ways be at the forefront of what the denomination wished to, wished to produce. He grew up in Western Michigan. He served a church in Western Michigan, had a stint in a church in Orlando, Florida, probably more of a home missions thing. And then came back and was pastoring a Christian Reformed Church in East Saugatuck, Michigan, which is sort of a, which is a Lake town, has kind of a, it's kind of a touristy vibe in that area. And article about, about him came up in the Holland Sentinel. That's the local paper in Holland, Michigan, Holland, Michigan, and Grand Rapids, Michigan, that it's about the epicenter of my denominational heritage. Um, my, on my father's side, my great grandfather immigrated to America through Ellis Island and settled in Spring Lake, which is quite close to Muskegon where, which is the classical source of, of Keith. Keith Manus has given his life to the Christian Reformed Church, serving a pastor, serving as pastor for more than 30 years. He's done so hap, happily and thankfully. But on Sunday, October 11, Manus gave his last sermon and walked away from ministry among increasing political tensions and divisiveness, put simply he stepped away due to the CRC's broad support of president Donald Trump. While Manus loved the congregation, he served at East Saugatuck CRC for the past four years, he saw the church as a whole, he saw the church as a whole. Now, again, now watch the registers down here below. Was it the people that you were with? Or was it this, this image of the people or the people's connections? Well, let's, let's talk a little bit more about what happened. He says the church as a whole has abandoned its role in quotes as the conscience of the state in support of Trump, leading Manus to step away. There's a quote from Martin Luther King when he said, the church must be reminded that it is not the master or the servant of the state, but rather the conscience of the state. That's, that's worth thinking about in terms of a lot of the conversation that we've done with respect to one speed and two speed is, is the, is the church, remember going all the way back to Charles Taylor, a secular age, is the church a, is, so you had monastery and church and Charles Taylor said those are sort of two speeds. And then he said, well, in Protestantism, there's one speed. And I remember Mary Cohen pushing back on that pretty hard and, you know, the, the distributist integralist, Roman Catholic tradition, all that's out there too. And part of the reason I'm doing this video is because Cale wants to talk about some of these things. And I got some things to say probably that Cale and I can talk about. It'll give Cale a chance to listen to this because Roman Catholics are nowhere in this story. And they're a big part of what's going on in the American context, nor the Orthodox. And it might be before I started my channel that I could blissfully sort of live in Protestant land and never get a thought to Catholics or, or Orthodox, but not so in the American picture anymore. So again, Charles Taylor, there's one speed and two speed and the monastery is an intensification of, of Christendom. What happens in Protestantism is, is you have this chain, this strange, the strange change where in Zurich and Geneva, and then in Plymouth and New Haven, Connecticut and other places in America, the church is the intensification of the kingdom of God, which is now in the cities of God. And in, in Martin Luther King Jr's, Martin Luther King Jr's theology, I mean, he was going to sort of some of the best neo-Orthodox, the orthodoxy at that point was really sort of at its peak. Again, I'm losing some of you and talking about what neo-Orthodoxy is. It's a, it's a particular school, Karl Barth, Bonhoeffer, neo-Orthodoxy in some ways tries to reclaim some of what would have been lost by theological, by Christian Protestant theological liberalism without necessarily losing standing with the broader liberal communities that very, that in many ways was big iglesia, let's say big iga, big, big prop, big prodi. I'm trying to figure out what to call it. Big churchy, big chur. So neo-Orthodoxy, you know, Bart wants to critique the liberals because that increasingly the church is feeling like the liberal Protestantism had lost its way. And so we want to get it back, but, but we want not to lose things too much. So the church is the conscience of the state that, that, that line itself could be unpacked at great lengths. But in a context like this, I don't know how much thought is going into throwing out that line because now over on the Roman Catholic side, well, if the church is the context of the state, how chummy should the Pope be with Joe Biden? Fair question. And again, Ali Beth Stuckley says, well, wait a minute there, they're rear grounding abortion. Somebody in a, somebody in a, in a, in a comment said, do you have any videos on abortion? No. Am I, am I one of those people? Well, yeah, in some ways I am. I'm a, I'm a moderate, I'm a moderate Protestant. Why are your videos so long? It's because I'm wrestling with my soul. I'm doing this with you because I want to hear from you because I don't want to have to choose. Man, I said that just hit me hard because I think broadly white evangelical community in our country has abandoned that role. Is the Christian Reformed Church about white evangelicals? Part of what's been going on in the Christian Reformed Church is this absorption into the main line and the evangelicals. And you feel those, you feel those principalities that work in the denomination. And if you look at James Scott, 150 years ago, he was a Christian Reformed Church from the Christ Mort The question of the church largely and how it functions in this moment has been really disturbing. Ah, see it's the elephant underneath Or here's listening to the rider That's been troubling enough that I need to lay it. I need to lay it all down Keith again Keith's a guy. I respect he's wrestling with his soul, too. He's not doing it on YouTube Maybe if he had a YouTube channel, he'd still have a church. I don't know Manus is not the only Christian feeling the strain. No, that's true He said he knows several other pastors who are feeling the same thing. I have a little list of pastors that I know Many of which are not terribly happy with me since I paid so much attention to Jordan Peterson who are no longer pastoring a church because They were not in sync with the people in the pew Additional polls show that while white Christians still favor Trump that support has decreased In a poll conducted by now. Now look at all the polling that we do Pew Center research in September 30 to October 5 Christian support for trumpet as dipped during August now pay attention This is during the election in The poll published October 13 to 78 percent of white evangelical Protestants. But again now all of these categories You know you get a survey evangelical yes or no NUANCE? Wow, I guess I'm pro nuance aren't I? According to pew 44% of registered voters are white Republicans or white Christians Making it a key voting demographic. Ah, that's why the newspaper is excited Now they're gonna go to George lunch scowl the sociology professor at Grand Valley State University Let's find an expert who studied the sociology of religion Let's find an expert who studied the sociology of religion it says that from the religious community is tied to how people view God You know, that's true. Listen to Jonathan Haidt now How much difference does any of this make in Esau getuck CRC? I have no idea How much difference does any of this make in Living Stones Christian Reformed Church? Well I've got Democrats and Republicans in this church always have in Fact many of the Democrats work in politics This is Sacramento. It's this seat of the state people in my family work in legislative offices His actions don't seem very Christian much less conservative Christian Yeah, that's been a real issue with Trump. But why was Trump loved? well Trump sort of comes at the at the end of the Tea Party movement because you know, we send these people to Washington to do some things to to stop abortion and to Balance the budget and to cut taxes, you know balancing the budget and cutting taxes Can't really do both kind of hard to do both Well, if we just cut the taxes low enough so much income will come in Yeah, I think financially that way sometimes doesn't help my credit card balance It's something else about religion whether you see God as punitive or judgmental or loving forgiving version of God Hmm. Somebody else's filters are coming in there that definitely shapes political views as well. I don't know a Lot of stuff coming out of the left has gotten pretty punitive and judgmental lately Lundsgau says the divide between conservative and progressive Christians based on their view of God is a point of division within the faith in terms of political support The professor explained that those who see God as punitive tend to support Trump Saying they see him as strong-willed for the way he attacks opponents and punishes people for being poor Trump punishes people for being poor now this is where you really want a whole lot of nuance because a Lot of poor people to even black folks. I know some of them really like Trump because Trump was punishing big whatever now again in my opinion Trump's a rather strange advocate for Punishing big whatever because Trump was all about big Trump. He wrote it on the side of his buildings and on the side of his plane but These are the kinds of ways that we deal way up here in terms of the the broad Features and the values of who's on my side and who's not Years in the making Manus has has been feeling a disconnect between the teachings of the church and the actions of the political candidate It largely supports for years There's a lot of conservative Christians that have been saying that for a long time, too Let's be fair It started when Trump announced his campaign in June 15 while descending down an escalator at Trump Tower From the time he came down the escalator Manus was the first to say that From the time he came down the escalator Manus said of when he began to feel an internal struggle It's only been building ever since from the beginning I thought there's something about this man about the instrument that he is for a lot of things that are just not very not Jesus Ali Beth Stuckey disagrees the members of his church disagree He said the congregation at his church has saved his faith in many ways But what he's seen from Christians nationally has changed as challenged it Down up the absurdity of divorcing the local from the context you have Charlottesville Manus was a part of group of pastors that walked 130 miles from Charlottesville to Washington DC in August hearing stories of people during the 2017 events During the civil rights movement my father wanted to go on some of those marches And my mother said you got little babies at home and my father stayed home now Was that a sin of? Was that a sin of patriarchy or anti-patriarchy he listened to his wife Why go on this march when you know your church feels this way Because it's a religious convention Because it's a religious conviction because I'm what are you doing I'm participating in the story of the civil rights movement I Was too young to march when they were marching in the 60s now when I march now I I participate in the same thing Marches on the other side participating in the same thing Some of the dynamics that go on in a megachurch these are the same dynamics that go on in a march He called Trump's holding photo holding a Bible in front of st John's Church in Washington in June following the use of tear gas and riot control to clear protesters from the area Tremendous violation of something deep and holy Was he there? No, he saw it on TV And so At the hot at the as the tension in his heart and the world around him continues to grow Manus said his feelings began to show in his sermons causing discomfort for some of his parishioners Yeah, we pastors where we got a The job sets us up To be some kind of a weak Vocal trigger on what's in our heart and if we're in alignment We're supposed to in some way speak back to the congregation what they're feeling in better words This is some of the dynamic of Jordan Peterson in his audience Jordan Peterson said it's so much better than I could yeah That's what the preacher does today Jordan just put a prayer on his YouTube channel Wow And so man is this is this is this is how he is he's he's one person and he's a And so of course, this is gonna leak into his sermons and it's gonna make some of his parishioners uncomfortable But aren't you supposed to challenge them? prophetically, yeah Trying to keep his thoughts internalized became more and more difficult as time went on there's some duplicity forming And what am I going to do? What it really was doing was tearing me up he said that's cuz he's a good guy he's honest he's got a conscience He's he's he's telling it like it is. He doesn't have a YouTube channel to pour this out to poor guy I'm blessed. I'm blessed by you And I think part of the reason that you listen to me is because some of you feel exactly the same way and And Quite frankly I'm in terms of my lifelong voting record compared to Keith Maness's I'm pretty darn sure I'm Fairly far I've been fairly far to the left of him At least until Rod Dreher and Jordan Peterson and all the red pills I've been taking Gosh It's not only me it's quite a number of pastors I know that are just like me This is it all this preaching we did about Jesus and there's this there's this big disconnect surely if I just preach Jesus to them, then they will see that Donald Trump is antichrist or Surely if I just preach Jesus to them, then they'll see that Joe Biden is antichrist abortion, you know Mexicans Muslim bands all the things I Think that's a real burden on a lot of pastors hearts. I love these people. I love God. I love Jesus I love the church and there's something happening here that I just have to speak against Allie Beth Stuckey She's on the other side. She's Tim Keller. I used to I used to love his books He's helped me so much but this critical race theory and the social justice Why hasn't he come out against said some things against those words? Paul Vanderkley he's talked about it. It's Paul on what side of the line is Paul on Man has sat down with the elders of his church in September began to express the tensions that he's been feeling That's exactly what he should have done After a long and emotional meeting they agreed it was time to part ways It's a big deal for a Christian reform pastor It's an article 17. No doubt. I didn't really look it up Law article 17 in some ways for a Christian for a pastor is a kind of a black mark on your record Keith Manus to the best of my knowledge Doesn't have another place Someone it's Christian form church a small enough place someone might pass this video to him and he might watch it So if that's the case Keith, you're in my prayers. I Said this about John Sook who had on my channel Took a lot of integrity for John Sook to he had reached the height in many ways of Christian foreign power structures he stepped away and took a took a mainline church in a church of you know United Church of Canada Church in Toronto and I talked to him and you know He's plenty woke and and that's John Sook But you know, I I appreciate his integrity for saying I'm out of alignment with the Christian from church. I should walk away I appreciate Keith's integrity saying I'm out of alignment with the East Soggartuck Church. I should walk away. We're not helping each other here. Fair enough You did the right thing We got down on our knees many of us Wept it was really hard decision. Yeah, they loved each other This thing got in the way Man has said it was time for me to lovingly and with great peace and loss separate from the church It was really crushing because I've given my life to the church and thankfully so again Keith's a good guy He's always been a good guy I don't think you know that the the young Calvin College student the young Sarah seminarian again when you're in college and seminary even just somebody a year or two ahead of you you kind of look up to him because They're a little ahead of you and again Keith was a Keith was a student leader and and he was You know from everything that I've known and seen he's exactly the kind of pastor that the denomination wants and needs Be the conscience So that's the paragraph heading Manus says he understands many Christians will vote for Trump and he will still love those who do but implores them to think about What it means to be a Christian before they're making their choice Ali Beth Stuckley from the other side of the line throws it right back at you. I Would just implore anyone who claims Christ to look very seriously at the core things. Jesus called us to do and to be This is right from Peter Werner's Christians must reclaim Jesus from his church. We're gonna start a new one He calls on his fellow Christians to be the conscience of the president yeah, but we got a new president now What does that mean now be the conscience of Joe Biden Lots of people got their opinions about that, too Lots of people got their opinions about that, too We're supposed to be the conscience of the presidents and we have refused to do that really I mean that Is it is it because nobody told Donald Trump clearly that they disagreed with him No, there were there was a lot of there was a lot of noise I Don't know that a church who believes in Jesus as we do can abandon this conscience and and not say mr President we're calling you to do better than that and you need to call our nation to do better than that I think a lot of people said that And lots of different ways to Donald Trump and he didn't care a Lot of people are saying that to Joe Biden Does he care more than Donald Trump? I'm not inside each of these man's heads or hearts. God will be their judge a Few weeks prior to his last sermon manis wrote with a member of the church who asked him to reconsider his decision The person asked him about his plans once he walked away with no guarantee that the issue will ever persist after Election Day He said what are you going to do? What are you going to have manis recalled? Well, at least I have my conscience. I Think he's one of the articles said something about he's gonna maybe go into chaplaincy Churches pastors when for one reason or another they don't want to be pastors anymore Usually it's therapists or chaplains or something, you know, it's usually the way it goes Increasing divorce between actor and setting Absurdity is the divorce between actor and setting we treat people like tech like feature lists So this was the article that was in the Holland Sentinel Of course Christian from church is a small place got passed around read it again, I haven't talked to Keith manis I don't know how much I talked to him back in the college and seminary days, but Again got a lot of respect for him and nothing in that article diminishes my respect for him. I Think people are entitled to their theological and their political opinions and If you find yourself out of line with a church Getting out is a good thing and to get out without another church to jump to Takes a lot of guts takes a lot of integrity. He did it Again, they might start talking about I don't know Ali Beth Stuckey She could very well be a person of great integrity probably is See things very differently than Keith manis Jonathan height. Well, wait a minute Local politics that's that's about like clink keeping the streets clean and the property values National politics that's way up there in the heavenlies big things moving us We participate in them. We feel them deeply Keith story got picked up By the LA Times They decided to run with it. They were not going to run with it a Previous title in the Holland Sentinel a little bit closer between actor and setting Holland CRC pastor leaves church amid political tensions Holland Sentinel knows how many Republicans live in the Holland, Michigan area It's a pretty purple area. I would imagine Probably went for Trump It's a fairly nuanced Accurate Keith manis is a pastor for more than 30 years but laid down his ministry amid internal tensions over the church's broad support of Donald Trump Okay, which churches local church? Yeah so Holland CRC pastor leaves church amid political tensions, that's the title in the Holland Sentinel Title in the LA Times The pastor thought Trump was evil. So he quit his conservative church. Oh Wait a minute. Wait a minute. What's going on here? This video is now three years old local news has been dead for a while It's not it's it's now just a corporate mouthpiece with local puff piece Disaster added with some flavor Keith man a story got pulled up into the heavenlies into the upper registers with the LA Times not the New York Times yet You know not the Washington Post maybe you know LA Times that sort of be level LA Times would like to be the New York Times, but of course these papers are owned by McClatchy I mean these papers are all owned by things I mean the sack B is just one little tentacle of all these newspapers that are all shuffled about Let's see how this article reads This article was on Los Angeles Times they have paywalls and stuff fortunately Yahoo News picked it up So let's read it from Yahoo News, it's basically just from the LA Times First we have all the title of course the pastor thought Trump was evil in scare quotes So he quit his conservative church. It's all we know just that little resolution Then we have a picture of Keith on his front lawn He's got a Biden Harris sign Now I don't put political signs on my lawn for a reason Then he's got hate has no home in Holland he lives in Holland Michigan with a bunch of multicolored Fists in the air and you know what I've said about that Reverend Keith Maness in front of his house in Holland, Michigan the Christian Reformed Church pastor and lifelong Republican Recently quit his position to speak out against the reelection of President Trump Was it Trump that broke things Well, he's a lifelong Republican that's not unusual he's grew up in the Christian Reformed Church in Western Michigan Almost all of them Republicans just like his church. I grew up in the Christian Reformed Church in Patterson, New Jersey Tiny little insignificant black church. So I floated with all the black folks. We voted for the Democrats Some of those politicians in Patterson weren't really Anyway, I'm not gonna talk about Patterson politics So something changed him something changed him This is the LA Times piece It was going to be a hard day Keith Maness prayed. He was doing right He got into the car and drove past the harvested cornfields and keep America great signs. Whoa What are we doing here? We have flyover country. We have cornfields We have flyover country we have cornfields They didn't talk about cornfields and the Holland Sentinel piece. Of course, the Holland Sentinel knows where there are cornfields in Western, Michigan Didn't talk about the keep America great signs He parked walked a few steps and opened the door to his church a pastor for decades He stood before a few dozen congregants. He knew them all their histories struggles and joys. That is the way things are here He told them he loved them and asked for forgiveness But he couldn't go on as before most church members supported President Trump He said and Manus could no longer hide his revulsion. Ah disgust disgust That's what height deals in right and you know, someone in the comments mentioned hate disgust. It's a powerful thing It's pre-conscious. It's down here in elephant land It's lifelong Republican His repulsion for the man he considered incompatible with Christianity I Am to follow the call of my heart and speak into the world as small as my voice may be said the 59 year old lifelong Republican Holland Sentinel didn't tell us about how he voted It was a voice. He said that was too controversial too divisive for this small house of God He saw getux no make a church He saw getux no make a church CRC doesn't really have many mega churches He gave his two-week notice and quit East saw getux church It's a big deal again for a Christian foreign minister to do in this conservative region of Western Michigan The GOP stronghold where pastors and parties have long united as one Manus's decision rippled through the city of 33,000 in a battleground state ahead of a bitter presidential election Just lift it up this whole story is just lifted out Manus became front-in-age news in the 10,000 circulation local paper now in the LA Times and Yahoo news his Facebook plays page long inactive Flooded with comments from strangers labeling him a baby-killer Heretic and a man who was more worried about the social gospel than about the real gospel Ooh now we're demonizing the other side Both sides demonizing each other right websites covering his denomination The Christian Reformed Church suddenly were plastered with the name of a rural pastor who until then was little known outside of his flock He received emails of support from seminarians and ministers calling him courageous for speaking the words. They couldn't Because they're they're gagged they're gagged those evil Republicans they shut you up and they shut you down The pastor long filled the pastor long filled by his faith yet fearful of sharing his beliefs As the nation was a crossroads felt a freedom like never before pioneer now Nervous excitement of the new path taken and the doubt of a man who wondered if he could make any difference But unburdened himself comes at a cost after he left church But unburdened himself comes at a cost after he left church that Sunday a month ago he stuck a blue Oh, that's it's after he left the church. Okay Harris Biden sign in his yard. It was a small act of defiance, but it was who he was he's the rebel against the Big stuff around him against Big Holland He went inside slumped on the couch and held back tears and again This is who the guy is he's been this all his life. He's a man of conscience. He has convictions stuff has moved him He I guess he was blue-pilled If I was red-pilled, I don't know We won't we won't go into my politics There goes early retirement no Christian reform pastors retire early Early Christian reform pastors can't afford to retire early My pension my friends your pension doesn't go anywhere. Come on your friends I'd still call you my friend Keith. We don't really know each other but Just read read the byline on my Twitter We spent nearly 30 years pastoring churches across Michigan and Florida is it worth it? Oh, that's a good question Across the US Trump was almost unwavering support from evangelical and conservative Christians like those in Michigan Where he won by 10,000 votes four years ago. It's not a lot of votes. I mean Unwavering support early in the sentence and 10,000 votes later in the sentence Eat it out my friend With the confirmation of Amy Cohn at Barrett to the Supreme Court the faithful have cheered the president for delivering on a promise To appoint conservatives who might strike down abortion rights. That's exactly why a lot of them sent him there an Issue billboards advertise here is a sure sign of Paul of the politicians Christian Corps Holland Sentinel didn't write about that. They didn't have to everybody in Holland knows it's a ten thousand circulation paper But smaller groups of Christians those plucky rebels against big Conservatism But many of them Republicans like Manus has crossed party and faith lines Recently to stand against the president in hopes of persuading believers in places like Holland in a country that won 62% For Trump in 2016 to vote differently now Let me tell you something if you really want to win friends and influence people Careful with the grandstanding Be a little bit more subtle be a bit more loving Have some nuance some understanding Yeah, maybe they don't vote like you like but you do love him and he certainly did I'm not saying to eat your conscience. I don't Now we're gonna get to Big Eva two major evangelical figures the former president of Pasadena based Fuller Theological Seminary and Former Calvin College professor and member of the Christian Form Church Richard Mao and a former Orlando, Florida mega church pastor Joel Hunter Joined thousands this month to march for pro-life evangelicals for Biden. There's not many pro-life. There's not many pro-life Democrats left They say the former vice president was more biblically balanced agenda than Trump despite Catholic candidates support for abortion rights In an essay published this week prominent Minneapolis based theologian and preacher John Piper Oh, I guess we're all in the middle of Big Eva Described Trump as leading a destruction of more kinds than we can imagine Though he said he would not vote Democratic either months later Christianity Today a magazine founded by the Reverend Billy Graham inflamed tensions after an editorial criticized Evangelicals for supporting a man with black and moral record and bent and broken character. That's Mark Galley. That's the guy who was Complaining about sort of the sycophancy Among some evangelicals for big media big blue church That's what it's way hierarchies and social status work The nature of Trump's character has become more apparent to Americans four years ago about the same time elders and deacons recruited mannus to EECS to ESAGATUCK church the delicate pairing of preacher to congregation seemed a good match Manus had spent 18 years as a pastor to a rural congregation in McBain. That's northern Michigan. It's another little CRC area town of 656 in northern Michigan after short stints in churches in Orlando, Florida and Muskegon, Michigan Congress at ESAGATUCK worshiped in casual dress to the rhythm of contemporary music played live on guitars It's kind of you know CRC sort of blended stuff not too not too progressive not too conservative No skinny jeans for pastors no smoke machines, but few guitars and drums, you know Our Sam would feel right at home leading worship in a CRC Although they have to talk about that Trinity thing That they believe steadfastly in the conservative traditions that could be traced to the church's founding 150 years ago Yeah CRC was born in secessionism from the state church where the plucky upstart Although is that ES ESAGATUCK as locals call it faced the same issues roiling other conservative Christians Questions of racial diversity and role of LGBT people and faith faiths place in politics It was not a community that made headlines in Holland dubbed the city of churches for its more than 170 congregations The church was a typical member of the Christian Reformed Church the denomination stretching back to Dutch immigrants somebody here did their homework Who settled in Western Michigan and Midwestern states of the mid 19th century? ESAGATUCK had a thriving cadet program similar to Boy Scouts Christian Reformed Power military units. I was a cadet Freddie was a cadet Freddie will tell you the cadet pledge see Points on the board here mention of the Freddie and Paul show in one of my other videos Put it down on the bingo card A booming Sunday school and ran a long-standing Wednesday night free dinner series with Dutch apple crisp was always for dessert For Mannes this was a return to the place where he grew up and went to seminary where his mother and relatives still lived And where he could plan to retire with his wife a mental health counselor a short drive from the eastern shore of Lake Michigan Trump election threw all that into question and again, you know I Think I know who you married to I think I remember her I think she was in my class The president instituted a travel ban that largely targeted Muslim majority Countries he cut refugee settlements to the lowest level in American history He promised to build a wall to block illegal border crossings and painted immigrants as criminals He stoked support for white supremacists by Retweeting their memes and at times seemed to support their causes before backtracking to say he was maligned and misunderstood In a church where congregants saw serving refugees and the poor as Inherent to their biblical mission where anti-racism was a core value and where farmers sent proceeds to anti-hunger prophets It's all true of conservative Christian reform churches Back in the back in the end of the Vietnam War Christian reform churches all over the place were taking in refugees Christian reform churches today continue to like taking in refugees We're a moderate church like that We we believe both in a crunchy faith of Jesus resurrection and word indeed and helping the poor And these things endure long beyond Blue and red states Republicans and Democrats The only celebrations of the president were times when he condemned abortion Yeah, Maggie hats and shirts were seldom spotted in the building A church service would never be mistaken for a Trump rally. It's absolutely right. We Most CRC most CRC sanctuaries do not have flags in them. We do not do politics in the church This is something that's been a long conversation in the church as He would any president man has offered prayers for the nation's leaders each week as well as for the state's Democratic governor He visited the ill and presided over baptisms weddings and weddings and funerals Funerals he noticed the Trump bumper stickers in the church's lot and the Facebook banners of congregants hailing the president as a hero as COVID Not pant 19 pandemic hit Trump initially resisted wearing a mask and tweeted liberate, Michigan Manas saw faith over fear signs going up around a message that belief in Jesus alone Was enough to prove was enough to protect from the virus This summer as he watched protests in response to George Floyd's killing engulfed the nation streets and the Secret Service pepper spray crowds as the parent president could be photographed with a Bible Manas decided to speak up in a biblical code One Sunday he contrasted Trump to part of the Heideberg catechism a pillar of the church's faith Which expands on the sixth day against murder? I am not to belittle hate insult or kill my neighbor not by my thoughts my words my look or my gesture That's a tough one to keep Some of the crowd scoffed at the mention of the president. Yeah, things are tight. Things are dicey Should he have said that shouldn't he have said that? Was Keith's call and he made it I make my own calls you listen to my rough drafts you can listen to my sermons at Livingstones I Talk about I use political illustrations all the time in my sermons Part of the difficulty of Trump getting elected was he was a stock figure in many of my sermons for years I grew up in the New York area. I know what Donald Trump was In a sermon on Christian unity told the church he knew most were Republicans who supported the president Democrats manic said were brothers and sisters in Christ to as Christ is bigger than us and bigger than party. Amen a Couple quit church via text message upset that the pastor believed a Christian could be a Democrat could be a Democrat In another sermon. He told a story of the prophet Jeremiah who argued with God and lamented the mockery He endured for sharing the Lord's message His word burns in my heart like a fire. It's like a fire in my bones The prophet said manis was unable to void speaking out on how his faith spurred him to oppose Trump knew how Jeremiah felt And Late August he made a he made a he made agreement with church leaders and deacons to go on vacation and travel to Charlotte Virginia to take part in a 10-day walk to Washington DC The pilgrim remarks that took the pilgrimage marked to two years since the nation saw white Supremacists with torches converge on Charlottesville chanting Jews will not replace us in blood and soil Man has promised church leaders to keep his attendance at the event a secret. Ooh, that's They see and tried to block his face in photos now there's one I Don't know if he's in this picture Walking try to keep it off social media Walking 15 hours a day on rural Virginia roads. It was his first protest his first time holding a sign that said Black Lives Matter What's he participating in is that religion is it politics When he returned a member of his congregation confronted him you're supporting a terrorist organization He said to manis I disagree the pastor replied later feeling cowardly not saying more The man and his wife quit the church At a tense church meeting not long after manis knelt to pray with the elders and deacons who had hired him they were With the elders and deacons who had hired him they agreed to part ways wrote a letter to the congregation Elders and deacons wrote their own letter Cindy brink read the words aloud in what of manis's last sundays praising the pastor who had served our church with integrity and honor And promising to always speak well of him. She declined an interview request good for her Since manis said his goodbyes He's began to share his opinions he penned an essay for a blog and the reform journal entitled. Why are Christians so mean? He wrote another for the banner a newspaper covering his denomination called Conduct becoming the body of christ about the abysmal stories. He heard from other congregations turning against their pastors He no longer looks over his shoulder when he describes the president as evil He meets with groups of pastors like him ones who left their churches or have considered it now, it's a movement There's a man in rural zeeland church the nearby church where manis was born who quit his job because the congress refused to worship with masks There is the holland pastor who faced backlash after writing a letter to the local paper No matter how many people are murdered by white supremacists the republican party always chooses to defend guns over god I love our people they're beautiful christian people, but I could never get to them What's moving us It's like the story in titanic the orchestra that played as the ship's going down he said of the church in america I feel in this case i've been playing a violin as the ship is heading to the iceberg He said of the church in america I feel in this case i've been playing a violin as the ship is heading to the iceberg He saw getuck they still pray for manis and his wife for god to guide them and direct them as service leaders Say the week after his departure We will not see eye to eye on political values, but both see eye to eye with the lord I wish politics could have been left out of the church and I wish we could have Praised the father as a loving congregation said one churchgoer kenny sheldon recently wrote on facebook At home manis's manis who was taking a chaplaincy class And recently interviewed for a part-time job to counsel younger less experienced pastors also praised He asked god to care for the congregants who had his hip surgery The couple in the church struggling to find jobs the elders the extra burdens they now carry Sitting in his basement with his face to the ground manis reruns our axe nine in his head the story of saul who was blinded after persecuting jesus followers As he repents the scales fell from his eyes. He could see again He later became the apostle paul manis thinks of the church in america that he has aligned himself with the president I pray that it will separate itself from donald trump. He said I pray that scales will fall from our eyes Donald trump isn't in office He didn't get reelected joe biden is Politics is now religion as always How are we going to navigate this? I was looking at the all one body site. There's a video of keith up there A lot of people are going to say aha see See this is the way that goes I can't for the life of me figure out If all one body wants to be persuasive in the christian reform church Why do they use this anxious intro music? To their videos to try to convince us this music just makes me tense If you want to make if you want to make people Accommodating to your ideas don't play this I mean, it's almost a lament Hi, i'm keith manis and i've been an ordained pastor in the christian reform church for over 32 years I'm here today to appeal for the full inclusion of lgbtq persons into the life ministry leadership and sacrament of the church and also to say that Just recently out of the conviction of my heart i've decided that If my denomination were to allow it, I would officiate for a same-sex wedding Which is quite a departure from what I've thought and taught and preached over many years This is me repenting When you say you had a conviction that now you have to repent for You put all the other people who are on the other side of that wall To be in need of repenting of it, too He goes on in this video to use some little things with Then he's going to talk about this wall this wall that separates and We can take down this wall that separates but When he repented of it, he was not going to take down this wall We can take down this wall that separates but when he repented of it he just made a new wall In other words you basically put everyone who currently holds the official position of the christian reform church as sinners By basically saying these Well, we should let him talk for himself having grievously sinned against god and against all his commands And of never having kept any of them And even though I am still inclined toward all evil like right now at this moment The longer I live as a christian. I'm so aware of the fallenness in the depth of me The great word from the catechism nevertheless Nevertheless out of sheer grace without my deserving it at all God grants and credits to me the perfect satisfaction righteousness and holiness of christ As if I had never sinned nor been a sinner as if I had been as completely obedient as christ was obedient for me This great substitute together You know, we're making we have these earthly pursuits that are oftentimes far from discipleship in jesus and we have Material possessions and we make these earthly commitments and yet we say bless me Oh pastor come and bless me In in this fallen situation. I'm telling you though this idea that somehow we have attained Some level of righteousness that earns the blessing of god that system doesn't work There is no wall in the heart of god for anyone Who seeks to come by the grace of jesus? We are all together. I'm christ The solid rock we cobble our lives together trusting in his grace and blessing No matter what oh that great word. Nevertheless But yet the Which is quite a departure from what I've thought and taught and preached over many years This is me repenting I Ali beth stuckey will say see see see a lot of christian form pastors are going to say see trajectory confirmed That's why you got to really watch the wokeness stuff Because before you know you're listening to kendy and You know if you're against racism you'd better be against excluding lgbtq people I It's all trump's fault trump did this now Are you going to talk about big eva well you don't get much bigger than to be able to get printed in the atlantic I'm, not going to read the piece you can find it at the atlantic the links are down in the bottom It's a fairly long piece George marsden Christian christian cobes de mai is quoted in it quite extensively David french Mega church pastors Bob fry former publisher at introversity press all big evangelicals. I mean this is in some ways barn a group. I mean Ali beth stuckey would call this all big eva. This is this is big eva The key issues in these conflicts are not doctrinal friling told me same thing ali beth Stuckey said same thing keith manis said and part of what we're dealing with is well. What is and isn't doctrine? How do you suss out religion is always in politics is now Now They include the passion stirred by trump presidency the legitimacy of the 2020 election the january 6 Insurgence the murder of george floyd the black lives matter movement critical race theory and matters related to the pandemic such as masking Vaccinations restrictions on in-person worship I know at least one large church in eastern washington state where I grew up that has split over the refusal of some of his Mayor its members to wear masks. I know churches that are there too There's always been mean people who cloak their unkindness and religious devotion one minister in a conservative denomination told me Well, that's a true statement. But in this context folks are going to see that in a certain light Well, I gotta get the um Gotta get the text up there In his own church some of the elders are devoted to culture war politics Okay But when I see this I think about a marital fight He started it. No, he started it. No, you started it. No, you changed. No, you changed How do we change Who's got red pill who got blue pill These guys can be a special kind of relentless and I don't think I've seen i've had it as bad and I don't think i've had it as bad as many he said But when we're stressed out trying to be public health officials Without training to do that trying to keep our own families from blowing up with covet stress getting criticized from both sides at once Then having folks doing whatever they can to ruin us and get us run out of town We'd love to just be trusted as friends and shepherds. I understand why many folks have said i'm done. I'm not there yet I hardly think i'm above it or guaranteed I just pray to jesus to not let me throw in the towel Mark knoll another favorite author of mine another christian reform member teaches in at noter dame Much of what is distinctive about american evangelicalism is not essential to christianity knoll has written And he is surely correct I would add only that it's it isn't simply the case that much of what is distinctly About american evangelicalism is not essential to christianity And then The author starts taking on the role of a preacher Jesus now has to be reclaimed from his church from those who pretend to speak most authoritatively in his name Sounds like the kids are stuck sounds like they're not going to be able to speak Sounds like the kids are stuck. It sounds like the church is a kid stuck in a bad custody battle Too many christians have domesticated jesus by their resistance to call To his call to radically rethink our attitude towards power ourselves and others mark laberton the president of fuller theological seminary told me Yeah, but when you use those words, baby People people be smelling woke Say power oh power it's all about power now now that word's a thing that we fight over We live in an era of acute anxiety and great fear He said as a result too often christians ends up wrapping jesus and our angry and fearful distortions. Yeah, that's true But if we're living in an area of anger and great anxiety fear and great anxiety Why don't we be a little bit patient with the other side? Why don't we not demonize them too quickly? Why don't we understand that all of us are in the the grip of principalities and powers and and we surely want to be subservient to our lord And savior jesus christ and we want to be under the sway of his holy spirit And we're not agreed on what that looks like Oh that vanderkley you're you're both sides isms Unlike in the sermon on the mount the parable of the good samaritan unlike jesus barrier-breaking encounters with prostitutes and roman collaborators Yeah, but you know what you know why he was crucified. He was crucified because he didn't Raise the army He was crucified because he let them How does that play out in the man of story Those on the wrong side of the holiness code With the wounded souls who he healed on the sabbath Many christians today see the world divided between us and them the children of light and the children of darkness Yeah, i'm seeing a lot of that Blessed are the politically powerful for theirs is the kingdom of god Blessed are the culture wars for they will be called children of god I believe the portrait i've painted is in this essay is accurate But it is also and necessarily incomplete countless acts of kindness generosity and self-giving love are performed every day by people precisely because they are christians Their lives have been changed in some cases transformed by their faith My own life has been immeasurably blessed by people of faith who have walked the journey with me And who have shown me grace and encouraged me in difficult moments, but I can recognize that while Also recognizing the wreckage around us something has gone amiss Pastors know it as well as anyone and better than most The jesus of the gospels the jesus who won their hearts and who long ago won mine needs to be reclaimed I You almost sound like he isn't sovereign look at how jesus fought his culture war Jesus was crucified I would assert because he didn't either satisfy The jewish national resistance side of his culture war Or the new tide of history that of the roman way that side of the culture war Is this really about donald trump I Would certainly like it to be about him because trump pretty much likes everything to be about him When trump was first elected I did like many Who didn't like him or trust him, you know post these little jabs on facebook these little these little videos From the left that sort of mock him The more I did it the more I said, you know Why am I giving this man free space in my head Why am I going into this culture war like this Why am I becoming that guy well which guy well you get guys on either side being that guy, right He sort of offers himself as a scapegoat What's more troubling is now we all have stock images of each other And we play with them in our little battles like little tin soldiers And you say well paul well racism is real yeah it is well abortion is real yeah it is Do these things matter absolutely Keep up the debate keep arguing keep influencing Be shrewd as serpents and innocent of stubs there's a biblical text This is great for mass media sales and social media metrics Nothing like a fight to get our attention So maybe we'll do some talking listening and thinking together There's going to be some church recieftling happening. There's no question about it for my denomination to try to conduct a General secretary search in this context Lord have mercy on it I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to do that Lord have mercy on it I'm not sure the lego block free wall solution is really going to hold Repentance implicitly puts the guilt on the other side of the wall and on the timeline You know one of the things I think about often is Jesus and the sermon on the mount when you pray go into the closet Jesus when he talks about our reputation It's conflicted in the sermon on the mount on one hand let your light shine and on the other hand Don't practice your righteousness before men for others to see So I probably annoyed everybody with this video It's too long Too long Too much both sides ism Why don't you take a clear stand? I also have this idea that If you're sufficiently craigs like You might not have a very good reputation because he certainly didn't And when he stopped passing out the baubles of miracles and Wonders that people wanted to see the people in the gallilee left him We face enemies far above us That's where they are They're the values that the principalities that the powers They're long before us You know I start a video like this holding it by the end of the video i'll have a conclusion I'll land the plane somewhere i'll come to some kind of some big answer that will sort of resolve the whole thing I don't have one Then why do I put out videos like this I guess because Like keith manness, I want to be honest with how I feel I want to be honest with how I think I want to be able to process in public. I want to be able to process with you But I want to be able to do it in a way where And I know I fail at this Where I don't have to demonize my enemy Hey, I get to vote every four years for president Today is election day at other places in the country not here in sacramento at least I didn't vote by mail most of the time I get to vote I get to speak I get to share my opinions. I get to i've got a bigger platform than most christian reform ministers I guess i'm part of am I part of big eva now or am I part of? You know the declining idw the pastor of the idw yet pastor of one more unsuccessful gathering and movement I Did a little bit of looking through marsden's fundamentalism in american culture You know the kinds of things that they fought about after the civil war Freemasonry that was a hot topic catholicism another hot topic Kinds of things that they fought about you know As they were going from the 19th to the 20th century temperance movement After of course the second the first world war bolshevism. I mean that held that held sway throughout Card playing at the beginning of the 20th century the christian reform church had a had a report against worldly amusements card playing even when my parents were in Were growing up in the 1950s if you were a christian reform person you didn't go see movies When I was when I was when I was a young adult I'd notice some Conservative dutch baptists in grand rapids who wouldn't go to amuse a movie because it would um It would it would jeopardize their witness. They'd just have to wait for it to come on tv And they had cable tv We are silly creatures we are not bright we are moved by principalities and powers I Maybe I should end with a little comment from jordan peterson Me the intolerable burden of my ignorance arrogance willful blindness bitterness and resentment As I pray that others rise above the same faults and temptations I Watched Fox News release a message this week There are terrible things afoot under the surface of our society and the perpetrators are coming for you and coming for us And then I watched the democrats respond in panic and anger saying There are terrible things afoot under the surface of our society and the perpetrators are coming for you coming for us Take a head lay and i'm ryan wolf our greatest responsibility is to serve our treasure valley communities deal Paso los cruces communities eastern iowa communities mid michigan communities we are extremely proud of the quality balanced journalism that cbs4 news produces but News stories play in our country Are there terrible things afoot bubbling under the surface is something coming for you and for us Ask yourself how true that is of yourself and your own life Have you addressed all that are you concerning yourself with the dust in your enemy's eyes? Instead of attending to the filth that obscures your own sight Do we want accusation suspicion discord derision and hatred? Or the peace and prosperity and happiness that beckons to us at this moment like never before I Liked jordan's prayer gris got to him already Good for gris did a little work on the song When I was in seminary andy banstra there's a good There's a good dutch crc name andy banstra professor of new testament Uncle to rodney hugin who's been on my channel Andy banster was a giant Not quite as big as rod hughin At some point said you have to decide what kind of preacher you want to be Do you want to preach law or do you want to preach grace? and I Haven't put out the video of my conversation with gris and mark and Chad the alcoholic yet. We did a three-way conversation yesterday four-way conversation Part of the gospel is not just The obligation Not even just the obligation to examine ourselves But the fact that as keith said nicely in that little video Even if I disagree with aspects of it that finally we don't save ourselves So then just as you received christ jesus as lord continue to live your lives in him rooted and built in him Strengthened in the faith as you were taught and overflowing with thankfulness See to it that no one takes you captive through hollow and deceptive philosophy Which depends on human tradition and elemental spiritual forces of the world rather than on christ For in christ all the fullness of the deity in bodily form And in christ you have been brought to fullness He is the head over every power and authority in him you were also Circumcised with the circumcision not performed by human hands Your whole self ruled by the flesh was put off when you were circumcised by christ Having been buried with him in baptism in which you were also raised with him Through your faith and the working of god who raised him from the dead When you were dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh Christ made you alive in christ He forgave us all our sins having cancelled the charge of our legal indebtedness which stood against us and condemned us He has taken it away nailing it to the cross and having disarmed the powers and authorities. He made a public spectacle of them Triumphing over them by the cross Therefore do not let anyone judge you by what you eat or drink or with regard to Religious festival a new moon celebration or a sabbath day These are a shadow of the things that were to come the reality. However is found in christ Do not let anyone who delights in false humility in the worship of angels Disqualify you such a person also goes into great detail about what they have seen and are puffed up with idle notions Of their unspiritual mind they have lost connection with the head head from whom the whole body supported and held together By its ligaments and sinews grows as god gives it to grow Since you died with christ to the elemental spirits of this world Why as though you still belong to the world do you submit to its rules? Do not handle do not taste do not touch Back to verse 15 having disarmed the powers and authorities. He made a public spectacle of them triumphing over them by the cross I have as big a platform as any individual minister in the christian reform church And I wish I had the power to heal its wounds I'm saddened by the loss of fellowship between keith manness and his church But last night I told you of sauron the great the dark lord the rumors That you have heard are true He has indeed arisen again and left the hold in murkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the dark tower of mordor That name even you hobbits have heard of like a shadow on the borders of old stories Always after a defeat and a respite the shadow takes another shape and grows again I wish it need not have happened in my time said frodo So do I said gandalf and so do all who live to see such times But that is not for them to decide all we have to do is decide what to do with the time that is given to us Maybe that's a good way to end i'll end it here