https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=5Z3b47PtkUU

 Hi, this is Paul and this is Rough Draft for Sunday where I run through the current status of my Sunday sermon. Now I don't usually say this, but part of the reason I do this is for feedback. And so if you liked the sermon, if you didn't like the sermon, you know, pretty much any input you have on what you heard is welcome. I'm, you know, I'm not offended by negative feedback. I actually try to read a good number of the comments before I finish the thing off on Sunday morning and I bring it to the church. So that's part of why I do these rough drafts, because it's actually a tremendous opportunity for me to get feedback, which is something as a pastor you almost never get. So that's part of the reason I do these rough drafts. So if you feel inclined, go ahead and say what you think in the comments section. Advent, we've been in Advent for a few weeks now. Advent begins with an apocalyptic vision. Now that word apocalypse is a tricky one in the English language, but I'll use it in the common sense. The world is present. The world as presently constituted is unsustainable. We have a real sense of that these days when people talk about climate change or nuclear war or asteroids hitting the earth. Basically, human beings, the world as it's presently constituted, violates God's desire for peace and justice. If you believe that the world was created by a good God, many people look around and say, I don't believe this world was created by a good God because there's so much bad in it. Well, humanity has used the world and has used its liberty for license. And if you read the Bible, you'll read the book The Flood in the beginning of the book, which is similar to, well, you know, people were violent and God couldn't stand it anymore. And so he he regretted having made the world and he wiped it out, except, of course, for Noah and his family. And the evil continued to grow after Noah. We have painted ourselves into multiple corners and we can't imagine how civilization, life can go on much longer. It's it's common to hear in podcasts and news accounts and just from people that, well, I can't imagine the world would go on much longer. It reminds me of the 1980s and 90s when I remember friends and relatives who were very much waiting for the second coming of Christ saying, I'm sure Christ will come before the year 2000 because I can't imagine the world will be able to go on much longer. Now, a lot of secular people don't have Jesus coming again at the end of the world. They just have some catastrophe that ends it all for all of us. But the truth is, the catastrophe and the apocalypse fractal their way down into each of our lives. Well, the world might not end next year, but COVID might take you out. It's the age of decay, which is if there's one phrase I'm known for around these parts, it's that phrase. There's catastrophe in politics, catastrophe at home, catastrophe in our bodies. The other world might not end next year, but each of us might. Or we we often say that, well, you know, my life ended with that car accident or that end of a relationship or a bankruptcy or the death of a friend. The day of the Lord is coming to the world. It's also coming to our nation. Empires don't survive. It's also coming to our families. Families break up and have fights and terrible things happen to them. It's coming to our bodies. None of us get out of this world alive. Last week, we looked at Malachi 3. I entitled it for the Internet fractal unfaithfulness frustrated by the messenger of the covenant. Israel is complaining after, well, they came back from Persia and didn't seem to fulfill everything that the prophecies from the prophets had for them. And they had some complaints. God wasn't holding up his end of the deal. And God responds, you might not like my assessment of you when I come back in terms of holding up ends of the deals. Now we jump all the way to the Gospel of Luke in the 15th year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar. During the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of the Lord came to John, son of Zechariah in the wilderness. He went into all the country around the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins. As it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah, the prophet, a voice of one calling in the wilderness, prepare the way for the Lord, make straight paths for him. Every valley shall be filled in every mountain and hill made low. The crooked road shall become straight. The rough ways smooth and all people will see God's salvation. John said to the crowd coming out to be baptized by him, you brood of vipers, who warned you to flee from the coming wrath, produce fruit in keeping with repentance and do not begin to say to yourselves, we have Abraham as our father. For I tell you that out of these stones, God can raise up children for Abraham. The axe is already at the root of the tree and every tree that does not produce good fruit will be cut down and thrown into the fire. What should we do then? Ask the crowd a very reasonable question. Well, the table is set. Apocalypse is coming. The end is near. What are you going to do to get ready to face your maker? That's very interesting because Malachi, we don't know exactly who he was or when he, when he spoke, but maybe around 460 BC. John the Baptist is around 27 AD, nearly 500 years apart. 500 years sounds like a very long time. Jerusalem capitulated to Alexander the Great in 332 BC. The Hasmonean dynasty, a little bit of autonomy that that Israel had again after kicking, kicking out the Greeks with the Maccabean revolt from 140 to maybe 37 BC. And then in 37 BC, they become a client state of Rome again. A little context to this 500 years ago, Columbus, a little more than 500 years ago, 1492, I was in the Dominican Republic for 1992, the celebration of the 500th anniversary. Luther nails his theses to the cross 1517. That's just a few years ago, was 500 years for Luther nailing the theses to the Wittenberg door. The Mayflower was 1620, only 400 years ago. Yeah, this fractal thing, this waiting thing, it's very real. The day of the Lord comes. It comes again and again and again. And we wonder, will the will the final day come? People today aren't. People today don't imagine the end won't come. What should you do to prepare for that day? This is what John the Baptist says. What should we do? The crowds asked. John answered, anyone who has two shirts should share with the one who has none. And anyone who has food should do the same. Even tax collectors came to be baptized. These were Roman collaborators. Teacher, they asked, what should we do? Don't collect any more than you are required to, he told them. Then some soldiers asked him, what should we do? And he replied, don't extort money and don't accuse people falsely. Be content with your pay. Now, a lot of this is covenant faithfulness. The prophets all the way up to and including John the Baptist basically called Israel to hold faithful to the covenant that they had agreed upon with the Lord. There are elements of personal righteousness here, teaching others, treat others how they want to be treated. Share your food, share your clothing, share with the poor, resist corruption. Tax collectors and soldiers. This all sounds good to us. We don't have much of a sense of the heat or the anger of the first century Judean culture war, but it's interesting that he didn't say overthrow the Romans. He didn't tell the tax collectors, quit your tax farming. He didn't tell the role soldiers turn your soldiers against your, your, the people above you. And let's finally be rid of these Romans. John didn't do that at all. Why not clear out the Romans from God's promised land and God's chosen people? Now this baptism, baptism always has two senses. One is sort of a ceremonial washing and the other is ceremonial drowning. And I know for a number of you, that sounds dramatic, but baptism is basically a ceremonial water ideal. What's an ideal? You can find a variety of ideals in the book of Daniel. Ideas are ideal or deals are a way to test the will of God by putting something out there and seeing what comes back. And so for example, in the beginning of the book of Daniel, they, Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego did not eat from the king's table, but only ate vegetables and drank water. And they showed themselves to be better than the others. That's an ordeal as such. There's later in the book of Daniel, the fiery furnace, throw them into the furnace. Well, then they were rescued. That's an ordeal. Trial by lion, throw them into the lion's den and the lions didn't touch him, but the lions touched his enemies. That's an ordeal. Baptism is a ceremonial ordeal. It's sort of going under the water and seeing if God will preserve you. Those who emerge from beneath the water are pronounced innocent, chosen by God, preparing for the day of the Lord, waiting to be on the right side. This is all what's happening with John the Baptist. The people were waiting expectantly and we're all wondering in their hearts, if John would be the Messiah. If John now he's gathering people for repentance and then, well, what would the Messiah do? The Messiah would do sort of like David did to the Philistines, sort of like the Maccabees did to the Greeks. The Messiah would release Israel from the bonds of Rome and, and what? Because they slipped the bonds of their captors many times and bonds kept coming back. One is waiting for a final deliverance from bondage. John answered them all, I baptize you with water, but one who is more powerful than I will come, the straps of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie. I, he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire. His winnowing fork is in his hand to clear the threshing floor and to gather the wheat into his barn, but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. This is what he is expecting from the Messiah, that he will come and he will reward those who have been faithful. So he'd better be faithful and he will punish those who have not been faithful and they will burn. Jesus confused John in some ways. Should God use fear to obtain covenant compliance? Read the book of Exodus. Read the book of Exodus. He's thundering and lightning on the mountain so that they will fear and obey. It doesn't work so well. Their obedience doesn't last very long. Accountability based on fear is effective at gaining short-term compliance. It's effective in the short term, but it requires diligence and consistent reinforcement. This is part of the issue with Malachi because, well, if God really wants to, to, to get the people to comply, he'd better keep, keep the hard times going because nothing will make people softer and looser than good times. We all know that. If God had just kept the good times going, what would have happened? God is looking for a new kind of obedience. It needs to be free. It needs to be voluntary. It needs to be motivated by joy. It should be a participation in the joyful creation and governance of God, not an avoidance of punishment. And then the chapter and then the message here ends, at least the part in the, in the lectionary. And with many other words, John exhorted the people and proclaimed the good news to them. Is this good news? Well, the Messiah is coming. He's preparing the way. That's good news. But is telling people to shape up so that they can avoid punishment? Is that the good news we're looking for? And remember that this good news, this evangelism is a lone word from the Romans first used in politics. This was the word that a victory had been won. And so your reprieve is coming. Is the day of the Lord good news? Well, there'll be punishment. There'll be reward. The age of decay will end. So it is, but will it be good news for everyone? Even the best of us need accountability. It's not a bad thing to have accountability or to recommend that people shape up and get ready to face their God. There's nothing bad in that at all. We need reminders of the consequences of our rebellion. And even for the best of us, it's helpful, but such accountability is always insufficient to yield the kind of world God wants for us. And from us and deep down, we want this better world for ourselves and for each other, mostly not always, or the rebellion would end. We can't simply be scared straight. Our hearts need a deeper transformation and that transformation usually isn't a one shot deal. It needs to drill deeper and deeper, usually through continual reminders. Continual reminders, sometimes admonitions, other times promises, which is pretty much exactly what you'll find in the Bible. We need to want to do what's right and not just today or tomorrow in this area or in that area. We should do so out of love. We should do so out of generosity and we should do so even if it takes sacrifice. You'll notice that almost all of my sermons end with misery, deliverance, gratitude, the structure of the Heideberg catechism, because after all, gratitude is a motivation for obedience that goes beyond escaping punishment, but also beyond seeming futility. What can you give to a world that has painted itself into a corner, which on some levels, many things will end. Empires crumble, marriages fail, people die, yet we are admonished to give. Jesus raised people to life and they would die again. Jesus healed people and they would become sick again. The one resurrection that was permanent was his own. What can you do that will likely prove futile in the measurements of this world, but from the perspective of God's invasion be a sign of the life of the age to come? Gratitude can motivate you towards those ends. What do you need to do in a disciplined way to be capable of this level of love?