https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=PsO7Ewe8q4Y

 Welcome to the Freddie and Paul show! Glad to play Paul! So last night we had our first meetup of our tour. We are in Tucson, Arizona. We are currently staying in an Airbnb that has been lovingly provided to us. And last night after the meetup, Joe says we should go home and do a little video and talk about the meetup. So let's talk. I thought it was terrific. Wonderful time. Ok, so we met at the Village, which is a church here in Tucson. Rod Hugin has been on my channel. The three of us plus Rod have done a video together. I suppose we could do one tonight if we wanted to again. The most incredibly comfortable quarters. A room perfect size with all the sound equipment that's necessary for excellent functioning. I thought it couldn't have been better from that point of view. Hilton chairs. It was really nice. So when we came in, there were already some people there who had showed up early. I think we ran to Jeremy pretty quickly. Shout out to Jeremy here. There were two circles of couches and chairs that Nathan and Francis had already been making. Michael, thank you. And we discussed a bit and decided let's make one new circle. The nice thing about this church was that they have audio and microphones. So that worked really well. And then, yeah, it still wasn't enough. Still more people showed up. And we had to get some more seats. It's like all these people, how are we going to feed them? No, that's not how that... Do we have a sense of where all these people came from and how they heard about the event? I mean, obviously... A bunch of them were villagers. Yeah, from the village, sure. They had been projecting in a conversation with Paul van der Kleijen Meetup on their screens. So that had been going for a while. And then there was your videos. Meetup.com itself might have been useful. That would be very interesting to know. I would actually really like to send a message to the Meetup.com group. Like, hey, who here came via what Meetup.com presented? There was an existing philosophy group that Nathan has been leading here in the area. And Nathan found me from my channel through the Discord server, got in touch with me. And I put him in touch with Rod. And that had happened a number of months ago. And so there had been some connection between his group and then the Village Church. And so there were some people from that. There were some people from the channel. Cassidy was in, Kevin was in, and Kevin brought his father. And Kevin who I had spoken with a couple of weeks ago. And Kevin, the same guy that had talked with Steph, the boy. So there were a few people from the channel who were there. And they brought some other people. So we had 35 in all. So it was a large group for a Meetup. We usually, you know, it gets difficult managing a group that size. But I thought that one would work very well. Yeah, you start an introduction. Everybody knew what was going to happen. Okay, we're going to do it. Everybody's going to do their own little introduction. That took a while. And that went very well. Everybody listened to each other. And it also caused some questions after the introductions had been done. Now we did get a comment at the end, which I think was well put. That maybe we'd like to time box and organize these introductions a bit. Like, who are you? How did you get here? What would you like to talk about? And that also more explicitly sets the goal for the evening. I think that went well. But after that, you kind of just opened the room for questions. And that went very, very, very well. There was no fighting over the microphone. There were no heated arguments. There were all sorts of questions from, well, what about Peterson's health? Something about the Holy Spirit that then was a discussion between somebody from the village and an ex-Pentecostal preacher, which is just very interesting sort of way this is going. He's a present Pentecostal preacher, still a preacher. Transition. Oh, yeah, the interim. Right, right. Yeah, sorry, I'm Frank. And that went actually, that felt like it went by very quickly. And we opened up the room to just social and people very quickly formed groups. And I think the last one sort of left at 1130, which is mostly because we weren't the last ones to leave. No. We left at 1130 and people were still talking. I had to force the issue. I was so tired. Jet lag. Yeah, we got to go. I'm just glad you did. That was really good, too. So one thing you did, John, is you collected some... Demographic data? Yeah, you went on... Well, yeah, I did it in my own crude way. Okay, we're all going to sign this paper, name, email address, and the nearest cross streets of your favorite Starbucks. But in retrospect, it probably would have been better to have said if you would like to be contacted for future events, then put your contact information on here. That would have probably been a little bit more hospitable and respectful of people. Your goal was to have information for future organizers to... Yeah, if other events were to happen, then at least you have a sense of who is out there that you can contact and have a way to do that. So it was actually more a shorthand for, you know, make my life easier next time I want to do something. But I think you're right, you know, we kind of talked about that, that this is really something that would be better left to people's own preference and... As an invitation rather than thou shalt... Yeah, yeah, because you get the clipboard in your hand like, oh, I'm going to pass it on, I'm going to write something down, what's going to happen to this? So yeah, I do like the whole, hey, clipboard's over here, afterwards we're going to have like breakout groups and if you want to... That would be better, that's a better way to do it. I will repent, I never did it again. No, it's just, I thought it was an interesting... So I got nothing else, I did really like that given the huge group we had, the microphone passing back and forth worked really well. It prevented chaotic yelling back and forth across the room or people kind of yelling through each other. And then afterwards you saw many small groups form to discuss certain things they were interested in. I think that's exactly what we would have wanted from a set of this size. That really was lovely. So we're doing these meetups are in some ways different from the regular meetups that we hold in Sacramento, some of the regular meetups, John, that you're holding in Chino Hills. What do you think is the reason for doing these meetings like we're doing it? You mean, are you asking why are we doing them this way or why are we... It's kind of a different meeting that we're doing when people come in and they don't know each other. Some of them have drivens, a number of people came in from Phoenix. Why do you think, I mean, we're having a good time. It's fun in terms of people who watch my channel to get a chance to shake my hand and meet Job and get to know each other a little bit. It certainly adds some dimensionality. But why, could you explain perhaps why we want to do a tour like this and what we'd like to see the tour pursue? Well, the progression is, okay, so you meet online and you discuss abstract things. Perhaps you become part of the audience of Paul Van der Kley or originally maybe even before that, Jordan Peterson. And now you become part of perhaps some kind of online conversation and interaction. Maybe you started in the comments section of Paul's videos and you began to recognize some people that regularly show up there and a little community is being formed. And that's all good and well, but it's still an online, relatively impersonal kind of connection. And so, rightly or wrongly, I think that to meet face to face has additional value. And so we want to at least give people the opportunity to do that. And that's why we let the word out that we have these groups and that has already been advertised in different ways, whether it's on the Discord server or in our regular meetup.com announcements. And you mentioned it in your videos occasionally. Your own group is always advertised in the comments section. So that opportunity has existed for some time already and different groups have formed over time. Well, sometimes these groups need a little infusion of new energy. So that's kind of how we conceived of having you show up in these different locations and said, Hey, you know, this is a little bit special. I'm going to be there. We can talk person to person and you can meet Paul and ask him some questions. But then the goal of that is not that that is the end all because he is some kind of a spectacular celebrity, in fact, you know, his coat will heal you. But didn't make my hair grow back. Can't even make my own. Profit, grow your own hair. But the intent is that once you meet these people, even just once, you might find you have some things in common that you can talk about. You enjoy each other's company. You share a similar language. You have, you know, struggled with some similar questions, perhaps. And here's a few other people that you can continue to do that with. We try to find out, you know, who is all in the same neighborhood, so to speak, in the same geographical area. And then then it perhaps becomes possible to continue to do that even after we have left on a regular or semi regular basis so that it either becomes a monthly thing or as it is in my in my in my meeting. We have one Sunday meeting that is monthly and then two Thursday evening meetups that are on the first and third Thursday of the month. And then it becomes a, you know, so the group exists. I have five to seven people show up fairly regularly. But I'm pretty sure that when you will be there is coming Thursday, there will be a lot more people there. I fully expect that to happen. And then half of them, we may not see them again until until you come again. But in the meantime, maybe five or six or ten people have recognized that, hey, this is something that I could join that I could be part of that I could participate in and face to face real people, real relationships. We can care about one another and we can listen to each other and we can share with one another. Some of them did it with the great guru Paul Van der Leyen. There you have it. Basically, what we did, we did introductions for the first little while with a group that day. It took a while. And then we had give opportunity for individuals to ask questions of another individual in the room. And that kind of helped process the meeting, gave people a chance to ask questions, be invited to speak rather than someone just saying they had something on their chest and they wanted to they wanted to share with the rest of the group. So good, good. And the fact that people stayed this long, that's just always so encouraging. Like, you don't even want to leave, you know, you know, you have to like Cassidy was there really late and we know she had to drive back a distance. That's just it's really encouraging. So usually we usually have it go. This is what we've done in Sacramento. We have to go for two hours and then we close the official meeting and we'll usually take a picture. And then, you know, get everybody out of their seats, get them all different in the room. And then after that, people can stay for a while and talk until whoever wants to close the facility down has to kick them out. But that was our practice. And I was I was very happy with the way the whole thing went. What I find intriguing and have found intriguing for a long time is that you can actually put some generic content on the table. And people can say, well, see this conversation between so and so and so and so. And did you, you know, I'm a follower of so and so. There were some atheists that declared their loyalty to Sam Harris and that was interesting. And they were respected and their and their input was appreciated. One of them joined the discourse today and he's been engaging. Everybody's very nice. That just warms my heart. Wonderful. So my point is that that that out of that generic, somewhat higher level content, inevitably some somebody goes a little bit deeper and says, you know, this really touches my life. And I've been, you know, I'm struggling with this or this has been kind of my journey and this kind of important to me. And to get a little bit more vulnerable. And then the conversation, you can just tell that people perk up and they're more invested and they're more interested because, hey, if you can have that kind of authenticity and openness and vulnerability of sorts, then maybe people will listen to my story also. And, you know, I think people have a need to tell their story in some venues somewhere. Oh, tell me about it. Yeah. And it was really quite nice the way people were listening to each other and respectfully and warmly. OK, so anything else? More information? People can put the schedule for the continued tour under this video. This is a sign of things to come. I can't wait for the next one. Yeah. Yeah. And if this is actually going to be online in time for you to see that before we get there, the schedule will be on there. It really was a fun time. And we think you will enjoy it also if you were if you were to decide to join us for that. So what's coming up this week? Let's not get the dates wrong again. Well, on Wednesday night, we will be in Bellflower, California at Bethany Church. And the information is on meetup.com. And then on Thursday night, we'll be at my meetup in Chino Hills, which is not going to be at a church, but at the compound of the 55 plus mobile home park slash lake resort. And we have a really fine facility which also features Hilton chairs. Are we going to get kicked out at a certain time? It's very unlikely because my group has made friends with the security guy and he really loves us. So I don't think we're going to get any hassle at all from from Adrian. Adrian will also help you find a place. I strongly recommend you find your way to the pipeline entrance of the park because every other entrance of the park has a gate that's always locked. So go to the pipeline entrance of the park. And from there, even if you were to Google, use the link that's in the meetup.com directions, you'll find your way to the East Clubhouse. And if not, just talk to the guy in the white security car and he'll tell you where to go. It's a little bit intimidating, I think, to not be able to find your way around and drive around in a mobile home park where the streets are not necessarily marked perfectly and Google Maps doesn't give you the right directions. But look upon it as a heroic journey and a dragon to slay and part of your suffering. Carry your cross. Carry your cross up that not hill in Chino Hills. Yeah, there's no hill there. We are in the armpit of Chino Hills. The armpit of Chino Hills. The swamp. The swamp. Bye everyone.