https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=b6XuPvQiIBU

 Remember, Amadi, you are live. I am live. We are all live here together. This is the first Friday of the month when we normally, we've had some interruptions the last couple months, do the bridges of, uh-oh. I muted that, there we go. Where we normally do the bridges of meaning, question and answer. This is sort of my form of question and answer. I take the questions and answers over here at the bridges of meaning discord. If you'd like to ask a question, you'll have to first sign onto the discord and be subject to them. So here is the link. I will put it right there in the, in the chat. YouTube puts this silly, somebody leave a comment. Anyway, I'm not gonna fuss about the interface. Um, yesterday I, I've done a bunch of things. I did a thing with Kale on Wednesday, which is up on his channel. I did a thing with, um, Burn Power to help him raise funds to get his library from Haynes, Alaska to Tbilisi, Georgia, which was tremendous amount of fun. We had a great time over on, on Burn's site. And so today we're doing question and answer at the bridges of meaning discord. And I'm picking up questions from where I said, no more questions for October 20. So it's been that long since we've done this, but here we are, or did we, or did we do one? We didn't do one in November. Okay. Okay. B of M. No, okay. All right. So I will pick up questions. I've got the chat on a third dose of PVK today. Oh, Anselman. I feel, I feel for you, man. Too much PVK. Oh, the, the, the, the, the, the, Yosef and curiosity gun. Just doing something I should put the, I should put the, there we go. Now you can see it. So I'm over in the discord and I'm pulling questions there. Yosef, Yosef asks, was AI as promise or threat addressed much at arc? Not that I recall. Now, as I mentioned in a number of the, in a number of the interviews, you, we sort of, somebody, somebody yesterday, I think it was in burn powers thing, mentioned it sort of like, sort of a high, it was sort of Ted talk ish in some ways, the way the strut, the conference was structured. You had all of these talks by all these different people in this big room on a big stage. And so after the first day, a whole bunch of us started picking and choosing what talks we actually attended, which of course warped our perception of the conference, but also gave us more from the conference of what we wanted. Now, most of the talks are out there. Anselman said that the David Stroud talk was out there. So I still haven't found that on YouTube. So if anybody finds the David Stroud talk on arc, what does arc stand for? The Alliance for Reform Citizenship. I apologize in advance for the grizz at the next arc. Well, we'll see if they hold it in London again, or if they move it around. So I don't remember much talk at all about AI. It was interesting because during the Chino conference, John Verbecky was quite, he did a lot of talking about AI and the threat of AI. There seemed to be sort of a fever moment where everyone was panicky about it. I really would like to dive a little bit into this whole Sam Altman firing, rehiring Microsoft takeover of open AI. What does that mean? There's a whole lot of chatter on that. I'm sort of in the middle with respect to the whole AI apocalypse. I can certainly see its potential for really disrupting collective sense-making, which is already enormously chaotic now. But I don't know, I don't know, I don't know. I just don't know that much about it. They seem very, very pro-technology. Yep, they're very much a pro-technology thing. That's why I said that Paul Kingsnorth, if he was there, would burst into flames. Mary Harrington there gave a note of caution in it, but it was a coalition. And so some of what's sort of been emerging with the drama around James Lindsay very much is there in terms of the assessment of the enlightenment or the counter-enlightenment, as Peterson said to Chris Williamson. So this in many ways is one of the huge cultural issues we are dealing with right now to figure out, to assess the enlightenment. I said before, we continue to assess the Protestant Reformation. And yeah, that's a huge issue. But yeah, on the surface of it, there were a lot of very pro-technology. Again, go back to my first video about when I was at the art conference. There was a lot of sort of, let's get back to modernity. Modernity was great. Modernity gave us all kinds of stuff. All these Wokeys are anti-science and anti-modern, but again, Peterson comes out as counter-enlightenment. It's super all over the place. Van Gogh's Ear. Shouldn't there be greater emphasis on getting young white men into churches? For many non-Christian white males, it seems ideology is going to be their only outlet. Black America isn't going to be helped if white America isn't helped first. None of the Western, black America is already much more in church than white America. The whole category of white is really difficult. In a lot of ways, white is sort of Northern European because our Russians, white. So when my son Jared was going to high school here, he was called white, not Russian. So these categories are super low resolution. You could argue about non-white assimilation, citizens being ostracized by the disagree, there's no question in there. Is there a place on the Discord to recommend interviews to PVK? Yeah, there used to be a kind of a recommendation thing, but I wasn't checking it. Spam folder. Dennis says. I don't go out and do a lot of, I don't hunt down a lot of interviews. Partially because there's tons of people in the corner and on YouTube and in this space that are hunting down a lot of interviews. And it's not really my job. I would much rather keep my randos interviews open because I actually think that does a greater service because the high status people getting interviewed, there's so many interviews with them out there on the internet. That's part of the reason I do the commentary videos because why do the work of interviewing them when I can just listen to the interview? Every now and then there are some questions that I don't think are being answered, but status binds in blind. So I don't go out and get a lot of interviews. All right, here's comes Joseph's big question. I loved your last interview with Rafe and I think it had a lot of great resonance with Sam's talks with Vervecky and the new one with Nate and Jordan Daniel Wood. Well, I think Rafe's functional embodiment story is a better story. However, I think one potential pitfall using the physical body as a metaphor is that we're talking about multigenerational evolution, which doesn't happen in one body. Good point. And processes greater than bodies like evolution, spiritual processes, going down dead ends all the time. And that's an excellent point. I mean, again, the truth is the world is just so vast that there are so many productive loci of attention. And the relevance realization is all about prioritizing the most effective loci in the moment. I mean, that's essentially, you take the combinatorial explosiveness, hierarchy of values, relevance realization, it all sort of fits together into general intelligence. And this is, or whatever, I don't even know if that correlates. I know for Vervecky, it does correlate a degree with general intelligence, but I'm a little skeptical about general intelligence, which makes me even more skeptical about AI general intelligence, because again, AI isn't embodied. And general intelligence has everything to do about embodiedness and context. Part of the reason I think all of this general intelligence talk is going around is because part of what civilization does is create sort of a collective platform. Part of what the monarchical vision within modernity tried to do is sort of see the world as a whole. And a lot of this is what has been breaking down. General intelligence, and movies love to harp on this. For example, think about the crocodile Dundee movies. The whole shtick about the crocodile Dundee movies was that what works in the Australian outback has an interesting relationship to what works in New York City. And it's so charming and cool that this rubed from the Australian outback can go to New York City and sort of master the environment by taking the set of relevance realization from the Australian outback and bringing it into New York City. I mean, that's the whole conceit of the movie. But behind that is of course the recognition that contexts matter and the kind of intelligence you need. Now, of course, general intelligence is supposed to sort of speed you up in either thing. And I'm not skeptical about that, but contextual intelligence usually beats general intelligence in the moment. It's gonna take you a while if you are dropped naked and afraid into the Australian outback to figure out how to live. Whereas if you have inherited wisdom, aboriginal wisdom that continued on through the centuries, that will tend to beat your general intelligence. Now, there are anomalies. I've been now making my way through the rest of history's history of the defeat of the Aztecs. And that is in some ways a study in this. But there's also sort of these things that happen in that story that make, that brought about the defeat of the Aztecs that are just people look back on them and they're like, what are the odds of this ever happening? But yet it did. So, and that's what makes history so astoundingly interesting and so completely difficult to gain. A little back to the question. How do we tell what's a bone versus an appendix? Oh, okay. Like monogamy is, and again, this has everything to do about context. Now part of what's combinatorial explosiveness applies to context as well. We've never had an upcycle interview. That's a good question. Yeah, we've never had an upcycle interview. That's an excellent point CJ. This is so freaking ADHD. So think about Hernan Cortez going and meeting the Aztecs and his lover slash interpreter slash guide slash potentially woman who basically was the, was wielding the Spanish to seek revenge on the Aztecs who had destroyed her people and enslaved her civilization. So you have humanity. So there's a biological, there's a biological commonality between the Spanish and the Aztecs because of course the Americas get populated through the land bridge or over the water, yada, yada, yada. So there's biological similarity. The Spanish are able to easily interbreed with the Aztecs. They're all homo sapiens. They're all human beings. The American context is very different until it gets terraformed by the European plants and animals, guns, germs, and steel, 1493. The cultures are very different, but in some ways the Mesoamerican, the native American cultures are still, they haven't sort of jumped technologically. So culturally they're using all of this technology that Europe has just sort of kept working through by virtue of its wars and its conflicts and its competitions, et cetera, et cetera. So that in a sense, the Aztecs are totally owned by the Spanish and then everything gets totally owned by the Spanish. So what is, it's very difficult for us to figure out what is appendix and what is bone. How do we trade off looking for answers to that question for ourselves or for our children's children? Super, it's super difficult. And again, this is part of the reason why religion is so vitally important because civilization sort of brings with it a body of knowledge. It's one way to think about a civilization, but religion has been, religion tends to have received more attention and better documentation. And so I think that's part of the reason that religions are so foundational to civilizations and their deep connections between religions and civilizations. How does that change when you recognize that everything we have accumulated via evolution, including religious wisdom and institutions is context dependent, evolved for a niche that no longer exists? This is of course the Brett Weinstein challenge. Yet we can't, as going back to your bone versus appendix, it's super hard for us. Yeah. Yeah, if I'm not paying much attention to the comments right now, because if I do, I'll never be able to answer questions because I'll interrupt myself. So these are all the issues, Joseph. I mean, you're asking all the right questions and these are the issues for religious people in this context of hyper change. I remember listening to a audio, a great courses series on technology. And I remember that the person made the observation that for the last few centuries, so much change has come via technology. Well, even technology is too broad a word, via physical industrial technology. I mean, almost all of these travails that we have over gender roles is because of these massive transformations. For example, the industrial revolution and now the information revolution and the increasing cyber revolution and transhumanism. It's just massive, massive changes. And whereas maybe a change would happen in a generation or two, now changes are happening at the speed of decades and years. Already in 2024, 2014 feels like a long time ago in terms of a variety of technologies. And of course, AI is just only gonna speed this up, which gets to that, what was that limit? The great filter question about this anxiety we have about at what point will one of our technologies do us in? Well, you could argue that the technology of transportation and the speed of transportation that happened in the early middle ages that brought the black death to Europe almost did us in. And it's probably that kind of doing us in that will continue to happen. I mean, we think it won't happen, but it has happened many times and it may very well happen again. But every time it's a different apocalypse. And that's why I say these apocalypse happen regularly in terms of, you know, I've been in my sermon series, I've been sort of working this story from Hosea to Jesus. And so last week was Josiah, which was just sort of this little renaissance because Egypt and Mesopotamia were sort of caught in their own drama and they couldn't sort of impose themselves on the middle area where Judah and Israel are. And so Josiah, you know, you have this reawakening of Deuteronomic identity and consciousness and cleansing of the temple and reform. And then of course, when Josiah goes up to try to, I mean, it makes perfect sense. Egypt is going to intervene to try to bolster Assyria against Babylon. Of course, if you're a little guy in a geopolitical binary, you're always working one side against the other. We saw that during the Cold War. We see it to agree now in terms of China versus the West. So Josiah goes up to try to stop Necho from bolstering Assyria against Babylon. And he's killed and, you know, little Judah loses the battle. And even though Egypt doesn't prevail against Babylon, Egypt still has enough power to establish its hegemony. It's hegemony over Judah, which lasts for a while. Until of course, Babylon really resurges and Nebuchadnezzar comes down and pushes Egypt back, back across the brook of Egypt, and then establishes its hegemony over Judah. And Judah, of course, doesn't do well in terms of its relations, Jehoiakim, and is a disaster. And then a Judah, of course, loses and Jerusalem is destroyed. There's an apocalypse. There's a day of the Lord. These things come, these things comes to build. They always scale, they're large and they're small. And we have such a global world that probably when these, you know, we saw it to a degree with COVID, COVID sort of pushed back globalism a bit. You know, borders shut down, nations retreated to themselves, they tried different techniques with respect to COVID. So, you know, we're gonna continue to see that and they're gonna be bigger and smaller ones. There always are. But to point out, Everest was not always the tallest mountain and may not continue to be. Its Talot of participation is bound in the moment of time. How can this be the final cause? I agree with Peugeot's arc speech that we need to keep making sure God is at the top and not some lower finality. But then I disagree with him on the Twitter spat that Rafe is responding to because I think he's elevating his idea of truth to that very highest position as if we know the ultimate truth. Well, whether you're a religious person that believes you have a relationship with God and you get a certain amount of God right versus your other competing religions or you're sort of a Peter Sonian, Rafe Kelly skeptic that says, well, God is at least a functional category that is necessary for civilization. You know, those arguments work either way. Obviously, then your religious particularities just heighten the tension and the drama because you're placing bets on who you believe God is versus who the others do. Is your God triune? Has your God been revealed in Jesus Christ? I mean, religious people lay bigger bets and therefore give bigger sacrifices and therefore potentially have bigger rewards and bigger losses. What is perennialism? That's a good question you can ask YouTube. It's, there's some competing definitions of it out there. Generally speaking, it's sort of a, sort of a least common denominator, religion, and it sort of gets contextualized in different religious traditions, but it tries to reduce the particularities of different religious traditions. Is the fall of the main line related to perennialism in your own view? The main line, the American main line WASP consensus in the middle of 20th century, you know, it's sort of like the great books, great tradition that can be a sort of perennialism. And one could argue that Peugeot's sort of going back to Plato looking for a broad coalition is a form of perennialism. If you want widespread cooperation, you're going to have to establish a platform upon which those groups can cooperate. And, you know, sort of what we've had in the West, I think Church of England sort of does this, you know, some of the people when I was in the UK were saying, you don't have to believe in God to be in the Church of England. It's sort of the civilizational Christianity posture. And, you know, that was worked in America quite effectively in the middle of the 20th century. Some people went mainline. And then of course, there was the, by the Roosevelt administration, the attempt to bring Catholics and Jews into the conversation. Now, I think, you know, part of what I was, the door I was knocking on in this morning's video is, to what degree can Islam be brought into the conversation? You know, all of the religious groups have always had subgroups within them that didn't necessarily play nice in the big coalitions. And fundamentalism was sort of like that because as the 20th century kept going, the big mainline coalition wanted to embrace things like evolution and a variety of things. And of course, the fundamentalists sort of objected. And maybe that can, I mean, part of what I wanna work on is a better definition of fundamentalism. And I had that video where I talked about Verbecky's interview on the Sacred podcast. And I should send John a note and probably have a conversation with him about fundamentalism. Now, fundamentalism as a word is almost always used pejoratively. And I don't think it should be necessarily. I think fundamentalists right now have fundamental, let's talk about the appendix. I mean, one of the views for what the appendix is is a place where you store gut bacteria. And so if sort of the gut bacteria gets wiped out in the intestine, the storage, the little niche, the appendix is sort of a niche, you can sort of reseed your bacteria from that niche. One idea, one metaphor for fundamentalisms might be they're sort of an appendix. And what happened of course to Islam after the first World War is that some people were wondering if Islam was just basically going to disappear from the earth because of the destruction of the caliphate and the Ottoman Empire being the sick man of Europe, yada, yada, yada. And then of course, what resurges is this more virulent fundamentalist strain that sort of once again refloods the intestine. Now, you can see that sort of operating in American Christianity as well. Mainline has sort of been eaten by the woke. And so you have older, more crunchy versions of Christianity that break out and sort of repopulate America with more of its crunchy antithetical constructions of conservative traditional positions. And I think that could be sort of a theory of why fundamentalisms don't go away and continue to persist because they in fact serve a deeply functional role in terms of a religious ecosystem. And of course, I mean, you could see even Josiah's reform in that vein that the dominant religious cultural powers of Egypt, Assyria and Babylon, which is sort of this large pagan polytheistic milieu keeps sort of ravaging the children of Israel. And then when they recede, that deuteronomic fundamentalism sort of re-emerges and takes hold. So James Lindsay was talking to Benjamin Boyce about that. And again, it's so funny on Twitter, people are like, James Lindsay is not your friend. What do you mean by friend? No, I don't. James Lindsay isn't my friend like Rick is my friend because no, no, I don't mean that. Well, what do you mean? Well, you're just sort of positing this culture war framework in which I have all these friends, allies and foes and I don't think that's necessarily the best way to posture all this stuff. Maybe it sounds objectifying, but I see these individuals that I mostly relate to on Twitter or YouTube more as resources. And I don't have to agree or I can agree and disagree with James Lindsay, but I listen to what he says and when I find an idea that is helpful, I'll pick it up and play with it. It's what I do. You act like you're playing risk out there in the world with colors and a big board map and rolling dice and it's just to me sort of a silly way to deal with people in the culture war. You're not playing risk. Where was I? Yeah, so there should be an ordinance on loud stereos. I can't, this is a live streams. I can't mute everything. I don't know, maybe you can't hear it in the mic. I can sure hear it with headphones on. So yeah, these things are continuing to go through the culture and go through our culture wars. What's your take on the Lindsay Peugeot Twitter beef? Well, Jonathan backed off pretty quickly, which is smart because again, it just doesn't make a lot of sense to do a lot of going back and forth over big ideas on Twitter. You're much better making a video about it where you can bring in a lot of nuance and then people are like, well, Jonathan and James had a conversation before, sure. And Jordan and Sam Harris and Brett Weinstein had a conversation. I think Benjamin Boyce did a real service with having James on so quickly because he and James obviously are friends. And I mean, real friends, not sort of allies in this Twitter risk game that people wanna play. And Benjamin, if you listen to it, Benjamin was sort of pushing back on James very slightly about his classical liberal secularism. And Benjamin Boyce has, he doesn't talk about it that much on his channel. Benjamin Boyce has his own take on religion and his own interesting religious project that he's actually been sort of quietly undergoing besides all of these videos with trans and detransitioners, et cetera, et cetera. And so Benjamin was just sort of pushing back on against James on some of these things. But I found it to be a very helpful interview because he basically got James to share with us why he's attacking the ortho bros in bras because he basically sees the wokesters as being former. And there's a degree of validity to this. Again, the wokesters as being reactionary former Christians. And so a lot of people became new atheists because they preferred sort of the secularity of secular humanism to the particularity of their religious tradition. Again, Sarah Hyders in this, the apologist, the porn apologist is in there. Ayaan Hirsi Ali is in there. A lot of people deconstruct from sort of a fundamentalist Christianity that for some reason or another, they get hurt or it bites them, or they'd rather have the freedom of secular humanism and all of the nice little baubles that are out there with it. And to a certain degree, and I also like James was talking about sort of the inner church and the outer church in terms of the wokesters. There's kind of a hardcore down inside. And then there's a lot of people that are just sort of floating around in the culture and they pick up woke ideas because all the cool kids are doing it. And he basically sees, some of you are gonna react to this. And I don't think it's necessarily fair or true, but there is some validity to it. That some of the orthobros are basically done a reaction to secularity and wokeism. Yeah. And the problem with this thesis is that, again, one of the big video I didn't make that I talked about with Kale, one of the big problems with theory with respect to how humans operate is the forgetting of the very real reality of temperaments. Some people are just going to be reactive and they're going to have big swings. Look at someone like Mary Harrington. Mary Harrington, you know, she was going by the name Sebastian for a while. She was, wherever Mary Harrington goes, she's gonna have the pedal down. I mean, some people have an accelerator that's kind of a nice, they're kind of moderated by their temperament. Other people, their accelerator's like a binary on-off switch. And so if Mary Harrington's gonna go woke, she's gonna go 100% woke. And then if Mary Harrington's gonna be a reactionary feminist, she's gonna be 100% reactionary feminist. And some people are just like that temperamentally. Look at somebody like Paul Kingsnorth. And it's often these kinds of people that get traction on social media and in the media because they stand out. They're exceptional. And so when the world catches a cold, they get pneumonia. And so there's gonna be all of these dynamics. And it was so funny because somebody on Twitter's like, well, Jonathan Pujol's a fascist. And it's like, that is just, if you know Jonathan Pujol at all, Jonathan Pujol is about the furthest that you're gonna find from a fascist. It's just incredibly humorous. Jonathan Pujol is not a fascist. Jonathan Pujol is a very clever, passionate icon carver who has a very winsome personality and can actually get along with a wide variety of people. So Jonathan Pujol is not a fascist. So you're just gonna have these personality traits. And so, yeah, some of you bit hard on new atheism. And when that ran its course, you bit hard on orthodoxy. And now, I think what a lot of people who don't have a lot of experience in religious institutions have difficulty understanding is that, again, these institutions are massive. And then the observation that some sociologists made recently that generally speaking, religious institutions help to moderate people's extreme personalities. Because what religious institutions actually force many people who go into them as religious extremists to do is sort of settle down and realize there's a whole variety of people in your church or in your monastery or in your synagogue or in your religious community. And you also have the reality that other significant things happen in life that can either radicalize you or temper you. And that can be childbirth and raising a child or just having more experience in the world and appreciating the diversity of human temperaments, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. So, is it true? Is there some validity to James Lindsay's point about the fact that some people are gonna, I mean, I talk about steep slope and gentle slope. Orthodoxy is steep slope. And people who sort of need really strong medicine are going to go steep slope. And that's totally cool. I see that in say ministry in my context. I noted a long time ago that if someone comes into the church and let's say they were heavily involved in gang activity, they've been to prison, they've had extreme chaos in their life. They're probably going to wind up in a much more authoritarian Pentecostal street ministry than this one. Who winds up at living stones? People who've been to university, people who read books, people who like a degree of the thinky talky, people who like nuance and not always sort of hard commands. And so there's a temperamental aspect to that, but there's also a cultural aspect to it. And there's a therapeutic aspect to it. Some people need an authoritarian Pentecostal minister that says, you move into my house, you don't have a smartphone, you're not gonna see a computer screen because the first thing you're gonna go to is porn. I'm gonna keep track of all of your money and all of your relationships because I know that the minute you get any kind of movement, you're gonna rob somebody or you're gonna get high or you're gonna buy drugs or you're gonna do that. That authoritarian Pentecostal minister is gonna be super helpful for someone at that stage that needs to get off of porn or get off of booze or get off of drugs. And now that might be a time in their life when they need really thick container to get this, to do detox for a bunch of things in their life. And what happens in religious traditions, at least old successful religious traditions is that in time, you probably don't need the detox anymore. Now you can handle an internet connection. You can walk into a grocery store and not have to sort of focus in on the alcohol aisle. You can maybe relate to some people who you used to in the past who had drug problems because you're stronger. I mean, alcoholics go through this all the time. When you first get into AA, boy, you're hard. I have never met these so-called authoritarian Pentecostal ministers. That's cause Sam, maybe you don't hang out in the kind of neighborhoods I do and go do some prison ministry. You'll find them. You'll find them. That's right. Come to come to Missouri. So, when guys and Chad can check me on this, my guess is that when guys go into AA, especially, maybe they're getting out of detox in a hospital or maybe they're just, their sponsor's probably gonna ride them hard. After a while, when they get some time under their belt and they get some strength, well then they can handle more of the world. But there are different churches for different groups and that's why I say fundamentalism can be sort of like the appendix to keep some of that gut bacteria alive as other things sort of wash through the system. How on earth did I get on that? Oh yeah, Lindsay Pageot. So yeah. And another piece of this is whether in the individuals or on the internet, there's a lot of spectrumy behavior. And I think Ian McGillchrist is super helpful with this. New atheists have always had, and James Lindsay is sort of a recovering new atheist, but there's still a lot of that still in him. Boy, this is gonna, this is gonna jangle some people. New atheism was kind of autistic. Let's face it. It's approach to the world was super left-brained. You sort of reduce everything to calculations. I mean, this is the rationality that John Verbecky sort of deconstructs. New atheism was pretty autistic, even though some of the cleverest new atheists were definitely not autistic. But new atheism is kind of an autistic worldview. And when you listen to James Lindsay, some of that autism is in his critiques. You're just sort of boiling everything down into these discrete cause and effect relationships. And that in fact is sort of the vision of that kind of worldview. And when Peterson sort of pushes back with his counter enlightenment, or when you talk about combinatorial explosiveness, there's just way too many variables, which means that you can't finally fully maintain that worldview. You just don't have enough lifetime. You have to use all these intuitive dead reckoning tricks that on one hand blind you, but the other hand give you insight. Kind of the genius of Verbecky's relevance realization that the same thing that makes you, people who have super high IQ and high IQ and general intelligence could be super stupid and dysfunctional in other ways. There are always these trade-offs that are going on. And new atheism is just super autistic. And that's why it was never gonna last too long because autism can be really powerful in certain limited subsets, but the difficulty it has is sort of taking in all of the variables. And that's part of the reason that new atheism just kind of came apart. It's left-brainedness is sterile and leads to nihilism. And within its worldview, you can't find just it can't find justification for itself. Again, I actually made a PowerPoint for a video along these lines that I'm just sort of adding new language to it that'll probably get me in more trouble with people. But yeah, it's... And James Lindsay tends to have some of that in his critique. I mean, he's a digger. And so the value of what James brings to the conversation is all of this digging. And of course he does these long podcasts and he's just going down into Kant and Hegel. Now then you'll find a lot of people that are watching what he's doing with philosophy and saying, you really have Kant, right? You really have Hegel, right? But I think a lot of his stuff is super left-brained. And again, he's a mathematician. So his analysis tends to be spectrumy, but there's a lot of real value in spectrum. Spectrumy things. If someone is a savant, they can do just amazing things. Matchsticks fall, there's 238 matchsticks on the floor. Boom, they know it right away. They can do square roots. I mean, I did a video of... I don't remember the... I did a video about some of that stuff a while ago. And so it's super powerful, but it's super limited. And that's exactly Ian McGilchrist's critique of the left brain. And it needs, so I have the master and the emissary. It needs to be broadened out. So you can listen to James and say, yeah. Is it a thing that people who got bit really hard by being super woke, wind up being super religious and going to a super steep slope form of religion in America like orthodoxy? Now, again, orthodoxy is super steep slope in America. It's the gentlest slope in places where orthodoxy has been for a long time. And someone recently pointed out that often when someone first gets into a religion, it's sort of like an infatuation period where it's like, boom, they're completely consumed by it. And when you find a convert, you sort of see them completely consumed, but after a while it sort of mellows and that can become Church of Laodicea and either Luke, I mean, there's just trade-offs on all sides. So, yeah. James Lindsay is doing us doing a service, but a guy like him is gonna do drive-bys. It's just the way it's gonna be. I mean, look how many people he blocks on Twitter. I mean, I don't block anybody on Twitter. I don't think I've blocked anybody at all. And I've had some annoying people adding me in all sorts of things. Twitter has lots of controls. You just mute the account. You don't have to block them. You just ignore them. I mean, that's one thing that reactionary just can't stomach is that you don't have to fight everyone, especially on social media. Just ignore them. The power of ignoring, of not giving them your attention. It's a great power because the truth is that this super annoying person right now, they might have a hundred bad ideas, but they might have one good one. And you kind of wanna be there for the good one once they hit it. And then you might wanna say something nice to them. That was a great idea. The other 99, well, they were clunkers, but good job on the good one. So, how can it be that James, no true enlightenment thinker Lindsay can do three hour podcast on the theology of Marxism, but fail to grasp of the rather base or theological religious notions Peugeot points out. Jonathan, well, Jonathan Peugeot again and again and again has said, nobody would have understood me 10 years ago. Why? Because we were too in the grip of this, of the enlightenment spirit that James is continuing to promote. Why can't James understand Jonathan? It's right there. Yeah, Oliver Sacks, you got it up cycle. It's right there. He can't understand Peugeot because he's completely in the middle of the enlightenment spirit. Now, if you can understand the enlightenment spirit and understand Peugeot, you can see both sides. Then when you look at James, you don't have to wig out and be reactive. You just understand that he's possessed by the enlightenment spirit. That's who he is. And there's value in the enlightenment spirit. But it's super good to be able to understand its value and its strength and also understand its weaknesses and shortcomings, which is what is giving Jonathan Peugeot the lift he has. So I think that's why Jonathan Peugeot backed off because he realized this is pointless. Jonathan had forays into talking to Adam Frended and rationality rules. And we saw how those things were. It's super difficult to be an exorcist against a powerful spirit like the enlightenment spirit. And that's why again, Jordan Peterson is the unauthorized exorcist. What Jordan Peterson really is is an exorcist. And he has been exercising these very powerful spirits in massive numbers of people. Now, where they go after that, the religions have been around, the legacy religions have been to pick up a lot of people because once they are relieved of these very powerful spirits, then now they are open to, in my opinion, better spirits. And then Jonathan knows this. And would Jonathan talk with James? Sure. Would James want to talk to Jonathan? No. But James will talk to Benjamin Boyce. And again, I don't have to talk. If James Lindsay said, you called me, Spectrum me. I want to talk to you. No problem, James. I'll talk to you any day of the week. I'll talk to anybody. But is there a lot of value in it? I don't know. And again, I go back to my conversation with Eric Weinstein that I started talking to him. We kind of got a little bit of one-on-one time and I saw that I didn't think the conversation was really gonna go anywhere. So I just blessed him. I just blessed him and said, can I bless you? And he said, sure. And it was wonderful and it was great. So none of us are all things to all people. And you have to, wisdom is sort of, wisdom is knowing where to spend your time and what to spend your time doing. And there are many people that I know around me who are possessed by all kinds of different spirits. And by virtue of my experience, I know I can't cast these spirits out within a five or 10 minute conversation. And so I tend to be a very patient exorcist. And again, to someone deep in the enlightenment spirit, I know that you can't call that language, even those words and exorcist spirit, magic that just triggers. And that's just it. When people have tons of triggers like that, then you just sort of walk around until, God does something to sort of put them in a different space. That's just pastoral strategy. Okay. Were you aware that Matthew Peugeot never converted to orthodoxy? Yes, I knew that. I've known that for a long time. Matthew Peugeot is not orthodox. I don't even know that Matthew Peugeot goes to church. Maybe he does, maybe he doesn't. I don't know it. He doesn't readily identify with any particular Christian tradition. Of course, they were raised by their father within the church. Kind of a, if I recall correctly, kind of a Pentecostal tradition, evangelical tradition. And so, I don't know, is he still living in a yurt, cutting firewood? Could be. Matthew Peugeot's an interesting dude. He's a super interesting dude. I sent him an email inviting him on the channel. I'd love to do a Randall's conversation, but he basically has said, he thinks that Twitter is a better platform for him than YouTube, which I totally get. That's totally fine. But no, Matthew Peugeot's super interesting guy. Dennis has, I have religious trauma. They said my sin was bad. And that's, so there's a video, Peter, is it on Peter Boghossian's channel? There's a video with Peter and the, the, Chris, the sign guy. And I swear Nathan Digital Gnosis is there with Peter Boghossian in London. I think they're at Speaker's Corner doing Peter's little shtick that he did with me. But I'm pretty sure that that's a digital gnosis that Peter's doing it with. And so, super interesting. And it's just, that happens to a lot of people. And you see it as a pastor all the time that a church shopper comes into your church and, oh, you have women in office, I'm out. Oh, you don't have a rainbow flag up, I'm out. Oh, you do communion this way, I'm out. Or you said something, you said I shouldn't, you know, be living with my girlfriend, I'm out. Yeah. Okay, boomer. Define the two religions. Religion S for secular and the second one, religion W worldview. So part of what happens in modernity is that religion gets put into a corner. And there's a category, there's a, modernity invents the category of religion. And this is a super smart thing because what it does is sort of say, well, all these things aren't religious. And lots of, you know, I was taught in junior high, all of life is religion. I was taught that, I was just part of catechesis in the Christian Forum Church. This game, so it was already a critique of modernity. This game that says atheists don't have religion is like white people don't have culture. It's this trick that the monarchical vision plays on people. It's a classic lab leak. And so when you say religion has to do with holy books and churches and vestments and prayers, those are religious things, but cars aren't religious and politics isn't religious and that move. So that's why I call it religion S. It's sort of containerized religion. But of course your real religion is your operating system for the world. What is good? What is the chief end of man? How should you live? That's all your religion. And of course, Tom Holland pulled the sheet over it when, you know, were the Greeks religious? Well, they didn't work with the categories we did. Well, but they had temples and sacrifices and gods, et cetera, et cetera. Yeah, they were religious. So are we. So are the atheists. No, no, no, I don't do religion. And you see that breaking down. So in that amazing conversation on trigonometry with Sarah Heider, I've only touched a bit of it. The whole conversation is amazing. You know, it gets to the end of it, she basically admits it. And that's what's happening. And so that's what's happening. The enlightenment is passing away. Modernity is passing away. Now, am I super excited about that? No, why? Because secularity gave us peace in the world and a way of dealing with a whole bunch of things. And there was a ton of Jesus smuggling and Jesus value smuggling that happened in secularity and, and, and, and there's a lot of great things that happened from it. And so it going away makes me nervous because it means that we're going to have more warfare with respect to religious ontology. And I'm not excited about that. So we'll have to see, we'll have to see. There you go, pineapple pizza. There's your answer. On my walking the dogs this morning, I was thinking about our father prayer and God placing eternity in our hearts and memory. I was thinking, where do all these thoughts and memories sit or come from? That's what George Peterson's asking. In some sense, it's absurd and incomprehensible to have all these memories and words and opinions. And yet there they are, seemingly readily available to use with care or malice. What are your thoughts on these three truths? The Lord's prayer, eternity in our hearts and memory. I praise God for them. I think they're all part of being image bearers of God. And part of the, lots of preachers note that first century disciple making rabbis would teach their followers particular prayers. The Lord's prayer is super compact. It's an amazing prayer. Some people have noted similarities to certain Jewish prayers. I think, and in terms of eternity in our hearts, and Augustine, our hearts are restless until they find their rest in God. It's in a sense, the argument from desire deep down in us that we're restless. And Dostoevsky picks this up in notes in the underground. And memory, well, praise God for memory. I work in a church where I've got increasingly a number of people who have memory issues and it's a cruel thing to watch. So devote that prayer to memory and let it ache in your heart. There's the three together. A feast is made for laughter and wine makes merry, but money answereth all things. There's so much fun stuff in the book of Ecclesiastes. That's what's great about wisdom. Three things most forbidden in polite discussion is money, politics, and religion. Probably because they're the most spiritual things we have. How can Christians better understand money without going the three most common and failed roots? Dave Ramsey's money management for gummies, Joel Osteen, give, you'll get prosperity nonsense the backwards preacher who's biblically over yet biblically illiterate claims of you can't serve God and mammon. Do you think there needs to be a new undiscovered approach that Christian West takes to money? Or do we have one that secular people have simply discarded and simply needs to be polished up? Or do Christians need to learn something for once from the secularists? This is always a tough issue for me because I was very much raised be poor for Jesus. And I'm not poor. I eat every day. I've got gadgets around me. I have a new car that I bought this year, which is really cool and I really like it. I like driving it. I like driving it. I like driving it. I like driving it. I like driving it. I like driving it. I like driving it. I really like it. I like driving it. I've got a pension. My wife has a pension. We're not collecting them yet, but hopefully we will someday. So I'm really middle-class. Money is a difficult thing. And Peterson said that often, money is a difficult thing. It's a difficult thing to do well with. And people who do well with their money, and when I say do well with their money, I don't just mean can accumulate a lot of it, but I mean can accumulate it and put it to good use that blesses the world. I think that's what money is for, but money is tricky. Part of the reason that the love of money is the root of all kinds of evil is because money can very easily become idolatrous because, and God and mammon are sort of set side by side, because they're sort of completely engrossing. And in some ways, secularism of the West worked so well because, worked so well for people with money and people with security, because so much of what drives us to God is desperation. And if you've got a lot of money, you don't feel a lot of desperation. But yeah, I noticed that people with money get themselves into trouble all the time. They can be just as miserable as people without money. Money is idolatrous because it can never fully deliver on what it lyingly promises. So most of us spend a lot of our lives just trying to deal with the challenge of money. And, you know, Jesus, it's hard, you know. So when Jesus is crucified, it isn't that he had nothing because he had that one garment that the Roman soldiers who were plundering what he had left decided it wasn't worth cutting to divide. So they cast lots for it. So when Jesus was crucified, he didn't have a lot, but he did have something. And Jesus lived off of the generosity of a group of women. These women likely, it's so funny. We have these cultural. If you're a young, good-looking woman, it's not stupid to marry an old wealthy man. I mean, we call it gold digging, but it's not stupid because throughout history, there's been a lot of this. And you know what happens? Well, hopefully he's a good man and you can enjoy a few years of marriage with him. But when he dies, you get all his stuff. And throughout history, there have been, plus men have died in wars and men die earlier than women. Throughout history, there have been wealthy women who blessed the world because they stay widows for a long time and they have all the money from the men who died. So these women cared for Jesus, probably with the money from what their husbands left them. And in the, you look in the early modern period, there's all these wealthy widows who are in the salons in France. It's a funny dynamic. Men can't really play the same game because, you know, the sex differences between, let's say an older woman and a younger man, most older women will look at a younger man and say, yeah, you might have a romp with him, but you'd never want to marry him. But older men look at younger women and say, okay, I'll go, I'll do it. And, you know, they can, and out there, of course, there's gonna be somebody who points out a really wonderful marriage between an older woman and a younger man. And that's totally cool. I mean, life is like that, but it's funny business. I got here from money. There's been this mosquito in my office for two days and I have yet to, oh, I just got him, good. So yeah, money's a difficult thing. And I'm by no means the best person to answer that question. Who is the most Christian person alive today? Why is it Bill Gates? Ha ha ha ha ha. Ha ha ha ha ha. So Christian's conversation with me is still in the membership section. I'll spring it, you know, possibly this weekend, maybe Saturday, depending on how many videos I make today. How would it, first of all, it's always difficult to have a hierarchy like most Christian. I'm not saying such a hierarchy is impossible, but I certainly could never be the judge of it. And probably the best Christian alive today is someone that none of us know their name. And they might be some Christian somewhere who is practicing the widow's might. So would it be possible to have a, this little corner quest for a spiritual home film series in 2024? You can call a council of ship captains in the photo. See the influence of Grim Grizz? This is Grim Grizz language. And decide on 12 movies related to the subject and agree that all will devote one episode of you programming to discussing the film of the month. Not setting a course for the armada, but a general direction. My nomination would be a little known, 2015 film called 10,000 Saints. Interesting, never heard of the film. One of the things, one of the interesting aspects of this little corner is how amorphous it is. And Vindonka is always calling me, pestering me about, what's the relationship between estuary and this little corner? Like, I don't know. We in sort of the space around me use this little corner far more than you hear it in the symbolic world or in sort of the Verveki camp. Ironically, the Verveki camp for the Verveki foundation, this little corner is just sort of around me and this flotilla of channels in a more, in a way that's talked about. The symbolic world is sort of around Peugeot. I'm not sure what's around Verveki, and all three are part of this corner. So there are corners to the corner. And John talks about it more than Jonathan, but it's not like we have a monthly meeting between the leaders of this little corner. It's sort of a spiritual leadership more than a physical embodiment. But it's a cool idea. And I'd say when you have a cool idea, see if you can get some traction on it and run with it. Everybody's sort of doing their own thing. I mean, it's only every now and then, like at the Chino conference when the whole flotilla seems to come together, I still have to make up my mind if I'm gonna go to Florida in February for the symbolic world thing. I probably should. I just gotta, I just gotta, so I've told this before. I have four weeks a year from Living Stones that I can devote to this effort. And I've spent my four for 2023, and I have four for 2024. And, the 2024 scene isn't super set yet. Originally there was gonna be an Israel conference. I don't think that's gonna come off. There isn't, nobody sort of stepped up and said, and I don't know if it could even happen in 2024 yet in terms of myself and Jonathan and John Vervecky in for a conference in 2024. Jonathan Peugeot's schedule is hard to get on, and John Vervecky's isn't easy. Mine is the most flexible for the most part. So, any trips to Michigan next year, Paul? We'll see, there is no corner. There's this fear of influence around Peterson, says the good father. I don't know whether or not I'm going to Senate. I was convicted the other day of the fact that I really do have to spend some time working on the Christian Reformed Church's mess that it's in right now, because it's a big mess. And I should, I've got a rather unique position in the Christian Reformed Church, and to not use this for the welfare of the Christian Reformed Church, I don't think that would go well with me in the, when I sit down with my Lord and he does an evaluation of what I've done with however many years he gives me. So, I should think more about that. And so, if I go to Senate again, then I can easily fly into Chicago and then have Jacob drive me up to Grand Rapids again. So, maybe. But the 2024 calendar isn't really set. And at this point, there's no VanderKlay, Vervecky, Peugeot, conference in the works for 2024. Now, those are big conferences and they're kind of audacious. We had one in Thunder Bay first, and then we had the one in Chino. So, Israel was gonna be the third one, but that's not happening. In 2025, there might be one in Europe. I know that the Europeans are wanting to put something together. So, I have to figure out where I'm gonna go. There's been talk of a Texas conference, but that hasn't been put together. Lance and Jess have to talk about Kansas City, but Lance moved, so that got sort of disrupted. And Mark Connolly is, he's got a million ideas for conferences. But the DC one was really, it was a great time together, but I don't know if financially that conference really worked. And the difficulty with these conferences is you sort of, it's easy to sort of take a bath in it. Now, they haven't announced it, but there is a lot more organizational development going on right now with respect to estuary. And that could really boost the possibilities. I suppose I should just do a conference at Living Stones at some point, but our facility is so small and it's a ton of work to put together a conference. So, nothing's more powerful than something. So yeah, and we're still sort of waiting for, what's with you guys in Minneapolis-St. Paul? You have so many, you have so many cool people. You've got CW, you've got Luke, you've got a whole bunch of others that whenever we do something in the Midwest, we get really good cooperation from Minneapolis-St. Paul. And you guys just, you guys just, you guys just don't have your act together yet. I don't know why. Yeah, we're working on it, we're working on it. Luke says we're working on it. I trust Luke to organize something about as much as I trust my dog to organize something. I didn't say anything about Luke. It's just, Luke's not an organizer. Luke is not an organizer. There I named you, Luke, you're not an organizer. So yeah, Minneapolis, too many babies to care for. Good for you, good for you. So yeah, so since we don't have a lot in 2024, maybe I should take one of my weeks and go to Florida. I should probably talk to Mike, but I've got a busy travel schedule in 2024 anyway, because I've got two weddings, Jared and Luke, and I've got a couple of other things to do. I've got a couple of other things to do. I've got two weddings, Jared, my son is engaged, woohoo! And my oldest son, Philip, is engaged, and my oldest son is gonna get married in Italy, so I'm gonna have a trip to Italy, and that's gonna be no work. I'm gonna go see Pompeii, I'm gonna see Florence, I'm gonna see Rome. I am so excited about my Italian trip, but that's not, is ARC going to be annual? No, the next one is February 2025. That's right, Luke Thompson is an Inspire, not an organizer. That's exactly right. I need a Peter Thiel. Kiss the Pope's toe. So yeah, we've got some engagements. So I'm gonna be doing some traveling 2025, but that's not my four weeks for this little corner, so I have to budget them out at some point. Anyway, where was I going with all of this? Yeah, it's up to you guys to organize stuff. It really is. Take initiative, organize something, take a risk. That's what people have done. Catherine did it, John Van Dock did it, Marcus and Joe did it, and again, that was, I had a great time in DC. I have a great time at all of these events, but, and the great time is having to meet new people. I got a chance to hang out a little bit with Michael Martin, the sociologist, got a chance to get to know Spencer Claven a bit, and then Father Eric gave me a tour of some of those things there, and that was awesome. And Jacob sent me a text the other day that says, you need to pay more attention, you need to give more attention to Father Eric, so Father Eric here, you're getting more attention. I don't really feel like Father Eric needs my help. I think Father Eric is doing great all on his own, and I've yet to hear, maybe I have to have Ted and a bunch of you on the channel. I have yet to hear a really good report from Arkansas. Did you take videos? Is there gonna be stuff out there? So there was a conference I didn't get to go to, but that, with Father Eric and Dr. Jim and Ted, awesome. So we need more events, and smaller events are great, it's just figuring out the economics of the events is difficult. And at this point too, John and Jonathan both have speaker fees, which at this point for them is totally understandable. I don't have one, I'll generally do something. If you can cover my cost, that's great. If there is an honorarium, that's helpful, but I'll usually just do it for cost, and in fact sometimes I lose money on it, but it's super cool. Yeah, Father Eric is great. The videos are taking forever, but it was awesome. Can't wait to see them. So, all right, so that stuff's developing. New Stroud link, oh. There it is, good. I'm gonna like it so I can find it again. 22, oh, three days ago, good. That's a video I wanna watch. Thank you, Joseph. If ARC comes to you, ask to contribute videos to their YouTube channel, would you contribute? Sure. So, one of the things that happened at ARC was, I think I'm at liberty to say this. Here's a guy named Eric, used to work for Jordan before Jordan went to Daily Wire, and Eric now works with John Verbeke. He also worked at the ARC conference and he had a brilliant idea to set up these little pods for YouTubers to make content there. And the content was both sort of owned by ARC and then the YouTubers could use them on their own channels. And so when you see Dave Rubin in this little gray box, those are these pods that they set up. And that was a super idea. So, I was offered space in there, and I talked with Nathan Jacobs, who Nathan and I still need to get together for our little post ARC convo. We didn't find time to do one there, and I was a little concerned for some other things, so we're gonna just do ours outside. But yeah, I would be more interested if ARC came to me and said, help us do estuary-like community at our events. Yeah, well now you're talking, because the one thing ARC needed more of was process. The greatest thing about ARC was not the videos they put out, there's some good videos that they have. The greatest thing about ARC was they got the attention for 1,500 people, not easy to get people, they got them in the same place, and they had their mostly undivided attention for three days. That is a huge accomplishment. And a lot of that is because of Jordan Peterson and his influence. Now they really have to think about how can you build relationships if you really wanna start a movement. The fabric of any movement are all the little relationships. So, when for example, we were designing the Chino Conference, I told John Van Donk, you need to make sure some people are there, and one of those people is Grim Grizz. You need to make sure Grim Grizz is there. And whatever you need to do, give them a free ticket, give them some money, you need to make sure Grim Grizz is there, because if Grim Grizz is there, his presence there alone is going to shape the conference. And there are, and so part of the cool thing about Chino, which was cool about ARC, which was cool about any in-person gathering is, you need to bring the right people there. So that relationships can be cemented and grown. And so at ARC, my relationship with Rafe Kelly, my relationship with Glenn Scrivner, my relationship with Nate Heil, my relationship, I've gotta get some more of these artists on from the Peugeot faction, my relationship with a bunch of these guys took a level up. Only an in-person conference can do that. And so if you're creating a conference, figure out how to facilitate this, because those relationships become the binding of the fabric of the movement. So that's completely important. ARC, February, 2025, where is it gonna be? What are they going to do? I have no idea. But they've, they did some things already. And yeah, I'm really curious to see where it goes. All right. When the interview, when's the interview with Jordan Cooper? Okay. So I, as some of you can see, I am making it a priority to do Rando's conversations. So I did a couple this week. I'm gonna hopefully Lord willing do a couple next week. I wanna keep doing these Rando's conversations. I think they're a key part of this. Part of the reason for the membership section, the $3 membership section, it's just $3 a month, less than a cup of coffee at Starbucks, less than a cup of coffee just about anywhere. Part of the reason for that member, that Rando's membership section is I can put these, I could put more Rando's conversations available to you. Many people don't want their Rando's conversation on the open internet. Rightfully so. Rightfully so. And so the $3 membership section is the Rando's membership section where you can see the Rando's conversations. Now, some of them are gonna go out to the full. And when people say, I want it on the full channel, I'll happily put it on the full channel. But a lot of other ones and some of the really good ones, some of the best Rando's conversations I've had were never recorded and never shared because they're the most personal. Some of them were recorded and never shared and I still have them. I just saw a tweet from Justin that he's working on the estuary stuff again, which I'm super excited about because I think that documentary is going to be amazing. So Rando's priorities, Rando's conversations are priority. So I have three levels in the membership section. One is the Rando's, $3 a month. Then there's a $7 a month tier. Now the $7 a month tier is no wait, no ads. And what I do on that tier is when I sort of have a flurry of video making, videos that are going to go on the open channel, go there first and get parked there first. So if you want early access, you get early access and I keep the monetization off. So you don't have any ads and you get early access. And then there's the third level, which is the supporter level. And the supporter's $25 a month because I didn't know how to price it. And that's sort of a way that there is the Patreon. And yes, you get no benefits from Patreon. Patreon is just a way that if you want to support me at a dollar a month or $50 a month, you can do that on Patreon. Patreon takes far less cut than YouTube. YouTube takes 30%. So if you just want to support the effort, you can give money via Patreon. But there's no benefits. The supporter benefits has all the benefits of the randos conversations, the no wait, no ads. And what I did for the supporters finally got around to doing something for them is I basically gave them my cell number. And so if you're on the supporter level, just send me a text. If you want to do a conversation, if you want to talk on the phone, if you want to do any of that, that's what you get as a supporter. So those are the three tiers. Another tier might come because in January, my adult Sunday school class ends and we start the, it might come back. We'll see what happens with the Estuary Project. I'm gonna do Estuary meetings at 9 a.m. on Sunday morning at Living Stones starting in January because Living Stones needs it. Living Stones needs more bodies. And not everybody is there for the church aspect, but people love to come for the Estuary at Living Stones. So if you're coming into town and you want to meet me, Estuary at Living Stones is gonna be the way to do it. We'll just have conversations at nine o'clock. I love my adult Sunday school class. I love going through the Bible. I love studying it that way, but I need that time slot for Estuary. So I'm considering doing an online Bible study and that will be a separate membership tier. And then once I get that going, once I get that going, I'm going to, I might start an online Bible study and that's gonna be paid, that's gonna be in the membership section. And then I'll have to see whether those videos go out to the open internet or just stay in that membership section. Because what I don't want is just people coming into a Bible study online and trolling. That's a waste of my time. What I do want are smaller Bible studies, four to eight people who are serious about it. And one of the things that asking for a financial commitment means is people take it seriously. And that's sort of a way to be on the internet and not just have it be a free fall, just have it be crazy. So that's sort of the membership. And I was answering the Jordan Cooper question. So this week I had Kale and Bern and next week I'm talking to Spencer Clavin for his podcast and, and, and I only have so many hours in a week. And some of you might say, well, don't make your own commentary videos. I make my own commentary videos for me. That's how, that's sort of a therapeutic practice of mine to get stuff out of just between my ears and out of my mouth and out there into the world to think with you. So I, Jordan Cooper, I wanna do another conversation with Jordan Cooper. I wanna do a, I've got a few other people out there who I wanna talk to, but it's just all scheduling. And now we're into the Christmas season. And I only have certain number of hours a week that I can devote to this. And you already get a lot, but I, yeah, I wanna talk to Jordan Cooper. I really enjoyed my conversation with Jordan Cooper. I wanna talk to him again, but I just gotta fit it into my schedule. And I've got, I've got pastoral responsibilities, you know, and as a minister, you wouldn't believe the kinds of stuff I have to spend time doing, you know, in the book of Acts, the disciples are like, you know, we need to have deacons so we don't spend all of our time waiting tables and I don't have a lot of deacons here. So I spent a lot of time working, helping individuals with stuff, which is just absolutely insane. If it's so funny because a common question I get from people is how do you stay so grounded? And it's like, if you only had a view of my normal life as a pastor at a local church, you would know why. It's, it's, it's my life, my, it is insane. The things I do from week in and week out, you know, it is totally insane, but it keeps you grounded. And I love it, I actually love it. There are many Sunday afternoons when I come home from church, I just shake my head and laugh because I've had the most insane Sunday morning, but it was absolutely a delight. And part of what, you know, when I think about what happens when you become a celebrity, it's terrible. So God keep me from being a celebrity. All right. So yeah, I want to talk to Jordan Cooper. Why don't we have these question answers on Discord anymore? I didn't keep track of you when you moved to YouTube. All of us on the server lost a natural place to talk and interact with. Yeah, the difficulty was Rick has a day job and Rick had this whole way of doing it. And this StreamYard just basically works better with I'm doing it on my own. And so that's why we're doing it. It was super complicated to do it in the Discord and do it on YouTube. And so that's why I do it on StreamYard because it's easy, because I can do it. It was super complex and there were, and Rick of course could manage all of those technical issues, but that meant that Rick had to come down here on Friday morning. It's been pretty much all Friday morning here, which was fun because we do things together, but Rick got a job a couple of years ago. And Rick's a human being like the rest of us. Has to make money and buy motorcycles and do Rick things. So that's the way I went. What do you think of Aldous Huxley? Don't know a tremendous amount about him. Read Brave New World a few times. Someone at church wants to do outreach for drug users. The current idea is to approach drug users on the streets of New York City. This is not a well developed idea. You are right, it is not a well developed idea. But you could start with that. I mean, that's not a bad way to start because if you want to minister to people, get to know them. How do you get to know them? You sit down with them and listen to them and watch them. That's how you get to know them. So yeah, I'd say if you're gonna start something, it's not a bad way to start. Maybe five years from now, you'll have an idea how to be helpful. But there are dumber ways to start than to go and find them and hang out with them and learn their world. But I gotta warn you. Mind your P's and Q's around these drug users. They are drug users. Oh, I love Christians, they're great. They're so idealistic. Let's go help the drug users. Please do, just don't do stupid things. Be careful. But yeah, go hang out with people. If you wanna help somebody, first you have to know them and it takes a while to know them. And then if you spend your time with them and you love them, at some point, you'll probably figure out how to be helpful. So I love it, I absolutely love it. How do you explain someone like me who was religiously followed Jordan Peterson since 2017, but hasn't made significant changes in behaviors concerning discipline and self-image? Oh, that's a great question, Tom Tom. Well, I don't think, I'm not surprised. Because you're just watching stuff on screens. You've certainly been impacted. You're here, you're talking, you're writing, but you don't make a change until you make a sacrifice. Okay, we can use Peterson's sacrifice language. It might be a sacrifice of attention. It probably means a sacrifice of time and money. And that's why I tell people, same as Peugeot, I mean, that's one thing Peugeot and I have, we've played the same tune right from the start, go to church. Go to any church, do something. If you're just watching and listening, it's not enough. You're going to have to go and do something. I see people who are trapped, miserable, and it can go on for decades. And they complain, they watch stuff, they listen to stuff, but they never do anything. You have to, and it might sound strange to hear a Calvinist minister say this and somebody left a comment. Paul VanderKlay is not Calvinist at all. I've been listening to him since 2017 and he's not Calvinist. It's like, oh, okay. You have to do something. You have to step out. You listen to this with Peterson, Abraham has to leave. You have to go to church. You have to change something in your life if you want to change. Just watching screens isn't enough. We're just entertainment otherwise. And again, I don't clean your room. That's a good place to start, but the problem with clean your room is you're not engaging other people. You're not going to disappoint anyone. You're not going to offend anyone. You're not going to encourage anyone. Nobody's going to hold you accountable. And that's why going to church is at least, now is that enough? No, but at least if you go to church, you're going to bump into other people. And hopefully you're going to start talking to other people. And maybe you'll make a relationship with someone. And then in the process of that relationship, there's going to be accountability. There's going to be all sorts of other things. So you have to do something. You have to do something or change will not happen. Then remember that you have to still get to work out that it doesn't matter, whether that's a week day or not because things don't get bigger and bigger. I'm going to a church today. So I just know that's a good place to start. That's a good place. I'm Ve just gonna go ahead and say how do you don't do that? How do you work out your problems? Rick expiration track is gonna doion. If it works out to be hard to do, I just want you all safe and I'm boy. There you go. Work the turkey wheel at home. I have no, what is a turkey wheel? this. Rick has the life. You know, Rick has the life. Uh no no I gotta Anselman Anselman. What's what's going on with you? You see dead people? No, that was Clint. Sorry. Oh, I'm sorry to hear that answer. Anselman, I was in Scotland. I so wanted to meet you. Anyway, um yeah. Alright, well, we're okay. This is what I'm gonna do. Uh no more questions. or December one thing close that and they'll take so so I'll take questions from the chat in a minute here and then um then if we um if we then maybe I can drop the link and bring people in. Consider how far to the left the feminists have gone. It's not irrational to expect a snap back to historical norms. I think that's right. What is the best strategy for women to protect themselves from male group think when the extremes of subjugation come back into popular practice? Yeah. Women, there's women have particular vulnerabilities. They just do. They also have particular powers. That's that's what that's what sort of this this contemporary quality is makes it so dumb is that women have particular vulnerabilities and they have particular powers and people don't appreciate the powers. Um isn't dunking a salience noise signal? Yeah. Shouldn't it be tapped down and publicly discouraged when witnessed scene in preparation for the great snap back? I don't know how you're gonna do that. That is if one encounters themselves among those who care about unaffiliated daughters and the future of the feminine younglings unborn individualism and the property ownership aren't easy aren't easy problems when the rule of law is removed or perverted. What's going to stand in the way of my equals right coming back with I agree and and so I um I appreciate your concerns and this my my my biggest fear with wokeism was not so much that it would win but that the push back was going to be fierce, violent, and authoritarian. So, I am a moderate in many respects. I think I know this is gonna I think generally speaking that a lot of the stuff that has happened with respect to women's rights and gay rights overall have been a plus for our world. I made sure my daughters got education. I understand that um them having some financial security is really important and I want my daughters to have the privilege of motherhood someday. Now, I want them to I want them to marry and be mothers but you know, in my case, my wife, you know, it comes to a certain point when you don't need people don't need their moms at home all the time anywhere even though my wife my wife would love it if I made enough money so she didn't have to go to work. She would love that. Yeah, don't don't message me on discord. I hate I don't like the platform. If you want to message me, use you use Twitter Messenger DM me on Twitter. It's the best way cuz it's the most reasonable email is broken and by no means use Facebook Messenger. I think a lot of the adaptations that have happened have been necessary because of the changes in society overall and so the challenges are now um figuring out how to deal with the context that we have. So, I'm a moderate on all these things. II don't think we should block women from the workplace or from using their gifts and in all sorts of roles and places. I don't think that at all. I think I think it's great that individual women have opportunities to use their gifts. They're and all sorts of gifts and all sorts of different ways and I think Peterson is right that societies that encourage women to use their gifts are stronger societies but yet at the same time figuring out how to do that without creating the kinds of problems we have today where there is not enough cultural incentive and motivation to encourage women to the path of childbearing and motherhood which is an extraordinary gift. How are Twitter DMs better than email see because there are less of them because there's no spam in my Twitter DMs and they're very brief. Mostly. Yeah. So, this stuff is really hard but it's always been hard. So, I the general rule is love your neighbor as yourself that your women neighbors and what I you know, sorry, sorry where I ended up in the video I released for this morning was you know, part of what's so good about the West is we're talking about it and when Sarah Heider complains that you can't even have a lot of these conversations in public in Islamic societies. That's a real issue. We're having them here. So, yeah, it's it's hard but we have to women have particular women have particular vulnerabilities that have to be as a society protected but also women have certain powers which should be recognized. Well, yeah, you can always you can always blame the other side. I don't know what that gets you. I don't know what that gets you. I mean, it's like complaining. Go ahead, complain, complain all you want. You'll burn out the ears of the people around you. You'll lose status. You'll lose credibility. You can complain. If not, for the modernist, physicalist conception of truth, would Peterson's live as if God exists be indistinguishable from normal Christian faith? Interesting. I think his admonition comes in the context of modernist, physicalist conception of truth. It's clearly it's clearly an admonishment to have people look above just sort of physical instrumentism driven by the physical, physical, physical, physical, physical needs and desires. I think that's that's kind of how it fits in. All right, time for questions from the chat. Ooh, three new members. Awesome. I think that's kind of how it fits in. Awesome. If you want to ask a question, put question in all caps so I can see it or use the super chat. It doesn't matter how much the super chat just comes in with big bold colors and it automatically gets starred so that I can recognize it. Lots of chatting going on in here. No questions from the chat. Pray for Vivian and Claire. Well, there you go. You get special mention. I met Claire. I met Claire came to the meetup in London and she was wonderful. She was a delight to have in the group and and this is in the video recently I said you know an internet persona. We have internet personas. They're sort of internet subpersonalities and not the same as our full personality. So to meet somebody in person is already always way more okay. Father Eric, why wouldn't you come and hang out in Florida? Because I have four weeks for this and I've got to use them wisely. That's why Florida sounds great. Thank you Kate for becoming a YouTube member. Thank you Mark for becoming a YouTube member. Thank you Jan for becoming a YouTube member. Thank you Matthew for becoming a YouTube member. Awesome. Corey and I should be there. Yeah, it's going to be a gathering. All right, Corey. Are you following the John Vervecky, Jonathan Pujo conversations with DC Schindler? What do you make of that stuff? It feels important but so much over my head. I've followed them to a degree but there's so much stuff to follow. DC Schindler is obviously an important thinker and so I've watched them but they haven't colonized me like some other things have. What is the case against women in office, Pastor Paul? I think it's sort of a certain past. That's a complicated thing. My position is I am against blocking women from office. I think women that aspire to church office should be allowed to pursue it. Now whether they will succeed in achieving it, well that just depends on the system but for most people who object to women in office point to certain verses of the Bible. I think now and I think the case in the Protestant world and the sacramental, the orthodox, and the Catholic world is different. I'm talking about Protestant ministers. A Protestant minister is different from an orthodox or Catholic priest. That difference between a priest and a minister is not a small one. Priests live within a particular conception of the church and its role and I myself remain a Protestant. I love it when we pray for each other. Yes, come to Florida. Question. Did you finish Hans Buhler's book? No, I didn't. He gets, I gotta keep going in it. It gets, it freaking philosophers, a lot of philosophers just don't really write that well and it's a second language for him obviously but I think the, I think this schema, the profelicity idea is super important and I think his nomenclature around sincerity, authenticity, profelicity is really helpful in terms of tracking this but I haven't finished his book. Do you think female pastors can be justified by reckoning they under the male headship of apostolic teaching? Oh, that's interesting. I think there's probably, I don't, it was interesting when I was studying Josiah. They looked for a prophet and it was a woman, Holga. I think God gives gifts to men and women to use for the church. And to me, the strongest proof text of women leadership in church is Lydia in the book of Acts. It's never mentioned but to me, that's clear. Paul welcomed the hospitality of Lydia. Lydia was likely the leader of the church of Philippi. It's my take. Has your wife found a suitable music stand for her classroom? I don't think so. Do you intend to make more joint videos? I'm trying to lure my wife to Florida for the Symbolic World Conference. She probably won't go to the conference at all but it's like, I'm trying to fly to Florida and at least hang out in a hotel. I'm sure she will show up. Question, can you discuss Christianity as an antidote to narcissistic pattern? Oh yeah, it's the whole idea of being a living sacrifice. I mean the whole idea of being a living sacrifice is completely the opposite of narcissism. To be a disciple of Christ, to be the least. I mean there's so many things in Christianity where it's kenosis. It's you empty yourself, you become the bottom, you become subject, you become the servant of all. It's completely the opposite of narcissism. Can you give a pitch of what estuary is and why it's important please? Estuary is a place to have meaningful conversations and you need that. Where else are you having meaningful in-person conversations? With whom can you talk about these kinds of things? Now maybe you can talk about them at home with your wife or your husband. That's awesome. But you want to expand the circle at all? Do you want to have new friends? Do you want to have... This is way more fun to do together. I mean when I talk to Rick we can talk about Grim Grizz, we can talk about Chad. There's a whole community. It's no fun playing community alone or playing it with a screen. Go make some friends. Learn how to have a good conversation. If someone was considering becoming a preacher or a pastor but not affiliated with a specific church, how would you assess their intention and is there any resource to point to? I don't think... to me that makes just no sense because being a church leader is a function of that community and my advice would be find a church that you can stomach and start getting involved. The best way to grow in leadership is to grow up in leadership organically in a church. In the Christian Form Church you can't become a Christian minister without a recommendation from a Christian minister that says you've been in this church. You have learned basic Christianity in a church. You have learned how to be a servant because if you're going to be the servant of a congregation the only way to start is by being a servant in a church. It is weird to feel that women pastors are fine but women priests are weird. No, I think that's totally true. I totally get that. To me that makes perfect sense because a priest is a different thing than a Protestant minister. The whole conceptualization is different. Now the Anglicans, you Anglicans, I don't know what's up with you. Anglicanism is a weird cultural thing but because they sort of... the Anglicans are always just sort of trying to have it both ways. Oh and oh women in office who votes on that? Church people. Question, what topics would be best for a future TLC conference? I think just follow the various conversations that are going on in the videos and I think bring in... So part of what Catherine established in Thunder Bay which I think was good is that she brought in someone local and outside. I think there are... I think our potential for... and Mark Connolly has been doing the best with this... our potential for new voices is great. Jason Baxter who wrote these books on C.S. Lewis or or Constantine Kissin or Tom Holland or Chris Williamson's living in Texas now. I mean Chris Williamson's a natural. You know his channel's grown so much I don't know what kind of speaker fee he would need. There's so many cool people. I mean that's why YouTube is so cool. So and then what we did for our conference was we got... you know we had Catherine, John Van Donk, myself, Jonathan Peugeot, John Verveke. John Van Donk had some ideas and some names and we gave them to the group and the group sort of changed some things and agreed on something. So get your get your primaries involved in the selection of it because that then will get them motivated to work on it beforehand. It's in a church Vivian. It's in a church. Who decides? However decisions are made in the church. So in the Christian Form Church, synod voted and that's how it happened. Now in Orthodox and Catholic churches their structures are completely different. They have popes and metropolitans and things so. So a whole group of synod made up 100 percent of men voted to have women join them. That happened. Yes the father is a male figure. Talk to Jacob about women rabbis. It's a fun conversation with Jacob. Okay I'm gonna work with the questions here. Question, have you read more of Running Grave? I started it and it was cool but I'm reading about 10 books at once and then I bought a new phone and so now I have to upload all those books again on my phone. I'm really curious about about JK. I'm curious about way way too many things. I'm so freaking ADHD but it's fun. It's like a drug. I'm really curious about JK Rowling's idea of what a cult leader looks like. Are you more on the side of sola or prima scriptura? Gosh you guys get me in trouble with these questions. Scripture isn't. I'll say it this way. Scripture has unique authority for the church and life. I'll say it that way. You can split that how you want it then. Does the resurrection dominate over what happens on the cross too much? Does the resurrection dominate over what happens on the cross too much? No I think actually churches don't talk enough about the resurrection. Partly because the resurrection is I really love that conversation they had on Grail Country about the resurrection with Sam and Jordan Daniel Wood and Nate and I remember who else was in on that conversation. Was Raviky out of that conversation? I don't remember but that was awesome. The resurrection is super mysterious and that doesn't take away from I mean the physical aspect is one aspect of it but it's it's super mysterious. I mean if we don't know what a car is how do we know what the resurrected body of Jesus Christ is? It's just really cool. Wonderful. Have you read Lilith? I have two copies of it because people keep sending. If you want me to read Lilith please don't send me another hard copy. I've already got a number of copies of Lilith. I have not read it. I kind of want to. I tried reading it. I actually bought it when I was in seminary and found it difficult so I should probably try it. I don't know if you've read it when I was in seminary and found it difficult so I should probably try again. Oh Upcycle. Hey thanks Upcycle. Upcycle's such a generous supporter of this little corner. Question. What is the proper fear of God? God. Awe, respect, terror. It's all part of it. Terror and fear have a way of dominating our attention so that's an aspect of it but see the difficulty about God is this diverse excellencies thing that Jonathan Edwards talks about. Is God more and Tim Keller used to say this all the time you know he's God is more terrifying than we can handle and he's also more loving and there's even terror in that love so. Hey thanks Father Eric and Ted. Enjoyed the gathering at Arkansas. Question from Miriam. How does a small church that is not part of a specific church prevent itself from turning into a quasi church organization that takes the place of a normal church? A small ministry that's not part of a specific church prevent itself from? Yeah that's a real issue with parent church organizations. It even gets stuff from when it's big. I mean is why wham a church? We can have Jess answer that. We've got a fair number of why whammers or former why whammers in the corner. So, Coleppa is another why whammer. Youth with a ministry, youth with a mission. God gives us the church and the church helps keeps us grounded as individuals, as ministries, as ministries. Yeah it's a good question. There's a little bit of fighting in the comments. Can you give a pitch of what a TLC is to an arc person? Yeah this is why this is why um if Justin gets this if Justin gets this documentary done it could be a huge asset because just explaining that there's this little community online sort of downstream from Jordan Peterson and there are real relationships that are being developed even babies born it's still gonna give them a sense and the power of something like a documentary to to sort of move people is huge. Uh oh I'm gonna have to call this to bring this to an end and run out of time. How do you love a narcissist without reinforcing their narcissism? Yeah um well part of it is in a real relationship there's no and narcissists have a hard time with no. It's sort of like how do you pay attention to someone who's um historionic. It's a real tough dance. How to love a narcissist. Well, loving people is really really hard. It's really really hard. All right all right everybody's fighting about women in office. Are there any online estuary meetings that you would like to do? Uh question for self. Are there any online estuary meetings at the moment? Uh else net is online and it's an estuary meeting. New England was having their meetings online. Estuaries you know in London. Hot! Fine Tayo! Fine Tayo and John Lumgar. We had our big London estuary gathering in a pub. It's kind of the McDonald's of pubs. It was kind of fun. It was really cool um and they took names this time. So find Tayo or Tayo. Tayo, Tayo, I don't know. Find him. He'll hook you up. Question. What's the antidote to creeping cynicism towards let's say ARC, Jordan Peterson, Jonathan Peugeot. Things getting bigger and bigger. Is cynicism always unhealthy? Well cynicism where did I hear a good definite oh it said Peterson had a good definition of cynicism in the in the in the Chris Williamson video. Bigness is not necessarily a problem if like Christianity is massive. But in order for massive things to not just sort of float away there have to be all this ecosystem below. The ocean is massive. Tidal pools are tiny and tidal pools have even niches within the tidal pools. And um I would say the way to combat cynicism is to found or just to get rid of confuse to found or join an estuary to go to just chatting on Jacob or Grim Grizz or Grail Country or or is the and remember a body that's the way to combat cynicism to have relationships with to go to the denim dinner at Chad's house. That's how to combat cynicism because the most powerful things are these in person things. They are the most powerful. And in order for, and that's part of the reason why even when we're holding big events like Chino, we keep bringing it down into estuary type things because there's the Dunbar number of 120, but Chino was even above that. And if this movement continues to grow, ARC was 1500. Jordan Peterson has 7 million plus subs on his channel. My channel continues to grow. It's small still. Well, what is small on YouTube? I don't know. It's bigger than some of the other channels. So you have to participate in something that is face to face, even if maybe you can't have it face to face in person, or maybe it has to be online. And so maybe participate in the hive mind on Grizz's channel. So I have an old computer that I'm mailing to Grizz on Saturday. So hopefully we'll get Grizz back on the air. You drop in on Luke's thing, drop in on just go into Discord and do some, don't just do text in a Discord. Part of the reason I don't like Discord is too much text. And when we were talking about bridges of meaning 2.0, we talked about something that actually sort of got eclipsed by these just chatting channels on YouTube. That's why there's no bridges of meaning 2.0. Because in some ways StreamYard did it better. So, but you have to participate in something small where someone recognizes your name. I know I recognize your name, but I recognize too many names. It has to be something where you walk in a room. It's like, cheers. You need to go where everybody knows your name. There you go. It's the cheers thing. The cynicism, always unhealthy. No, not always unhealthy. It's an important thing. Still arguing about women in office. That's the problem with mentioning something about women in office is that it just takes over things sort of like gay marriage. Cha cha. Okay. I have to land the plane. So who of your lesser known peeps are going to the Symbolic World Conference? Well, I just heard that Father Eric is. I mean, and again, when I hear that Father Eric is going to be there and when more and more people say I'm going there, I mean, it's one thing to go and say, okay, I'm going to go see my friend Jonathan Peugeot there. But the truth is, if I go to the Symbolic World Conference, how much time am I going to have to spend with Jonathan Peugeot? Even at a place like Chino or Thunder Bay, I don't get a lot of time with Jonathan Peugeot. I would love to go and spend a weekend with Jonathan Peugeot. I should probably, I should, what I should do is probably call him up and say, Jonathan, I'm coming to Montreal. I want to hang out with you for Saturday. I want to meet your wife. I want to pet your dog. I don't know if he has a dog. I want to shake hands with your kids. I want to see your art studio. I want to, I'm going to do a pilgrimage to the house of Jonathan Peugeot. And then I'm going to swing by and I'm going to go through Montreal. Not Montreal. I'm going to go to Vancouver and I'm going to, that's probably what I should do is plan a trip. We had the, we had the West Coast, it's all started with the Dunk and the West Coast trip that got short-cutted because of AIDS and we never got up to it. So I should probably, I should probably start planning a trip because if y'all aren't going to plan conferences that invite me to and pay me to go, then I'm going to plan my own trips and go do my own things because I want to see John Verbeke in his native environment. I want to see Jonathan Peugeot in his native environment. So yeah, yeah, maybe that's what I should do. See, I do this and I think out loud because I surprise myself because I don't think a thing, I don't think a thought until it comes out of my darn lips. Yes, I've seen Miracle. 37th Street, is it 37th? There's a 34th. I don't remember what street it's on. It's Little Natalie Wood and Santa Claus. Yeah, I watched that as a kid. Do you notice, did you notice the closes in Edinburgh? I opened at the close. I didn't, I didn't notice it. I'm just scanning for the word question. Jobe, Jobe, Jobe. Oh, Jobe is in the house. Congratulations Jobe. Jobe has child number two. Jobe is going to be busy, busy, busy. So he's got a toddler and an infant. So it's all hands on deck at the house of Jobe. Where are you going to Shilbin? Oh yes, I did that yesterday. So go to Burn's channel. I don't know if you go to live, it should probably still be up on live on Burn's channel where I hung out with Burn. And then Burn said he might, so Burn does editing. I don't do editing. Burn does editing. So I'll probably take that, do an edited thing. If it does an edited thing, maybe I'll post that on my channel. So by all means help Burn get his library. I just watched this morning, I watched Burn's Barbie movie and it was really good. Burn's treatment of the Barbie movie because Burn has, Burn has knowledge that I don't have like, Burn's like Barbie's a doll. You know, time in Memorial there were baby dolls. Burn's like, no, they weren't. That's not true. And then Burn opens up this book of the history of dolls because dolls and puppets are close to each other. It's like, so I watched Burn's stuff and it's like, oh, Burn draws connections I never would have thought of. And Burn's got all of this cool stuff. Burn played, instead of the branding that you get on Grimm Grizz, Burn had Ukrainian, not Ukrainian, Georgian music. And it was so cool. It was so cool. So definitely go and see Burn's move my library telethon. That was so much fun to be a part of. I enjoyed it. Okay. People are, the hive mind is still going. Question. I'm a Leo. Hey, we got to the bottom. All right. Good. We are at the bottom. It is time to end transmission. So, I'm just reading the live stream. So, thank you all for joining me today and for asking your questions. And, uh, I'm going to read the live stream. So, thank you all for joining me today. And, uh, I'm going to read the live stream. So, thank you all for joining me today. And, uh, I'm going to read the live stream. So, thank you all for joining me today. And, uh, I'm going to read the live stream. So, thank you all for joining me today and for asking your questions. And, uh, let me just take a look at the calendar. I don't know that the first Sunday in, for Saturday in January, I don't know what I'm, so my wife has, in a lot of ways, my, my calendar is dictated by my wife's job. And, and that means, that, that means that my schedules get dictated. So, I often have to take vacations when there are school vacations and figure all that stuff out. So, um, so I don't know if the next B of M question and answer will be then, but it'll, it'll be sometime in January, Lord willing. So, yep. And then February, February's coming. If I'm going to go to Florida, I got to get planning. So, who knows? Who knows what will happen? So, thank you all for joining. Time to end transmission. And I will do that now.