https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=8N_5SBCk4Uo

 Hi, this is Paul and I'm doing a conversation today with Reverend Andrew Bianch. I graduated from Calvin Seminary in 1991 and he graduated in 2000, so he's in a generation behind me, but he's a minister in Burnaby, British Columbia, that's right outside of Vancouver. And one of the things I noticed was when I was talking about Jordan Peterson and some online communities within the Christian Reformed Church, Andrew was too. So I wanted to do a conversation with Andrew and introduce you all to him and find out what's going on. So thanks for joining me today, Andrew. You're welcome. Why don't you describe a little bit why you got into the ministry? I know a lot of people are curious about pastors. We're kind of mysterious creatures to them. Where did you grow up and why did you get into the ministry and how long have you been in it? Hmm, OK. I grew up in a town next to Toronto called Oakville and never intended to go into the ministry. I grew up in a Christian home and have been part of the Christian Reformed Church all my life. But my first career was in engineering and I worked as a mechanical engineer for Ford Motor Company for six years and quite frankly never envisioned myself as a pastor. But it's a long story, but I felt like God was encouraging me to consider going into the ministry and through a variety of different experiences, which I won't get into here, really sense that that was the way that the Lord was leading. So eventually left my position at Ford and went to Calvin Seminary and began as a pastor in 2000. Served a church in Hamilton, Ontario for nine years and have been here in Burnaby now for eight years. So I think what got me into the ministry in a nutshell was a season of discipleship as a young adult just having gotten married that my wife and I went through and was deeply impacted by the love of God for me in a way that I had not experienced growing up and a fresh encounter with God through that discipleship experience, which really made me love not only God but his church. I began serving his church as an engineer though, but serving in different capacities thinking, I could be a great engineer and be a good Christian, you know, and people encouraged me to think about going into ministry. And so yeah, it's been a good change. I loved engineering, but I don't regret the way God's led. Oh, wonderful. Why don't you describe your church a little bit for us? So we are a suburban urban setting here in Burnaby, suburban setting, but you know, kind of have an urban pull. It's a church that's about 65 years old, began by Dutch immigrants that came after the Second World War, but are located in a fairly, well, quite an ethnically diverse neighborhood that the neighborhood has changed dramatically in the last 25 years. And certainly in the last five years as a congregation, we've begun to see some of that diversity reflected in our church. We have had a strong sense of call to this community in over the years in different ways, whether it's been to new immigrants that have moved into the area. We have a preschool that is very community focused. So in the last, well, certainly the last five to 10 years have really felt, you know, as a church, we need to reflect the character of our neighborhood. And we've been praying about that and really allowed God to try and lead us to become a kind of community that reflects that diversity. So you come to our church now and there's certainly some Dutchness there, but there's also a lot of Asian and variety of different cultures, Iranian. So we are no longer the white church that we were when we began, which you'll find many people in our church would say, yeah, this is a gift of God. We're so grateful for the richness that the diversity of God's family brings. You mentioned before, too, you've had a pretty good student ministry. You've folded a lot of students. About seven years ago, we began connecting with students from SFU, international students, from Simon Fraser University here in Burnaby, a place in the US called Douglas College and some other schools. We've partnered with an organization called International Student Ministries of Canada, which is a ministry on the campuses of these schools. And, you know, international students come, they're lonely. They come to a strange place to study. They don't often don't know anybody. They're far away from home. What better for the church to do than to show Christian hospitality and just befriend and help them get some exposure to our culture? And many of them come with an eagerness to learn about our culture. So we've had a wonderful ministry to international students, seeing many of them worship with us. We have a home, actually. Our church has a house called Mosaic House that we own. That's a ministry or a home for female international students. We recently began a home for male international students called Risen House. So I've often said to people that it's the international students that came that had patience with us when we had a lot of cultural blind spots, that had patience with us for blunders that we made, maybe culturally. Because they appreciated, I think, our willingness to invite them into our homes and have them over for Thanksgiving dinner and such. But they gave us a love for people of different cultures, and that now I think our community is sensing, too. So, yeah, it's been good. That's wonderful. Now, the reason I wanted to talk to you is because, again, you were pretty early on in terms of my attention that I was paying to Jordan Peterson. Now, you're in Canada, so this is a little bit closer to home for you. When did you first come across Jordan Peterson, and why did you begin to get, why did you get interested in what was going on? I was first introduced to him around the time when a piece of legislation called Bill C-16 was being discussed by our Canadian Parliament. And this was a bill that, well, among other things, was putting into legislation the need to grant specific rights of gender expression, gender identity. And it was closely connected to some of the things that the Ontario Human Rights Commission was purporting in terms of ensuring that organizations, government organizations, in particular schools, were speaking about or using particular language concerning transgender and a variety of things. But Peterson was resisting some of the ideology that was behind what he saw behind Bill C-16. And many people were quite upset with him because of his refusal to use what he called legislated speech. He was very concerned that our government was requiring a certain kind of speech regarding, particularly in this case, regarding sexual minorities. And that just created a real backlash on his campus at U of T. But it shot him into the spotlight. He got, you know, and that's when I was introduced to him. I started watching a few of his videos where he kind of defended his position. And I thought, here's the fellow that is bringing, I thought, a reasoned thoughtfulness to this issue and helping us see the way in which this legislation really was trying, was potentially undermining free speech, freedom of thought, freedom of expression, freedom of freedom of expression. So I was intrigued by that. And I also, as a pastor, I kind of felt like, though he didn't use, quote, you know, Christian language or biblical language per se, I kind of felt like he had a underpinning or a grounding that had sensitivity to a Christian worldview, that had sensitivity to a kind of overarching narrative that we need to pay attention to. And so I kind of listened to things that he wasn't saying explicitly, but I thought, oh, this guy's interesting. And then so he caught my attention and I kept paying attention to some of the things he was saying. And I watched a lot of his or a number of his videos on YouTube. So yeah, that's what originally, and then when he shared later, so this would have been in the, when was it, how does time flies now, spring of last year, I think, the biblical series. Yeah, spring of 2017. Of 2017. I listened to those lectures and, you know, he approaches the biblical stories as a, in some ways as a materialist, with an evolutionary psychology background. But boy, he identifies things that as a pastor, I thought, hey, this stuff sounds right, you know. And in our tradition, we really believe in God's activity in creation, you know, God's, he reveals himself through creation. So he reveals himself through good psychology. He reveals himself through good science and good anthropology. And so as I listened to Peterson, who doesn't identify himself as a Christian, kind of explaining these narratives, I thought, you know, I hear some, I hear God's voice through some of this. I really do. I felt like he was touching on some things that I could say in a sermon. And yeah, so yeah, I could say more, but he kept, he captured my attention. Well, has he been leaking into your sermons? Well, a little bit. Yeah. I've quoted him a little bit here and there. I've certainly mentioned to my congregation that I'm listening to him. And I have shared on a number of occasions, some of the things that he teaches or has shared even in some of those stories, in those, the biblical stories lecture series. So yeah. Why, you know, both of us know, both of us have pastor friends who are in the Toronto area. There's plenty of empty seats in their churches. And sometimes as pastors, it seems, you know, we can't drag people in here to listen to our sermons. And this guy's got, this guy's charging people to go and listen to him for, you know, people, your sermon goes a bit over a half hour. People start to grumble. This guy's going two hours plus. They're paying to see it. I mean, why? What do you think's going on? Yeah. Well, I do think in some respects, there's a confluence of things that are happening in our culture, even within our country in Canada, but more broadly, globally too, a confluence of things that are happening. And Peterson happens to be at the right place at the right time in history. So I think he's skyrocketed just because of how things have come together, whether it's politically in Canada or even in the United States. But I think that one of the things that a lot of people are drawn to is, I mean, as human beings, we're always looking for meaning. We're meaning makers. We're craving meaning. We're craving something that we can anchor our lives to. And yeah, in our culture in Canada, they were pretty secular, and you take away people's stories and their meaning. They're looking for something. And Peterson, he quite passionately speaks about meta-narratives. He passionately speaks about the need for meaning in our life. And then he is quite sympathetic to the way in which the Christian influence on the West, and so he talks about the Bible, connects different science and psychology to the Bible. And so there is a Christian memory in our culture. And I think Peterson may be tapping into that somewhat distant Christian memory. He's tapping into people's need for meaning, and he's catching their attention. And I know one of the critiques that people have had of him is it's mainly a male audience that he connects with, a white male audience. And I think that's probably true. I don't have anything to disprove that. But you could argue that a lot of white males are feeling like they're losing a sense of meaning. I mean, the culture can be critical of them, and maybe at times rightly so, but they can be criticized because they're male and they're white. So maybe Peterson is capturing them with, yeah, helping them feel like they do have purpose and meaning and value and giving them a story to connect their lives to. I think that that's a little bit of what he's doing. And people are saying, and I've heard a number of these kind of testimonies, if you recall them that, that he's changed my life. People are saying that he has helped me, one of his clean up my room, clean up my mess. And when I hear the kind of things that he's sharing, as a Christian pastor, we sometimes say similar kinds of things to our congregations about, we call it obedience, obedience to the word of God, repentance. We need to turn away from sin and turn to Christ and put on the new self, die to the old self and come to life. So we have very rich theological language, but Peterson uses similar kinds of ideas and language that maybe isn't nuanced quite the same way. So I hear all that stuff and I think, hey, there's a lot of echoes of the Christian message in reverberating in some of his talks. And so, do you know, I've had quite a few people write me. Some of them are looking for churches. Do you think there's room in church for people who are curious and wanting to explore because Jordan Peterson has somehow God-pilled them? I mean, what's that going to look like? Yeah, well, absolutely. I think there has to be room in our churches for people with those kinds of questions and those kinds of curiosities. You know, in our congregation, I'll get back to that international students ministry. I have been so enriched by the kinds of questions that many, well, particularly Chinese students, have, you know, they come to Canada, they identify themselves as atheists, you know, they're deeply, they've taken hold of a kind of evolutionary way of thinking about, very materialistic way of thinking about the world. They come to our church often just because somebody invited them to and it's a good way to learn English if you, you know. And I have the gift of speaking fairly slowly and clearly so international students like it because they can understand me reasonably well. See, I got the other gift. I got the gift for old people because I'm loud. See, I got the other gift. I got the gift for old people because I'm loud. Even in seminary, I go preach in some churches and there'd be nobody there except a bunch of old people. They're like, we like him, he's loud. So, yeah, old people like me too because I speak slowly and clearly. We're doing well. But, you know, when we would talk with, because we always have lunch after church with, for students when they come and, you know, that's an important part of, if you come to church, you get a free lunch somewhere and usually in people's homes or in our building. And so how many times haven't we had conversations about the meaning of life and how to understand religion or how can we be certain of the things that the Bible teaches or what does it mean? You know, so international students have been, have been just, I think, for not just for me personally, but for our congregation because these students are often invited to our homes. People open up their homes for that lunch or whatever. You know, this is a place where we are permitted and encouraged to ask questions. And so if the church can't be a place where people, you know, express their doubts or wrestle with different ideas, then, you know, the church has lost a good part of its calling. I think, you know, there's a cliche that all truth is God's truth. I mean, sometimes that has to be nuanced a little bit, but I think that's true. I think that, you know, God reveals his truth in science and various religions and in different ways of looking at the world. And so when people come with questions and looking for deeper understandings, I think in some ways there's a yearning of for God's truth that's being expressed. Okay. Now you're Canadian, I'm American, I'm just kind of watching over the border, although Peterson's coming down here quite a bit. What's gonna happen in Canada with this guy? I mean, are you guys gonna try and kind of put him in a box? I mean, he says if he gets arrested, you know, he won't eat. I mean, what's gonna happen with you all up there? Well, I wish I could tell you exactly. I don't know, but you know, Peterson is definitely catching people's attention up here. And there are a number of people in mainstream media that are, you know, stereotypically, the media tends to lean left and Peterson is identified as someone who's fairly bright. So you'd expect the media to be quite critical of him and a number of them have been, but there's also a number of well-respected journalists who are noticing Peterson and appreciating him, particularly around issues of freedom of speech, freedom of conscience, freedom of expression. Journalists care about that stuff. That's what they make of the living. That's true. And here you have Peterson saying, you know, we have to watch out that we don't allow an ideology to creep in and in the name of creating safe spaces, you know, cut off certain kinds of speech or exclude that. So, you know, he's been going on university campuses and talking and being well received by many, but being vociferously drowned out by others. You know, there was an incident on Queens University campus a number of weeks, maybe now a month and a half ago. If you see the YouTube videos of that, wow, people chanting and making noise, breaking, even breaking a window in the auditorium where you're speaking. So what's going to happen? What's going to happen? Well, I do think more and more people are going to pay attention to what he's saying, partly because, you know, we too in our, I'm going to just mention something that happened fairly recently in our country concerning what's called the Canada Summer Jobs Program or grant. Organizations in our country can apply for a grant to offset the cost for hiring a summer student, and it can be any organization, but faith communities have made use of that for day camps or for different kinds of events that they host during the summer for kids and such. Well, the government recently required that any organization applying for this grant to make a statement attest to a statement of values, which a lot of faith communities would say, you know, we don't want to hire people to distribute brochures against abortion or to, you know, distribute views that speak against LGBTQ communities, but we're not prepared to make a statement that we affirm, you know, a woman's right to choose, that we affirm same-sex marriages. We're not going to speak against them when we, we're not going to affirm and the government was requiring an affirmation of those kind of values. A lot of faith communities have said, well, we can't apply them and we're going to challenge our government. Now, in a way, you know, when a government requires organizations to make value statements, they're doing the kind of thing that Peterson has been warning about. You know, we, this is an overreach of our government to, to insist on, on requiring certain values that aren't actually charter protected, so to speak, you know, at least not a woman's reproductive right is not in our charter per se, but and I'm not quibbling, I'm not wanting to open that up as a, but so what I'm saying is there's a confluence, you know, you have a bunch of faith communities that are saying, hey, the government is overstepping its reach here. Peterson and other voices saying, we got to be careful about governments that allow a kind of what he would say is a left leaning, you know, neo-Marxist kind of view to, to creep in. So with that kind of confluence, I think Peterson will just get more attention. And yeah, so my sense is he's going to have an impact. My sense is on our next federal election, yeah, I could see that somehow his voice is going to, going to, going to affect, say the right wing party, which is our progressive conservative party and, and, and they're, they're jumping on the free speech thing already a little bit. They're jumping on this attestation thing. And, and I could, and yeah, so I think we don't know for sure, but my sense is he's only going to gain in prominence. So some people want him to run for public office. You think he'll, think he'll do that? I hope he doesn't. I don't know if he has the character of a politician. I didn't think Donald Trump did either in here. You know, we can, had to bring up Trump. Nobody can not talk about Trump. I hope he doesn't get into politics. I think he's going to have more influence if he can lecture on campuses and do different talks and write and, and, and continue teaching. I think he's going to have a good influence in that way, but you never know. Okay. Okay. And anything else you want to talk about or any, any questions you have for me in this? Hmm. Yeah, I, well, I've been very intrigued just as I've followed you a little bit on, on, you know, Facebook and YouTube, how, how you've opened up some conversation space in, in your own church setting for, for people who, who watch your YouTube videos to come and talk a little bit about how Jordan Peterson's message has impacted them. And, and so, um, yeah, I'm, I'm curious myself, you know, even from, from, from listening to you, how do you see some of the ways in which, you know, myself as a pastor can be open to allowing people impacted by, who have been impacted by Jordan Peterson to encounter, you know, the gospel and encounter a Christian world and life view, you know, you know, I, I'd love to hear that. I don't know if that's the purpose of our interview, but I, I, I'm, I'm, I'm, yeah, I'm curious about that. I'd love to see even, you know, something like that happen here, if, if, if God would want that to happen. Yeah. Well, I, you know, I, you know, early on, I saw this thing starting and I thought, you know, so I, in some ways it's similar to, let's say Billy Graham and where Jordan Peterson and Billy Graham are in very different places, but you know, Billy Graham would come to town, do a crusade, people get all excited. You know, one of the things that Billy Graham learned very early on was there was like, Billy Graham had this, this platform where he would engage the churches and in some ways marshal the churches to, because the Billy Graham show would leave. And, and my concern is, you know, you watch some videos, you get excited about something, you get an idea, you get inspired to clean up your room. Maybe you get inspired to, you know, straighten out your life in one way or another, fix your marriage, drink less, get off porn, play, play less computer games, whatever you get inspired. But, but we all know that inspiration doesn't last. And, and what I see is that the church offers a real community of real people in real time that, that people can live within. And so, so one of the things now, now obviously for a lot of Jordan Peterson fans, they're not confessionally Christian. They've got questions about even the existence of God. They've got all this stuff. But, but one of the things that, that I, I have seen in people is that there's a hunger to talk about this, to talk about Jordan Peterson, to talk about the change, the way that he's changed their thoughts, the ways that he's changing their life. And so immediately one of the things, a friend, John Van Donk in Southern California, I was talking to him about this and he says, you know, you should go to meetup.com and start a meetup. And it's like, I need, like I, like I need something else to do. I'm already making these videos. And he says, no, no, no, you should start a meetup. And so, so we've had three of them here and I visited one in the Bay Area last Sunday night. And I, I think it is important for people to find each other, to have a way to talk through this. In a sense, what the internet offers is, is people on the extremes of any bell curve to actually find each other. But this connection through the internet is not like a person to person connection. I had one guy call me and he's, you know, he's, he might drive up from Fresno, which is not a small drive to, you know, visit my church and we'll probably do lunch after church. But he says, you know, who can I, who can I talk, who can I talk about this to in my life? Because, you know, you're kind of like me, your family's like, what are you listening to this guy for? And, you know, I don't have three hours to listen to his any, any bloody videos. I mean, come on. But this has been a significant, a very significant thing in not a small number of people's lives. And, you know, so when I had my interview with Peterson last week, you know, this was one of the things I really wanted to ask him. And I think he's just been on this status rocket. I mean, when he goes into these interviews, he's just trying to keep his own head together in this thing. But what about all these people that are in his wake, that are, that are thinking about God and trying to put this together and I, you know, okay, so I'm a pastor and so I see this and instinctively, I think somebody's got to, somebody's got to come alongside these people. And it's not about, you know, I'm going to tell you what to think, or I'm going to get you to give money, or I'm going to, you know, slam you into my organization. I am, one of the things about Christian informed pastors, we tend to not be high pressure people. I mean, we don't, we don't cram on people. But I, my question and my encouragement and some of the pastors in the Bay Area and such, I've been talking to them and saying, what would it be like to make a space for these people? And it's not intrusive. So when I do my meetups, it's really hard for me not to pray before the meeting, because that's so instinctive for us. But we talk about Jordan Peterson. And you know, if I asked, I'll certainly talk about it from a Christian perspective. That's what a lot of my videos are on. But I wonder where and I have no idea where any of this is going. But shoot, we let AA groups, we let community organizations, let all kinds of we give all kinds of people space in church to do all kinds of good things. And I, I wonder what it would mean if churches open their doors to some of these people and said, we're just going to give you space to talk. And we'll be conversation partners if you want us to be. And we'll walk alongside you. And I think, I think, I think that could be a big deal. And I have a heart for, for people when they come to me and they say, you know, I've, you know, I've had a lot of struggle in my life, and I haven't been able to, I haven't been able to, you know, get a degree and I haven't been able to build a stable relationship with, you know, and find a spouse and I haven't been able to keep a job and I've struggled with substances and, and I've got real issues with meaning. And I think, you know, this, as pastors, this is our calling. These, these are people that and now, especially in this group, we look at them and we think, you know, we haven't had the church has had almost zero traction with this, you know, especially with scientistic, materialistic, atheistic communities. We haven't had any traction with this, with these, with these people and via this guy, people are coming to us and saying, I want to learn about the Bible. And I, I, I think to myself, and I think about, you know, what I want to say to my Christian Reformed pastors who are colleagues, you know, good grief, how do you not see this? So that's, that's my pitch. And I know, you know, you know, as well as I do, some of our colleagues look at this and say, we shouldn't have anything to do with Jordan Peterson. Yeah. And, and this is, you know, for whatever reason they've got, they don't have any interest in that. And to me, it's like, all right, but don't stand in my way because I think this could potentially be a movement of God beyond something that in the scope of Western history has been a terminal trajectory where people get more and more secular and then we haven't seen a lot turn around and say, hey, I'm interested again. And so to me, it's, I, I wanted to figure out why the turn, what's going on. So there's my spiel. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I'm encouraged by what you've done. And yeah, I'm, I'm sensing it's going to be a little contagious, maybe even for me. So, you know, one of the things that I've shared with a couple of my colleagues that speaks to some, speaks at least to some degree, the way that Jordan Peterson is captivating people. This is a young man in my church. He's 17. I know him really well. He knows that I've been listening to Jordan Peterson and, and at first I don't think he cared too much about the fact that I was. And, but he's, he's a video gamer and somehow through the video game Twitch or whatever screen, he, he's another video gamer just happened to mention Peterson and he's like, well, shoot, you know, I know Andrew and he's, he's, I'm going to listen to something. And so this young 17 year old guy listens to, to Jordan Peterson for almost 45 minutes. And he talked to me and he said, I, uh, that Jordan Peterson actually says a lot of things that, that we should be saying in the church, shouldn't we? You know, he, he's talking about, and this is, was his language. He's talking about marriage and he's talking about responsibility and he's talking about, um, you know, uh, uh, taking care of, you know, the mess in your life. He says, that sounds a lot like what you say, Andrew, you know, um, and, uh, so I thought, well, you know, here's a 17 year old young man and he wasn't that interested in Peterson. He does no real political interest, but boy, when he heard this guy talk and he thought, and, and, and he said, it's a voice we don't hear at all anymore. Like we don't hear people saying this stuff, except in the church, we hear people saying, you know, repent or with theological language, but so anyways, this young man intrigued me and I thought, wow, he's, he's hearing some of this too, you know. And so I agree with you, Paul, that Peterson is an interesting phenomenon. And if we, if in the church, we can help people find a place to talk about how they've been impacted and, and, uh, and as, as Christian pastors, you know, we, we have this wonderful sovereign view of how God works in through all kinds of different people and experiences and, and who knows how God is speaking through a man like Jordan Peterson. And, uh, so yeah, it's, it's quite a phenomenon, isn't it? It certainly is. It certainly is. Well, I, I really appreciate your time, Andrew, and your willingness to talk to me and your willingness to tape this. Um, it's, you always say tape. Why tape? I'm so old. Jordan Peterson, I saw a video today and he's like, you know, people can't set their VCR and he's talking to a bunch of college students. I said, they don't even know what a VCR is. Anyway. Hey, thanks for reaching out to me too. Oh, my pleasure. I'm glad we could have this conversation and I'll put, I'll put a link to your church in the notes so people can find you if they want to talk to you and are interested. And yeah, if you want any tips on how to start a meetup, let me know. Okay. All right. Thanks. Thank you, Andrew. Take care. Bye bye.