https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=OzGtgcJPyo0

 Cornington. It's all about the efficiency for me. Exactly. Pretty prolific. Well tell me a little bit about yourself Darren. I got some stuff from the emails but just for those who, if we post this, those who haven't read the emails, which I assume is probably... Everyone, I hope. I was going to start with kind of how you get from studying astrophysics to meeting God, which is kind of my journey. That sounds very interesting. Yeah, like my church background is pretty much zero. I was born in England and it's a pretty secular place. So my parents, there was no church for my parents. There was no church for me. I learned like the Lord's Prayer at school and that was about the extent of it. So then you move on to university in a science subject. It's pretty heavy. So there's no church there. The opposite in fact. My wife, we moved to Canada. She's pursuing a PhD there. So we completed that and then on to America for employment. So our lives are pretty much, you know, on a great trajectory. Without God, we're doing fine. And we've been in town two months. We don't know anyone and she says, hey, you want to go on a hike? And I'm like, well no. Of course not. But there's a little voice inside me that usually steers me the right way and it's like say yes. So I'm like, okay. And we go out with our little nine-year-old daughter for this hike. It's like five in the evening and the end of February. So it's starting to get dark halfway around and we hear a group coming up behind us. It's a couple and their friend. My wife's got a thick English accent. My daughter's cute and loud. So they quickly latch on to us. This happens a lot. We complete the hike with these guys and then they hand us a card and they say we're planting a church and I have no idea what that means. I know what church means so I'm a little wary. But we're doing a new church plan. We've only been here a year and that voice is there again. It's like she's gonna ask you to go. I'm like, I know. I'm not. And it's like, no you are. I'm thinking through. I'm like, okay. It's an argument immediately if I say no. But if I say yes, I know what will happen. We'll go. These people will be intolerable and will hate it and they'll say crazy things and it'll be terrible and then they'll demand some money and then we're free. I have this horrible PR with the church. This is what will happen, right? In my ignorance. So we do go. We show up and you know people are kind of polite and nice. They don't really interact. It's small. It's like 30 people at the most. They get a guitar out and they do some kind of contemporary sounding music with Jesus and God in it, which is I've never heard before. Not my thing. So this is all a little weird. And then your pastor starts talking some Bible stuff. It's kind of quiet and then the strangest thing happens. I start to feel oddly emotional and I understand it. I'm not prone to this kind of thing. He's not saying anything emotional. I get this overwhelming sense of belonging or being at home or something and I get a little scared. The rational part of my brain is like this isn't right. You're going crazy. I kind of glance across at my wife and she's like I see tears in her eyes. I'm like this isn't, something strange is going on here. And we get out and she's like I think we should go back next week. I'm like yeah so do I. See if this thing happens. I'm like maybe I should check out this Bible thing as well. Having never opened one. So I got a Bible. I just kind of opened it up. I think it was Matthew or something. I started reading and was blown away. I was like this is the instruction manual for life. Why have I never been given this before? It's telling me how to interact with people in a very productive way. Now I've been involved with Peterson from the summer before, right before the pronouns, from Maps of Meaning. And it was two months before his biblical stuff. But you know Peterson had been an influence and this was trying something new and like expanding my borders. So we went back. I read some Bible and I met with a pastor. We read some more Bible. But my thing is the culture shock from the astrophysics and stuff into the church where science is its enemy. I fear many people who come through Peterson's biblical talks and then actually enter a physical church thinking it's going to be this great environment. It might not be. Yeah. Yeah so my main thing was small groups. I went to a small group and they were doing the story of Jesus sends the disciples off ahead and they're in a boat. They get tossed around in the storm and then he wanders out across the water. And I'm thinking that's a great story. You know the water represents this chaos and there's these people in a boat and Jesus is untouched by the chaos. And he's just stood there unaffected. And then Peter's like can I do this? And Jesus is like if you keep your eye on me you'll be fine. And he does it. He's unaffected by the chaos because of what he's doing. Then he slips and he starts to sink and he gets a telling off. So I relay my understanding of the story that way thinking whoa this is really useful for my life. And I get a table of blank stairs. Like no he walked on the water. I'm like I don't know what to do. I was expecting like oh this is really good. We can live our life this way. If you had if the people in your group had read something like this which is basically this is a commentary unlike all the rest of my commentaries which is a compilation from sermons and writings of ancient church fathers. What you just described isn't exactly but you can get there from here. Yeah. You have a harder time getting there from a lot of this other stuff. There's real stuff going on here. Keep talking. Sorry to interrupt that was probably a bad move on my part. Oh no it's perfect. We were trying to make friends here so I held back a little bit from trying to insult anyone but we had a couple over for dinner getting to know them. It's going fine. And then one of them says can you believe people actually think evolution is real? And again I don't know how to cope. But once they found out I was more science based then they start flooding me with books that are clearly going to change my mind. So there's books by like Cahill and Young Earth types and they're pretty bad books but it's hard to it's hard to they're all like quote mind and it's an argument from ignorance in many ways because it's you don't know what you don't know. That classic Rumsfeld thing the unknown unknowns they don't know what they don't know so this guy says science is this and that you know they believe him it's unauthority. It's like it's it's not like that at all it's cherry picked and all the quotes are dot dot dot a cool line that proves your point dot dot dot. And I think they start at the conclusion and then find the evidence to fill in the gaps and then say look it works. Yeah just like mainstream media today with everyone's a Nazi right. You start with he's a Nazi and then Peterson fill in the blanks and that's right work this way. Yeah he's got all these Russian posters that shows he's a Nazi. It's like the it's like the the test for a witch in Monty Python on the Holy Grail. She floats she's a witch. That's just it. She weighs as much as a duck. No I know I know. Yeah so my I've been approaching this the Bible from a very like it's kind of logic based in that of course if I stop lying my relationships improve with people. Yeah and if I'm nice to people they'll be nice back. Yeah so I'm having this nice journey of logic. Yeah but then I come up against faith where reason and logic alone doesn't explain what God is. I don't want God to be a person because that doesn't seem to fit like he's described as a lot with emotions and he gets angry. I don't think that fits. I don't think God gets angry. I think you do things that increase the likelihood that you'll suffer terrible consequences when you stray from a biblical path. So being on the biblical path my life gets better and better and if I stray away it gets worse. I was trying to explain my idea with the pastor saying you know if you get a stool and put it on top of a table and then you spin around and dance on top of it that makes gravity really angry and gravity will throw you to the ground really fast when you do that. It's like it's not gravity getting mad you're just increasing the chances that you fall down but it doesn't exhaust it. There's something else there. There's this whole synchronicity that I'm struggling to understand like things happen. I saw a Peterson lecture where he says when you orient yourself towards something it's like looking at a map and things on the map start to stand out and then they stand out in reality. So if you have to turn left at the church when you're going down that street you see that church. Normally you wouldn't. You'd keep going but that still doesn't exhaust the whole thing. This week God decides to test me whatever God is decides to test me and my wife's driving to work and a truck pulls out and she almost hits it. She avoids it. She's shaken up but on the back it says Psalm 5 3. So she takes note. She gets to work and calls me like what is Psalm 5 3? I'm like I'm looking it up. I am looking it up right now. Psalm 5. No pastors do not have the Bible fully memorized. In the morning the Lord heard my voice. In the morning I lay my request before you and wait expectantly. That's Psalm 5 3. Yeah so the next morning that's what she did. She said God if you have something you want me to do today. She said I want to do this prayer every day. If you've got something you want me to do today I wait expectantly and she went to work and within an hour she got a phone call out of the blue saying are you guys able to host a foreign exchange student? And she calls me up and I'm like no of course no. Just like the walk no no no you're like me you lead with no any change no I don't want it. It's like you know we don't have a spare bedroom we have an office but we don't have a spare bedroom and we're moving in six months and we don't want to buy more furniture and I'm coming up with every reason no and she's like it's a God thing. I prayed this God wants you to do it. I'm like this is the first time I'm going to have to do something that I think is not reason or logical to do but because God wants it to do it. So it's a great test. I love the test because I'm failing it. I call up my old pastor and I'm like God wants me to do something I don't want to do. How do we what do I do? And he's like he'll stretch you. It's what he does so just go with it. That's all I have to do I have to try and figure this out. My camera won't focus. Come on camera. No. That's okay. It'll probably come back into focus who knows. If I stop moving too much. So I had to figure it out am I going to do because I'm living my life as if God is real but he doesn't have to be real for me to do that or for me to benefit from what seems to be happening but this one is different. You're going to have to put yourself out or do something that you think is stupid. You're going to have to get out of the boat into that water of chaos. Exactly. So that's what I that's why I'm doing this conversation for my living room and not my office because I passed the test. I'm like okay but there's a lot of evidence searching like has God let me down before when I followed any of this stuff and no but faith is a big leap from from logic. Yeah yeah yeah I'm sorry I laugh it's just too much fun. He has a lot of fun there's a lot of coincidences and when these coincidences pop up my wife points them out and I'm like I'm not even surprised anymore there's just so much synchronicity and I'm trying to logic in a way it's coincidence it's going to be still coincidence. Yeah you can you can play that game all day long that's fine you just play. Within two years he's got me. Yeah so what does that look like for you? It's very happy but you know and we're taking on a burden and I think Peterson's right when he says there's burden is where meaning is found yeah and Jesus carries his big burden cross around no but orienting myself towards God completely changed me my personality who I am yeah fundamentally from the ground up it's a whole thing about what you're aiming at changes the reality around you because you evaluate the objects based on what you're trying to do but chair and a desk are great when you're sitting down at the desk but if you want to cross a room these become obstacles yeah you don't like them anymore yeah so people before were you know you know obstacles yeah but then with Jesus's teaching you have to look at each one like each one was worthy enough that he would die for them yeah so that puts a lot of respect on each person yeah because if he's willing to die for you who am I to disrespect you I have no place to do that yeah so it changes my personality and like what I used to say was if you asked me a year ago you know you a good guy I would have said yes you asked me now are you a good guy I'm like no but I'm a lot better than I used to be I know that I know the selfish jerk I am now yeah it's very obvious how self-focused you are is you're blind to that yeah I see that religion requires quite a lot of self-awareness yeah and I don't see that as a particularly common trait so how do you how do you teach people to be self-aware you can't talk them into it you know and and this is why can you know what you're essentially talking about is conversion I mean that's the Christian word for it you've had a conversion experience no one you know the irony is that it begins with a walk but that walk began with a little voice and I can't tell you how many people tell me stories like this regularly and and so all of the church planters and missionaries and and earnest Christians out there trying to figure out how to bottle this and program it now now now you can program that little voice that little voice in you that sent you on that walk that had you that has your your your wife with a thick English accent and your cute little girl and the church planters just there and they pull out the guitar and you think oh and then but they talk and it's like weird and then you you've been looking at Peterson and then you read the story of of Jesus walking on the water and you're like I know what this is about you've got a boat you've got you've got a storm on the sea you've got Jesus walking and Peter keep you know this is this just this just interprets itself that's what I wanted to do for this church I was like there's lots of me's out there yeah and they don't realize it yet but they need this yeah so how do you do it but here's the funny thing if if you were to if you now were to talk to you four years ago you wouldn't believe the you now you'd say you know if you could send a tape back in time and say now listen to me um you know and movies play on this kind of stuff all the time obviously but you know and that's why that's why again part of Christian tradition is that this is God's work and God does this in us and that really then will start to mess with your mind because it'd be like well God why did God wait until now and not five years ago why is God doing this to me and not these other people over here and then suddenly the idea of a personal God a God who is making choices a God who the best way we can imagine him is in a personal way well suddenly that whole strain of the Bible and Christianity begins to make sense too but it's also but the problems don't go away because it's also rather offensive so I like to use the example of the apostle Paul in the book of Acts the apostle Paul is hunting down Christians in order to persecute or maybe even kill them have them killed this is what he's doing and then there's the road to Damascus now what would you say to the families of those Christians who had been hunted down before the road to Damascus of why God chose the timing he did yeah because you know and it's like um um you can't you there's no answering these questions and and the only way you can finally resolve it is saying uh he is God and I am not that's where I kind of got to is uh that's not your job yeah yeah my job yeah I'll do it you just don't get in the way yeah I'm like I can do that yeah and and if in fact you know this is what I tell I always tell people don't play chicken with God well what do you mean by that this this is not the kind of being you really want to imagine you can manipulate or control or schmooze or bribe or anything like that that once you have a sense of who and what God is those kinds of things become really bad ideas really bad ideas and you know Peterson says this in some different ways but the point is the same that once you begin to become aware that maybe the world isn't quite as flat and you are not you don't have the amount of power and control over the world much less yourself that you thought you did things you decide to work your life in a different way yeah um I spent a long time I was my God you know you play God in your own life and I was terrible at it I didn't know the future I didn't know where I needed to be what hike I needed to be on that's right I didn't know any of that stuff so I'm just floundering around reacting to things yeah but your observations about the church are really important and they're they're really difficult for so then you think well I'm going to tell church leaders what this is like and then maybe they can change things and what you begin to discover is that that's not so easily done because okay so what would you do and I mean the the question of music is a terrific example because about 30 years ago you know whole groups of Christian churches in the west changed their musical style and tradition radically in order to be more mission focused and capable and kind of works sort of works doesn't work you know it all of these we sit down and we think well I'll just rearrange something so that it will work but that's kind of how we got in this mess in the first place so it's really hard but but it's it's at the same time really helpful for people like yourself who have had the kind of transition you had to share your experience because we might not know what to do about it but we do kind of learn from it I don't know if that makes sense it does it's it's the biggest culture shock I've had like I moved from England to Canada and that was a surprising culture shock considering the language was the same everything else was different and then Canada to the U.S. is there's still a culture shock because there's things that are ingrained in children you know when you're young through growing up and cultural references that I'm completely alien to and habits but when I went into the church from outside the church the culture shock was enormous well talk about that say more about that well it's just I guess they're they're believing entirely on faith and with little evidence to back it up there's a lot of because the bible says so and my point I'm like okay so your evidence is the bible so now I need to know what the bible is so who wrote it and then I run into a wall there straight away it's like well we don't know we think this guy wrote this bit but then we think this guy wrote that bit I'm like if you're basing it on the bible and I can't verify solidly who wrote any of this stuff or what their motive was what their motive was and then you run into this question of did Rome conquer the church or did the church conquer Rome in which case you've got a good motive for changing what's in the bible but reading it there's I think the best thing I heard was the bible isn't the truth but it contains the truth okay and the messages are there the lessons are still in there but when you're basing how old a planet is on a bible I don't think that's sound well I the the irony is that the bible doesn't say how old the planet is well they extrapolate and there's a difference yeah the bible doesn't claim to own to say how old the planet is the bible seems wholly disinterested in that question I think that's right it's not an interesting thing like pragmatically that doesn't really help me with my relationships with people right and my approach to the bible is very much pragmatic right what can I get out of this what is it trying to teach me that I need to know right and you're doing that even while you're not entirely sure what it is well I try to explain that like I don't like what is God and it doesn't matter it doesn't matter if I'm following the teachings I don't I don't care and then the standard litmus test when people get worried about me is that like was the resurrection real and this is I'm like why is this question come up all the time oh it's kind of a litmus test they know which box to put you in depending on what your answer is right right yeah so I was like it doesn't matter for me because I'm gonna live like it was and if it wasn't and that's your attack on my faith to say well Jesus wasn't real I'm like it doesn't matter even if he was a made-up guy I'm still going to live by those teachings because what else am I going to do I haven't seen a better plan I haven't seen a better method and pragmatically in my life it's working but I love that and that is pragmatism yeah I'm strongly pragmatic like that but the culture shock is just that like I didn't realize the difference in culture on like evolution in Europe it's wholly accepted and I realized here that's not the case I mean it's more so recent years but well depending on where you are in in the states and even the question of what is evolution because that's not so so what exactly are we talking about that's because the the higher you get the resolution on that question more interesting things emerge too you know I was just having a debate about that on Twitter with with Esther and and it's so so so now suddenly so now suddenly you have have a pragmatic question well what does it matter whether or not evolution is true see that's see Americans are good at pragmatism and so you go into a church and someone who by virtue of their being raised in the church who doesn't accept evolution you might say well what does it matter whether or not Jesus was raised I find his teaching works and someone would say what does it matter whether or not evolution is true if the if what the doctor tells me works for making me healthy even though the doctor was trained in evolution evolution doesn't matter it's just the pragmatic ability of the doctor's medicine to cure me that would be fine it's when they're saying that you're wrong because you think that it is true and I'm right because the Bible tells I'm right then you run into okay now we're going to have an argument yeah one of us is right and I don't think it's important for our faith in God which one of us is right but if you're going to say I'm wrong I'm going to lay my facts out and say here's what I'm basing my it's right on what have you got and then I'll take a look at both and we'll I'll see if you can change my mind right I you know I ran into this when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic and I had a Haitian who was a translator for me I was visiting a lot of churches that only knew Creole and because I was living in the Dominican Republic I only knew Spanish and I hadn't learned Creole so I had this guy working with me and he was a school teacher and it was one day when I'm driving along the coast and I realized he doesn't he's a flat earther and and he even asked me I told him I was going back to the states for a couple of months and he asked me if I was going to drive and it's like you live on an island I can't drive to New York from here and and so suddenly I begin to realize he and I parts of our world overlap parts of our world do not now what's my burden should I should I stop right then and there and say hey before we carry on doing this translating work in these churches where I'm teaching a whole bunch of things to these churches let me get this flat earth round earth thing straight right now I didn't do that no and you know as and some people say well well he was wrong and I think yeah he's wrong I'm I'm really very sure we were living on an island and I'm really very sure the better representation of the world is a globe but here is this way that we disagree and what's germane so again is the world a space for objects or is the world a form for action and what action is required in that moment so this this right and wrong game is a very interesting one which is way more complicated than we kind of grow up assuming in our various different cultures yeah you discover that in physics where you start to learn you you pick at a subject a little bit and you you figure something out and then you realize there's 10 other things you don't know yeah and then you as you specialize you realize there's more and more you don't understand and then eventually you're like I don't know anything and I've been at this for years you get you get less knowledgeable or knowledge you gain I thought Neil deGrasse Tyson had a I referenced it in one of my videos had a wonderful illustration of that and that the the more you learn the more you realize is connected to what you have learned that you don't know so actually it's not the unknown unknown it's the known unknown that continues to grow exponentially as the known grows which is which is a fascinating dynamic and again one that you don't know until you continue to learn to know more you have to have a certain amount of knowledge to begin to realize how great your ignorance really is and then you still have to live so what does that mean because I'm expanding my ideas of what God is I've always got there might be something you don't know you don't know that will change everything that's right that's right you're like well how attached can I get to my ideas when they might be different in a month's time one of my favorite C.S. Lewis quote is that you know basically so he was raised in in North Ireland Church of England about the age seven or eight he decided all this stuff is bunk so he gives it all up you know then when he's no longer has to go to church he stops going to church becomes a rather angry young atheist and then later on his comment is you know if you really want to stay that way you better be very careful about your reading because and again it's the more you begin to learn the more you begin to realize I had all these assumptions these were just assumptions that I built basically all along the way and I assumed they all had these foundations under them that made them sure and so that I was right about these things and everyone else was wrong about these things and then I knew more and more and I began to learn oh well now what and then stuff happens like someone cuts someone cuts you off and bumper sticker he might be a bad driver and you think well why should I take Bible advice from a bad driver and it's and it's not exactly the most you know if it said John 3 16 I wouldn't have had to look it up but yeah five two how obscure yes I'm like is this a is this something people put on bumper stickers I've never seen it before I'm kind of new at this no I'm not new at this I've never seen it before you know Jeremiah 20 Jeremiah 27 yeah there's a whole bunch of Bible verses that you see on bumpers Psalm 5 2 that one's new to me so but then but then again I think you know Peterson is really helpful in terms of you know that's where he starts off Matt's maps of meaning in terms of a space of objects or a form for action well and again that's that's proud it's American pragmatism but but there's a point at which okay so you there's all these possibilities you have to decide what words are going to come out of your mouth and you have to decide what actions you're going to take and and you start to do these things and as you describe you begin to go down this road you begin to realize you know I was kind of a I was kind of a selfish jerk before and I really treated people poorly but if you had asked me if I treated people poorly I'd say no I don't but the reason I'd say no I didn't was because mostly pride because I didn't want to look like a person who treated people poorly because we don't treat other people well who treat people poorly I mean it just goes on and on and on and and so suddenly what you're beginning to realize is you're much more self-aware than you were and even though some of these Christians I don't really respect their beliefs about evolution and the music is kind of wonky but this Bible that they have which I can't fully figure out because most of it is anonymous and it's very old and it's it's a rather strange library which is what it is this is actually helping me this is actually helping me and I'm not really quite sure why and this God figure that yeah that this God would get angry well okay but at the same time he seemed to be intervening in our life in a really strange way that each time I kind of go with it better things happen so what does that mean and that was a question I had to ask myself was if this is acting as if a God is real can that God be an interventionist God yeah I'm like well the evidence says yes but my logic would say no that can't happen if it's if it's not something and you're just making it up to follow some rules then it can't intervene because it would have no power right right but then you spoke of making decisions and then I've been over this rabbit down this rabbit hole the last few weeks of like do we do we have free will or am I just a biological hardware with some emotional software that reacts to a situation to produce a result and that result would never change because my history my experience and my personality would produce the same answer every time this situation came up so I'm like am I am I working in a deterministic way based on everything then then my entire life's passed out already so why don't I just give up this illusion of of imagining that I exist and and when I say I I mean this this chooser this decider in the middle of all this biological um all this biological programming um but and and then you start to sit back and say well wait a minute what about the frame once I start imagining an interventionist God well that is all embedded within a frame of of kind of this this this clockwork universe which is a deism which someone wound up and it's going and then this God comes from outside of it and well what does that mean and then obviously you know if you say switch over to you know say a frame that CS Lewis employed often well what if what if this God is actually more like Tolkien de Frodo well suddenly this mechanist the clockwork deist universe that is actually deeply embedded in the secularism we inhabit I mean you you this game doesn't end and luckily being pragmatic you're like well this is all wonderful but how does it help me get up in the morning that's right that's right like it doesn't matter like I'm I'm gonna make the decisions I make and if it's deterministic it's deterministic and if it's free will it's free will but could I would this situation with the student have played out differently could I ever have possibly stuck to my guns and said no I don't know and and and and now I don't know I don't know if this is where I should go or not but you're just a few years into this because what happens then is if you're living this way for a lot of years someone like me I've been living this way all my life so then you make decisions and you think boy this was because of you know you can use providence synchronicities all this different language for what we're talking about similar thing I I think God I think God called me to this in like you know 1980 something but now in 2010 I look back on this and I have a judgment about it it was a good thing so then I think oh yeah God was good and providential and everything was cool or maybe it didn't turn out much to my liking and then how do I feel about God and then can I still trust him you know yeah yeah well just this summer there's a friend of ours who lives close by and she lost her husband very unexpectedly around the time that you had the thing with your sister as well very similar event and I was interested to see how does she do this like he was he was kind of young late 40s early 50s and then gone yeah and how does that play into God and to watch her her arc the arc they built sit there in the chaos solid and she trusted in God saying this is God's got a plan she was 100% in her faith and it was inspiring to see it and the amount of unnecessary suffering she caused herself through that course of action was pretty much zero yeah it was a lot of suffering yeah but the unnecessary suffering was removed and that unlike even from a secular standpoint even if she was delusional look how well it worked yeah because she's come through the other side in a few months and she's rebuilding her life and it was awe-inspiring to watch yeah at Francis Collins so Frank I don't know if you know his story at all Francis Collins he he was so there are two groups that were unlocking the human genome Francis Collins was leading one of them and he wrote a book the language of God so he grew up completely secular he was a medical doctor in a hospital and he began to suddenly he began to pay attention to patients that had faith and patients that didn't and a very similar thing to what you just described he began to note something of patients who had faith and he began to say what's with that and he began to look into it and and that journey led him to becoming a Christian and you know so it led him to the language of God is how he tries to put together the world which we all have to try to put it together but it was exactly that thing that he was watching Christians suffer and how they suffered and thought there's something going on there was a burning bush and he had to go check it out and it's powerful stuff and I just feel it's so useful for everyone but that word Jesus scares a lot of people you just mention it and you've grown an extra head or something and people are like I need to get out this conversation right now yeah and there's just such power in that name to this day yeah it's true I just it's so useful for so many people and then you get like empowered by it I want everyone to have this and it's not it's it's it's great but you're gonna be you're inviting people to church just like those people you met on the walk who do this thing called church planting and you're sure you're gonna say yes you're gonna go there it's gonna be weird and you're gonna give them money and that's gonna be your way out yeah but you know show up and see what happens if you hate it I'll give you your money back but that that's what I want to do but it's you know God says that's not your job you don't worry about that you just don't get in my way I'll figure the rest out that's right because you feel so like it's the guy who found the treasure I've got the treasure that's right that's right yeah yeah we had a moment in church where they had a speaker who was telling us how the grand canyon was formed you know x years ago very recently by some magic water or whatever it was the flood it was the flood and and he said that uh you know and the scientists have this conspiracy against the church and they're trying to destroy it and my wife you know PhD astrophysicist working in science she's like I didn't get this memo I'm not in on this conspiracy there's no conspiracy against the church from science well it's and again if you you know I'm trying to get out a video on on the um on the hoax the hoax papers and some of that discussion you know if you if you there's a there's history behind that person coming in in the frame that they're using because the the imagination of some people in the church is well if we if we just didn't get into all of this science then the church would still have the kind of hegemony over the culture that it had once there's some problems with that number one those golden days weren't really all that golden the days before you know like Charles Taylor said the belief in God wasn't axiomatic just because everybody kind of believed that there was a God certainly didn't mean everybody lived as if Jesus was Lord I mean those are two very different things and most of the people who are complaining bitterly about the havoc science has wreaked don't complain when they you know when they with their life expectancy is longer and the electricity stays on and they get to ride in airplanes and they get the internet so you know that's my favorite one for science you get stripy toothpaste yeah you get stripy toothpaste greatest scientific move with stripy toothpaste yeah so so it's it's it's it's a really complicated it's a really complicated history and story and people are people are people so so on the culture shock I think it's if you're coming from a Peterson biblical background you know it'd be nice if you're aware that this is something I was caught completely unaware I thought people would like oh this is a new way of looking at it this is great that might not happen no no and there's going to be work on both sides here so you coming into their culture you've got to acclimate to it and then just try and get what you can biblically out of it yeah and I tell people that I say okay so you're going to a church if you know don't worry about yeah very much like you said um you know in most churches they'll be very happy to have you even if you say like um Nacho Libre's friend I believe in science and oh okay but they're probably still not going to chase you out because they have this other foundational thing that says you should welcome these people that's also built into the culture so that you will be you will be their local heretic and part of them will love you for it was a nice thing he said like a pastor I said I'm not I'm not a religious person and he looked at me and he was like good nor am I I thought I got my attention and he's like it's a personal relationship not a religious like seek Jesus not religion yeah let's do it this way yeah but then there was that scary word again see you know because at some point you're going to say well what do you mean seek Jesus because I can talk to you I can read about Jesus but you know even this personal relationship language that's heavily that's heavily god number two and um the kind of you know like a friend of mine who just passed away last year said you know but God kills grandmas and puppies um that's god number one god number one and god number two are the same god well how do I live with that god and how does that god relate to Jesus and no it's no it's it's it's it's it's something to try to get your head around and it doesn't quit it's a great journey there's lots of lots of incidents you get thrown into a lot of situations you're not expecting to be in and grow constantly through this so I'm excited for my future my family's future see my daughter grow up in this but we want her to go at her own pace you know we don't want to be one of those religious parents who are like you must believe this devil child I'm seeing her getting an awful lot from it like her attitude towards other people and yeah like we passed some homeless people in the car and she's like you know someone should help them and she had her birthday money with her and I'm like you could help them and she's like okay I'm like I'm proud that's the right thing that's a race to the bottom so you see people in need and you're like okay what can I do to help you yeah yeah no that's that's beautiful we have we have just a few minutes left before the next guy comes in so um any last minute things you want to say things you want to say or touch on I'm sure glad we did this though because I again I I lately haven't had a lot of time to put out a lot of other videos but I love these conversations and I'm so grateful for you for sharing your story with me people are so interesting aren't they oh yes astoundingly interesting just as Peterson said give someone 10 minutes and you'll have the most incredible story that's exactly true and so not all of not everyone agrees to not everybody for very good reason wants me to post my conversation with them but this whole you know one of the huge gifts that Jordan Peterson has given me is all of you because I get to hear stories like yours almost every day and it is so cool it really is it's great uh I don't know if when I'm in small groups I find that if you want to get off the hook you just have to say be like Jesus and that'll that's a nice get out of jail free card if you're ever called on to answer something oh that's that's right be like Jesus you can't go wrong and children learn this if you if sometimes they have these little children's sermons in front of the church and the answer to every question that the children will give is Jesus and it always works so that's and again if you we we joke about that and we laugh about that but in a Peter Soni in a way if you start to take that apart you begin to realize there's something very mysterious and big and powerful going on there that we all too easily don't notice and we can't actually explain it and this the Jesus story the resurrection story appears across cultures and things so many different ways and so many different times that I'm like that doesn't weaken it for me for if you're you can attack Christianity saying it's a copy of this or a copy of that but if this story keeps showing up I'm like I should pay attention to this because it's clearly art typical in some way and important yeah have you read have you read much CS Lewis no I have not you should probably read some CS Lewis on that because that for him that's people would say oh well there's all these resurrection gods and CS Lewis he makes this point in the chapter the grand miracle you can find it on CS Lewis doodles you can find it in miracles you can find it in other compilation books of his because he actually says it a few different ways he says but the really funny thing was it happened in the one culture in the ancient world that didn't play that game and that's what's so interesting about it that and so for CS Lewis the thing that Tolkien really got him to think about was well what if what if this you know all of these resurrection stories that you have through history they're all clouded in mythology and they're mythical and they're archetypal what if it happened and then suddenly begin to say what if it happened and then now that then turns in again on my life and I say because a lot of people would say okay so this guy cut your wife off and you look at the psalm and you read the psalm and boy it's kind of about being open to God and then boom that day you get a call take in an exchange student and you take in an exchange student well that doesn't make any sense that's just crazy that's what my reason is doing it's outraged that I would do such a thing right and that's my kind of old self trying to keep I want to I still want to be God yeah we can't give it all over to this other guy yeah and if and if you are the author of your story your story isn't going to be anywhere near as good as if you let God be its author because he's a far better writer and he has proof of that talk to a thousand people yeah because all of us the story I write for myself is incredibly dull the story God writes for me now is including listening to some crazy crazy Canadian psychologist who says I live as if God is real well there I didn't plan on this for my story but here it is exactly it's great well I'm out of time and I don't want to shortchange the next guy so is would you like me to post this because I'd sure be happy to post it I'm perfectly fine with that if you see value in it then go ahead oh I there's again because for every conversation I have like this with you in public I have five conversations or emails from people in private and so I know a lot of people would connect with your story so okay and then go ahead okay I think it deserves to be shared he can and he will and he isn't gonna stop so thank you so much Darren thank you too and we'll we'll I'm sure we'll touch base at another time you can touch all right bye bye bye