https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=MWufAJx_L-o

 Wonderful! Well, this morning is Scandinavia morning because I just finished talking to a Swede and we had an awesome conversation. And it's so nice to see your face and hear your voice. Oh yeah, I've sent you a few emails but I am one of the shy types that I haven't added my picture to almost anywhere. I have one image in Facebook from like 10 years ago. Well, I don't know why you're a good looking guy. You got hair and it still has color. So, you know. Well, I don't know. I don't know. Laziness, I think. Well, it's probably some wisdom because, you know, there's some good reasons to not have your face all over the internet or your ideas. But I've obviously blown thrown that away years ago. So, why don't you introduce yourself a little bit? I know a little bit about you, but if we post this, then others will too. Yeah. So, my name is Altti Akujärvi. I'm from Finland. But there's so much to tell where to start. I was born in very northern Lapland and Finland. And I'm actually, I'm not completely Finn. I'm actually also Sami, the local indigenous tribe in Inari. Wow, I had no idea about any of this stuff. That's cool. Yeah. So, that makes life interesting. I moved to the capital Helsinki in 2003, 2004. I wanted to study because I wanted to study physics. And I had just two to three options on the universities that would have been suitable. And I decided that even though Helsinki was the first away, it was the only place where I could fly. So, it made the trip shorter duration, if not shorter in distance. So, I studied physics in the university. I met my wife also in the university. She's also from Lapland and she's also just from the other side of the province. And so, we met in a Christian fellowship. We had this small hall. There was never more than 15 of us, but she found her way there. And well, we found each other there. We've been married for 13 years, almost 13 years. And we have a daughter now two and a half years. And I've been working as a research scientist for almost 10 years now, who at a technical research center, I do, well, microspectrometers is the name of the team and it's the best team name we've had. We've had plenty. It actually tells what I do. We do small spectrometers. A few of them are flying in satellites, the Finnish satellites Aldo 1 and the Hello World satellite. They both have cameras from our team. Wow. That's really cool. That's really cool. I love meeting people and finding out what they do for a living. The last guy I talked to, and he gave permission, so I'll post the conversation. He does translation for subtitles. And so we talked about that and he talked about, yeah, it's different from just translating because you can't just use all these words to fill in the concept. You got to get it on the screen. And I thought, oh, wow. So that was really cool. And so microspectrometers in satellites. And so this is looking at the light that's coming from stars and other planets in order to figure out what the chemical compositions of things are. Is that the type of thing you're doing? Yeah, that's the intended use at the moment. The technologies in the how should I say, not the well, you can say early phase that we are doing. We say it's microspectrum readers. So we are trying to do them smaller and smaller. So the hyperspectral imaging from large satellites has been around for a long time and it is used for plenty of things. Ozone layer thickness can be measured with that. You can do CO2 mapping and plenty of stuff. But the satellites, they are many are the size of a small bus. And our cameras, we try to fit them inside a CubeSat, which is a one liter. So five centimeters, 10 centimeters, 10 centimeters is our device. And it's in a satellite that's only a three liter box. Wow, that's tiny. Yes, that is tiny. I get amazed myself. How is this thing powered? Solar? Well, on the orbit, yes, on orbit you have to have solar power. And that's, of course, one design issue that you can't use very much power because if you only have a few, it's not a very large satellite to have. You can't have much solar panels on it. So everything needs to have a small power consumption. Wow. Wow. That's wild. That's really wild. So, but I know that you have some other designs for our conversation. So, but that was very interesting. That's very interesting to me. But keep going. Yeah. So then I already talked about my work. So on the church side of things, from the from Ivalo where I grew up, we had a small Pentecostal church. There were around 100 persons in the congregation. And it was mostly old. But it just so happened that for my few years, around 1984, there were a lot of children, even though majority of the congregation were basically our grandfather's age group. So we had a large house youth in that church. And it was a really nice place to spend your youth and to grow in a church. We got a lot. Yeah, we had to take much responsibility of our what we did. So we had a it's it's not a cabin. It's a bit larger than a cabin in the congregation has. And so we spend in summer on summers and winters. We had had camps there. But when we were teenagers, we he asked that, hey, could we just, you know, hang out there? We have some of us already have cars. We could just have the one one adult. Then we will just gather every all the youth in the cars and we drive their 20 kilometers. And we provide our own food. We clean up afterwards as we go skiing. We take sauna in the evening. We have prayer in the after the sauna. And we had like three, four of these kind of retreats, retreats, retreats. Yeah. Yeah. The best summer retreat what we had had was I was 19 at the time. A few of the two of our girls where stayed 200 kilometers away on a bordered town or village. It's it has three shops for the Norwegians to come buy stuff that it's cheaper in Finland. So they were there as summer. They had a summer job there and they were there in this very small village for the whole summer. And we thought, oh, oh, the poor girls, they have to be there. So, hey, why won't we make a retreat there? So we started. I think it was four, four o'clock afternoon from Ivalo. We drove two and a half, two hundred fifty kilometers to Nätämö, Neiden. And then there was a cottage, ten, I don't know, it was six kilometers from the village. We walked there. We had our evening there. We left there. Her back. It was already twelve o'clock. But that's OK. It's the sunglasses. It's a nightless night. The sun is still up. We walked back to the cars. It's three o'clock when everybody gets back to the cars and we start driving back to Ivalo. I was home at seven in the morning. Oh, my word. Wow. Wow. That that that seasonal darkness and light. I mean, that's I've never experienced it, but it's got to mess with you. No, it doesn't mess it. When you grow up in there, it it it doesn't mess you. It raises it builds you. Oh, it would mess. It would mess with me. Oh, I lost we lost. I lost your audio. There is a there we go. Another muting here. So after I came to Helsinki, I had to find a new church to go to. I found one and I also found this fellowship in the university. Hey, when we after we got married a few years later, we changed to a smaller church because my wife, he well, it was good for me to be in the in the larger church. But we both didn't and and find our place. So we go get to a smaller church. It was around three and a half hundred have at the time. And for six years, I've been now elder in the church. We've grown. We are now at seven hundred. Wow. Church, especially for Europe. Yeah. Yes, it is a big church. Oh, wonderful. So so you've you've sent me a number of very interesting emails over the last while. And why don't you share some of some of what you've shared with me because I found it. I found it quite fascinating your observations on language and some of the issues that that, you know, Peterson raises up and symbolism and mythology. So I don't know. I don't know where you want to begin. Should I start with the ones I've already told you or should I tell you a another one? It's up to you. Well, I was planning to start with a new one. So, so a little bit of background. And also for others. The I find it strange this and there is a myth with the new atheists that the Enlightenment has somehow freed us from the darkness of religions that people were superstitious and they were afraid of strange gods until the Enlightenment came and gave them rationality. And now they see the light. But I hear that and I think, excuse me. Where did this happen? How I remembered it? Because I have a my ancestors, the first the first one who was baptized to be a Christian and as a child. He was baptized in 1702. And before that, his parents were all were baptized in as an adult. Hold on. And before that, they were pagans. And the pagan ways, even though people did come to, well, church came to them and they he turned to Christianity, not everybody did it. And the, he, and this, the pagan faith, and tradition stayed for a very long time. So, our connection with the old faith is much more closer. So when someone like Sam Harris or Richard Dawkins says that the Enlightenment has freed us from superstition and fear of the strange gods, I say, no, it wasn't the Enlightenment is it was Christianity. We still know the strange gods. And yeah, and I when I say strange gods, I don't mean that they are strange to us now. They were strange already to my ancestors. Because I did tell you about the this old Finnish concept of that the That the forest valleys and waters, they are not just wilderness, that has no, you know, owner that you can't let you. It's no one. It's no one's that you can just grab what you can. No, no, no, no, that's not how wilderness works. Every place is someone's house. Now when a man makes his place to stay, he, again, how do you can call it a field, but it's not plowed. It's just some, you know, you, you didn't make a clearing. In the woods, if you wish to make your place at home. So therefore, your, your household is a clearing in the woods. In the same way, a lake is a well rounded place. It has clear. Alright, this is the lake. So someone has made it. It's someone's own. You also see in in forests that at some point in something changes in the soil and you get different kind of vegetation, there is some strange A ridge or something and you realize that there is a border here. This is a one place and each place has its own owner. And in the, that's essentially what the word bail means in the Old Testament. Yes, a bail. A master for that at one place. With the Sami with my tribe. The The people, those Those who, who owned the places they were called Saita. They could be almost anything, but always something natural. A strange rock that's at certain angle looked like a fish coming out of the water. You could see a large head. 20 meters high. He on a rock rock face. You could see there say I there say a mouth. You could see at some I've seen here in the in Helsinki region. And there is at one place there is one rock that looks like a bear. When I saw that I said that would be a holy place if we would be this was in Lapland I and I can already see his borders here. Interesting. Yeah. So now the question about the strangeness. It's in the book of Job, where Job asks God that, do you have eyes like we do? Do you see like we see? Can you understand our pain? And it's, it's one of my favorite passages. And In a way, Jesus is God's answer to that question. Yes, I have eyes. I have the eyes of Jesus of Nazareth. I can feel your pain, because I felt it. And what is even more Jesus himself said about this. It was the Parable no teaching of about the last judgment between the goats and the sheep, I think they were. And they asked, he says to them, I was hungry, you didn't feed me, I was alone, you didn't come to see me. Where were you? In everyone. The least one of you who you saw and you didn't do it to them. And you did it to them and you did it to me. God in Christ participates in all our suffering in all our life. All aspects of it. So he has our eyes. But what kind of an eyes does the rock face have? If it's a face of a bear or a Wolverine. What kind of eyes does the rock that is like a pike coming from the lake. What kind of eyes does he have? Can he understand our pain? Can he understand our life? So it is no surprise to me that when I read there is a book here. You have plenty of books there. I have one here. This is in Finnish and in old. It's Sombio or Sombu in Swedish. It's the region just south of Inari. So it's our neighboring tribe. And this is from a folklorist who this is written in the early 19th century. He tells all this folklore from the region. And he also cites others who are previous folklorists and priests and others. And he recalls the first priest who came to Sombio to preach to the locals. No, he wasn't the first one. He was the first one to succeed. And how did he succeed? They had these powerful men who could do spells. So he found a shaman. It's a foreign word but close enough. He was the most powerful shaman, the most respected shaman. And started to preach to him. And he got this shaman to turn to Christ. And he took a baptism. And then he went and burned all his fetishes, all his magical trinkets, everything, drums. And the others were horrified. How can he do this? This is terrible. You can't do this. All the bad things are going to happen. There is not a bad thing that won't happen. And the terror which they felt a few days later when nothing happened was even worse. According to Jacob Fellman, the priest who was there. So he got to baptize over 30 former shamans. And that's the first time that in the southern tribe they got people baptized. So the idea that rationality and enlightenment set us free. No, no, no. Yes, your memory in Richard Dawkins, he might have a slight amnesia. Because the kingdom of Mercia, they turned to Christianity in 650 something. And in 856 I think the great heathen army invaded. Yes, it was a great heathen army because the whole England was already Christian. So perhaps he doesn't remember what it was like to actually worship for strange gods. But we have a hunch. Well, your story is so fascinating because it highlights, there are a lot of stories like this around. In North America you have the Navajo. You can go to places in North America where even this concept of indigenous, via genetics we would assert that nobody sprang up out of the ground in North America or even in the Lapland. So what you're saying is that indigenous in a sense is a people that, we don't even have language to describe exactly, or I don't have language to describe exactly this. But your story is fascinating because look at the speed at which your people changed. That's not that long ago. Yes, and as I told you it was only the start. Well, and a lot of what this kind of stuff that you've written to me about has been fascinating because you very quickly were able to connect a bunch of things that of course you and a handful of other people have emailed me or the only Finns I have any connection with on earth and only because of this crazy thing, YouTube. But the connections that you were able to draw with a bunch of these things have just been fascinating to me. And even talking about the bales in a sense, but that there was in many ways a, and I just finished talking about this with the guy from Sweden as well. There was in many ways sort of a universal culture and perhaps symbolism was sort of a universal language on top of it. And then we've kept putting other things on top, but you get far enough away from it and you forget the bottom because you're just busy in our little lives with everything that's up here. And it's incredible that you're not an ancestral artist or anything. You work on making tiny little spectrometers for satellites. That blows my mind. Well, I have to in part thank my mother. She's been doing some genealogy. She is actually from, she's not from Lapland. She's actually from Salonia, which is a totally different tribe. She moved to Lapland as a nurse or well, laboratory technician in the hospital to do who, the one who takes blood samples from you. Oh, yeah, yeah. A phlebotomist. The person who takes the blood is a phlebotomist in English, so I don't know what word they have. So now when you talk about your tribe and your indigenous people, what does that look like? I mean, I assume that there are distinctions that continue to be made. And then again, I shouldn't wonder about that because growing up in the Christian Reformed Church in the middle of the New York metropolitan area, that was our tribe. You know, we all went to the same schools. We all went to the same churches. And even though we go in the grocery stores and do business with the non-CRC people, we knew who our tribe was. We all had our own language and so on and so forth. So, you know, maybe it's that maybe it's that in indigenous versus immigrant dynamic that that highlights the borders. Yeah. Well, that's a very complicated topic and a very, very hotly debated also because it has happened in the in Lapland that had there has been well, it's called assimilation. But what it actually is, is a bit fuzzy because if my family and the village which I grew up in, we've been living there, the same families, He's for 250 years on the same place. And yes, we've had had sometimes we get a wife from home south. Sometimes there are only daughters in the house. So there is a Finn coming in there to be the new master in the house. They have a new name, but hey, they are still at no point have has the house turned to someone else. Always the same families. So at which point have we become Finns? Yeah. So it's and since it's happening all the way everywhere. And now where did you start drawing the line? And this is a very hard question at the moment. But I'd rather not dwell into this. Okay, that's absolutely fine. That's absolutely fine. Well, you've got some more stuff on your list. Let's have it. Yeah. Well, I could. Another piece that on the history of Finns and the tribes of Finns, the first crusade to Finland was in 1000. It was in the 11th century. No, I always get this mixed up. It was 12th century 1150 something. In St. Henry from originally from England, they came to first Sweden, and then they had a papal order to go and and make the tribes in the Finland and Christians. But this was in 1150 something. Now he died a martyr just a few years later, and there's a great fault lore on the killer. Of course. But the earliest Christians, or we know that there have been Christians in Finland, even before that, at least 200 years before that. In southern Finland. And it's very interesting there of how we know that they were Christians. There are no written records, but they found graves. They dated the graves. And all right, these are from the 10th century. Now question, how do we know that these are Christian graves? They were almost identical to the neighboring pagan. And the neighboring pagan graves. There was one difference. The pagans had this habit or ritual that they would dig their graves so that they would face the rising sun of either the solstice or the equinox. Or if there was a very holy site nearby, they might dig it towards that site. But these Christian graves were different. They were not facing the rising sun of equinox or solstice. They were facing the rising sun of Easter. Interesting. Yes. That's the one very interesting thing that I like to share since Easter is very soon. Only in a few days. The symbolism of the rising sun. And then I want my grave to point in the Eastern and Twilight. So that's one. That's also one of the... One myth which there sometimes is that Christianity has been brought to the pagans with the end of the sword. Well, yes, that did happen. But already 200 years earlier, there were Finns who were digging their graves towards the Easter. So, yeah, it's not just wars. And it's also that faith really catches on. Yeah. Very true. Very true. Now, what's happening in the church in Finland now? I mean, I know nothing of the history of the church in Finland or even what happened during the Soviet period. Because, of course, you know, you're pretty close to your big neighbors to the East. Evangelical churches are in many places all over the world. But what's the status of the church in Finland? Well, in Finland, well, first, we're a very Lutheran country. So since the Swedish times, because Mikael Agrikola, he was a student of Luther. And he came to the court of Gustav Vasa and who was a new king. He had become a king and he was desperate for money. So they decided that, you know, this is a church which is, you know, part of the nation state. That's actually a, or not nation state, but the kingdom that it's not separate. That's a nice, nice idea. They have plenty of wealth. So let's turn to Protestant. Let's turn to Lutherans. You don't have to send your money to Italy. Yeah, let's send it to Stockholm. And there was a very, you could say, a stagnant period in the 17th century. But the pietism that was around Europe, the Germanic Europe, it took on also in Sweden and Finland. And especially right after the, I think it was the Great Northern War. There were plenty of soldiers and officers who got prisoners. And it was a long war. So some of them spent 15 years imprisonment. And after the war, when they came back, they had during the imprisonment, they had found some books from the pietists. And they started the first, which we called revivals in Finland. And they have been, then there was one major movement in which started in Lapland in the Swedish side. He had, Lestadius is his name. And it's very local, only to Finland and Sweden. And, well, they are when I think the first, yeah, we got to the freedom of religion act in the after we got independence. So after 1920, it has been in allowed to have more churches than just a few official Lutheran Orthodox. And there was a great, there was a big movement after the war and all the way to 70s and 80s. And that's because there was a large shift in the culture. We were very agrarian culture during the war time, but there was a transitioning to more industrialized, more urban. For example, the municipality where my wife is from, I think in the 1960s, they had 11,000 inhabitants and now they are to down to, I think, below 5,000. They have, they moved many to Sweden and many to southern Finland. So there has been a big shift in culture, which also who brought in him with it had some movement in both the free churches. And what's the not main line. Well, not the state churches. I actually was talking with the suite about that too Lars because, you know, growing up, I hear. So he goes to the evangelical free church. Now in the Dutch realm, you have the state church, which is the, the reformed churches, we call it in English. And then the Christian reform churches in a sense, the free church, although of course in the United States, because there is no state church. They're all free. But Abraham Kuyper founded the Free University of Amsterdam and I always thought, why do they name it that? Did you go there without paying tuition? No, it's because it's the state and the free church. So yeah. Yeah. And then, yeah, for Pentecostals, they have been in Pentecostals since the 19, I think, 12 was the first. Wow, that spread fast because Pentecostalism begins in Azusa Street Mission. That's just a few years before. Yes, was it 1906? Yeah, something like that. 1906, 1904, around that time. And it came to Norway, I think 1910 and two years later, the first name was Arne, but I don't remember the second name or the last name. He came to Finland just two years later. Wow. And we had a big increase. We had one very prominent preacher in the late 70s, early 80s, but he died quite fast after the prominence. I think it was like five years. There's Nilo Ylivainio. And with him, the Pentecostal movement grew from around 30,000 to 60,000 people. And now, well, the modern day is giving us all a headache. As if they didn't have a headache before. Come on, everybody has a headache. Yes, they do. So what are the struggles now? Well, what are the struggles now? Well, the struggle is we have always had plenty of young in the movement, and we always have the youth mission as being good. But how do we keep them after they turn 20 and they go to university? And they change, especially in Finland, since in almost any place you have to move to a new town, because when you have to go to university, we have plenty of them. And we have too many of them. They are too many takers for a small amount of resources. But still, people move a lot to have their university. And I think it's over 40% of Finns go to university. So it's and if you add in the what is technical universities, which are in Finnish language or are not even called universities, then it actually goes even higher. I think over 65%. So this movement that you when you turn 20, you have to move to a new place, you have to start your life anew, and then we can't catch them. That's one of the. Clear clearest challenges. Yeah, that's interesting. That's so interesting. I just the conversation I posted today was the conversation I had the day before with John Sook, who I mean his story for me is so fascinating and getting to talk with him in some detail about the fact that so he grew up his, his parents were immigrants from the Netherlands after the Second World War to Canada, raised in the church. He was very interested, very young in it. His family was and he talked about the fact that he had a brother who died, but he's now sort of gone to a liberal church is his theism he says of himself and some of his blog posts he's rather a weak theists, he sort of inspired by the the generosity of Jesus at least within the certain framework that is sort of the contemporary moral framework, but he says none of his three sisters go to church, and you just watch this, you know you know that there's there's stuff going on here and I think that that is what many of us are wrestling with and I think that's sort of, and it's in that frame that I found Jordan Peterson so fascinating, because suddenly here in the university you have a guy who is not an evangelical trying to, he's not an evangelical apologist trying to make an argument, but the product of his ramblings is basically what I've, in a sense, chronicled and explored on my channel. And, and that to me is just so interesting in that it, and that via Peterson and then Peugeot and you know, then suddenly, you know, the stuff that you begin to bring to me it's like, oh, oh, oh, it's, it's almost like when we, when we get to university, when we, when we, when we climb what we imagine to be a certain hierarchy of status and knowledge that we dismiss. We dismiss a whole bunch of stuff without ever looking at it. But that stuff endures, you know I was, I was, I've been watching a little bit of Nassim Tlaib lately, and at a Google Talk, he begins the Google Talk by asking people, if you want your books to be read 100 years from now what should you write about? And you know, these Googlers are there thinking and, and someone basically said, you know, write about very old things and Tlaib's like, that's right, because your best chance of knowing what will endure is what has endured. Yes, that's the best guess. And it's very interesting watching, you know, the conversations I've been having and listening to people like yourself. Of course, some of us are, in a sense, holdouts, but then you see this other new, new group coming online that had, you know, their, their products of the, of the secular vacuum, and they found the nihilism unlivable. And so now suddenly, they're looking for, they're looking for life and they're finding it in places they wouldn't have imagined. So, it's very, it's very, very, and you know the Pentecostal movement itself fascinates me. I've done some conversations with Pentecostals, because one of the things that I realized, so when I was a missionary in the Dominican Republic, you know, in some ways, many Christians in the developing world are all Pentecostals, even if they're not necessarily Pentecostals. And that tipped me off to the idea that Pentecostalism is really much more a cultural shift than a theological shift. And the fact that it arises out of, you know, African Americans in Los Angeles, not an accident. It's a reaction to secularism. Yeah, that's I'm pretty sure that's a good way to look at it because just for the theological shift, try to present a concise theology that would fit all Pentecostal movements. Of course, it's not about theology. Our Pentecostalism has so much from the Lutherans that it's embarrassing. Yes, we don't baptize our children and for that the Lutherans will claim we are science of Satan, but yeah. Otherwise, there isn't so much difference. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Well, I was talking to someone, I was talking to someone and they're Pentecostal and they mentioned they go to a vineyard church. I said, oh, you're a Presbyterian Pentecostal. He looked at me like John Wimber. John Wimber was a Presbyterian before he did his, you know, Signs and Wonders and Power Evangelism and you know, all of the John Wimber stuff that launched the vineyard church. And so you're exactly right. The Pentecostals, oh, that was true in the Roman Catholic Charismatic Movement and the Christian Reformed Charismatic Movement. I mean, that's been a feature of this wave. We have these labels for them, but the labels are always approximations. They never, you know, there are best guests at trying to make Fable the ineffable. So that's what we do. Well, we just got a few more minutes. Any last things you wanted to get out there? Last things? He said, oh boy, way too much. Well, this is only your first talk. You know, you get it. I, you know, last week I looked at my schedule this week, about its Holy Week. I got a lot to do, but I'll hazard a couple of conversations and see how that goes. And I've just been so delighted at both of them today. So you're going to let me post this, right? Of course. Oh, good. I figured so. So good. Good. I feel brave. I feel brave. Good. Good. Yeah, perhaps a one final comment on this. A few sentences earlier here of this, that how do we try to, Elon Musk has this idea that, oh, if I could get this device that would just connect my consciousness to the consciousness of another, and I could just give him my thoughts as they are. No, please don't do that. That would be nightmarish. You will both go who insane trying that. But that is the, he, but he is thinking about the same problem that, how is it that faith is very, it's, it's the integral part of who I am. It's the most valuable part of the most valuable building block of my, myself that there is. How can I share this so that others might use it to build their identity, their self. And this, that when people go to university that they will just, they are so eager to get rid of all older ideas. Yes, it's C.S. Lewis, I think, said that they are like people all say about Sunday school teaching that they are so simple. This is, this is just so, this can't be real. And they neglected it. And then when you, who starts telling them how the adult version of the same stories, and they complain that that's so complicated. Why can't it be simpler? You already ditched the simpler. It didn't fit you. So we have this real problem that we can do the Sunday school. Oh, but how do we make the adult Sunday school? So that without that, Elon Musk's telepathy device. Yeah. Yeah. That's the reason why he's Jordan is so interesting. How can he do it? Yes, he doesn't even. He isn't even trying. He claims he's not even trying. That's right. That's right. He doesn't even know what he's doing and he's doing it and he's doing it. And that's exactly right. And it's that's that's what grabbed me immediately when I began to recognize what was happening. It's like, how's he doing this? I got to figure out how he's doing this. I'm going to turn I'm going to turn Jordan Peterson into technology. But no, that's exactly right. Well, thank you so much for this. And thank you so much for all the emails that you've sent me and the and the good stuff that you've sent me. And thank you so much for all the emails that you've sent me. It's it's really been enriching. And and you should maybe start your own little YouTube channel and and and share some of your stories because your perspective is so help. You know, this is something that that I recognize. I mean, my for the Christian Reformed Church, my youth was very different because of my father's church and my missionary service. I mean, and who we are. And so, you know what I should, you know, to get to a certain age, you should give yourself back to the world. And in some ways, that's what my channel is an attempt to do. But you with your your indigenous roots, your your I mean, all of the different elements that that make up who you are and your interests. That's a real gift. And, and it's important to figure out. I mean, you're doing it in your local church, which is good. And maybe now is not the time to do it on a broader scale. But you do have a lot of really helpful insight that that I've seen. And it's been helpful to me. So I, I really appreciate it. Well, I've been writing a blog since last summer. It didn't finish. Oh, well, that won't help me. Does Google Translate finish? Does that go pretty well? It's gotten better. It's gotten better. Still a long way to go. We have, we are aglutinative. We, this, we don't have prepositions, we just add stuff after the words. It's very, it's actually a bit hard to translate by by a computer. Well, I can't wait. I'm going to post so that my conversation with Lars that I just had before you, I'm going to post that one before I post this one. You know, I don't know, maybe we'll see how the channel goes maybe late this week or early next week or something. But I can't wait for you to watch the conversation I had with Lars, because that was fascinating. And I just love how I feel so blessed and humbled and privileged to be able to have this conversation with you. And with Lars and with how many people it's, I've just been enriched immensely by by your generosity of taking the time to send an email. And I wish I had more time to, sometimes I get gluts of email all of a sudden. It's like, oh, no. And sometimes they just trickle in, which is easier. So, so thank you for your generosity and for listening. I appreciate it. Thank you. You could put this out on the sun, Easter Sunday morning on the morning of the rising sun. I will, I will consider it. We'll see how it will see I don't often post on Sunday mornings on my channel I usually post on my church channel on Sundays so and it's not quite intentional but semi intentional so Okay, Easter Monday. I don't know. We are not sure which morning it was. Okay, okay. All right. Well, thank you so much. It's great talking to you. Yeah, thank you. Bye bye. Bye.