https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tXCl40fL7Z4

 Hi, this is Paul. Where do you look for help when you get afraid, when things are tough, when you get anxious? A lot of people look to money. What was it that Aaron made when Moses went up the mountain, stayed up there longer than expected? Aaron got nervous. He made a golden calf. Why a calf? Now I've got a picture up on the screen and might not be immediately obvious to figure out what it's of, but in a moment you will. It's the big bronze bull on Wall Street. What's with us? Why is the statue of a bronze bull on Wall Street? Why did Aaron build a golden calf? A number of years ago I, you could find the sermon or some of the sermon on my blog, you might even be able to find it on my old sermon archives on YouTube or something, but I wrote a sermon about why put Buddha in the bathroom and in that sermon I did a little bit of research about Hinduism and idols and I found a Hindu website about idols and it gave reasons for idol worship in Hinduism and some of their answers were easiest way to instill faith and devotion, a way to acknowledge the omniscience and omnipresence of God, help devotees become deeply religious and objects of concentration and meditation. Now at the beginning of the Ten Commandments it goes like this, and God spoke all these words, I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt out of the house of slavery. You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself an image in the form of anything in heaven above or the earth beneath or the waters under the earth. This seems very counterintuitive if you're trying to found a religion. Statues, idols are all over the place in almost every religion in the world. Egypt was full of statues, in fact those impressive statues continue to impress even thousands of years later. They focus the mind, they give people a sense of security and safety, all of these things that this website for Hinduism says that they do. And seemingly like a lightning bolt out of a clear blue sky this command comes down. You shall have no other gods before me. You shall not make for yourself an image in the form of anything in heaven above or the earth beneath or the waters beneath. What on earth is that about? Now for a number of weeks we've talked about the strangeness of the Jews and if you're familiar with ancient texts you find that there's some things missing in the Bible that we very much would imagine would be in different ancient texts. There's no story of the birth or origin of the God of Israel or the gods and this struck one particular Hebrew scholar as very strange. And it's out of this observation and many others from the Bible that Jewish that this Jewish scholar promoted what today we call revolutionary monotheism. This was like a bolt from the blue. Why on earth would Israel be so, would Israel, Israel biblical religion be so different as opposed to say evolutionary monotheism where sort of gods get accumulated and combined and then suddenly you're just down to monotheism. Biblical religion is fundamentally different from that of its neighbors even if they share a whole variety of cultural similarities. Now if you look at Greek mythology you find that gods emerge from usually the union of earth and sky or something like that and then all of these gods emerge and they're rather unruly. You'll find that in Babylonian mythology. You'll find it in Greek mythology. Kaufman who offered this book noted that well where do all these gods live? Well they sort of live within what he called a metadivine realm and what's crucial about this metadivine realm is that it's like every other realm around us. It puts limitations on us. Here in this space we have the limitations of gravity. We can only be in one time and one place at a time so on and so forth. These gods were subservient to the rules of this realm. Now other gods were developed and emerged and tried to represent the powers of this realm sort of like the fates. The Greeks had the fates and so you actually watch this in various mythologies where they're trying to deal with the issues between let's say the arena and the agents within them but they never really worked. The Bible begins in a very different way. In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. In other words God comes before heavens and earth, earth and sky. And this story as told by Israel in the Bible is radically different from the perspective of all the other gods. In fact this week and there is just God not any universe within which the God of Israel operates. Everything works beneath and at the behest of this God. I had two very interesting I made one video of commenting on a conversation with Bishop Barron the Catholic theologian who's on YouTube comparing and contrasting with a friend of mine John Verveckian his non-theism his non-theism and classical theism and had a very interesting conversation. And it all gets into this rather peculiar perspective of Israel and what on earth we mean by this word God. Now these fundamental differences between these worldviews play out in ethics and eschatology. Eschatology meaning what happens in last things like after when you die. And if you look at the last two sermons that I preached really both of these sermons flew flowed out of these kinds of contrasts. Israel's peculiar rather restrictive sexual ethic flows out of the fact that we belong to God as do our bodies. The good news of the resurrection flows out of the fact that we're not made to be immaterial beings we're made to be bodily creatures and so our restoration involves the restoration of our bodies. Now Paul of Tarsus is trying to express this radical difference to many people across the spectrum of culture and education through the ancient world and we touched on that and in our adult Sunday school class and I also made a video recently why do simple Christians sometimes outperform sophisticated Christians. Christianity can't be an esoteric religion whereby we talk about abstract ideals like a meta divine realm it has to work on the ground in everyday life at a level that people up and down the intelligence spectrums can understand. This is what we're going to get into in Paul's next stop in his tour. As soon as it was night the believers sent Paul and Silas away to Berea that's out of Thessalonica we spent the last few weeks in the book of the book the first Thessalonians. On arrival there they went to the Jewish synagogue now the Berean Jews were of more noble character than those of Thessalonica for they received the message with great eagerness and examined the scriptures every day to see if what Paul said was true. As a result many of them believed as did a number of prominent Greek women and many Greek men and over the last couple of weeks we've talked about this language about Greek men and Greek women and you will notice that there's Berean Bible churches all over the United States because many Protestants saw this text and said ah this is exactly the kind of people we want to be we want to be searchers of the scripture to make sure that when someone shows up and starts preaching to us that this agrees with the Bible. But when the Jews in Thessalonica learned that Paul was preaching the word of God at Berea some of them went there too agitating crowds and stirring them up. The believers immediately sent Paul to the coast but Silas and Timothy stayed in Berea those who escorted Paul brought him to Athens and then left instructions for Silas and Timothy to join him as soon as possible. So as we've seen before Paul seems to get all the heat so Silas and Timothy sometimes stay later and continue to work with the the budding church but Paul has to go to Athens and well what's Paul gonna do when he goes to Athens he's there unsupervised probably get himself into trouble. Paul was waiting for them in Athens while Paul was waiting for them in Athens he was greatly distressed to see that the city was full of idols. Now Athens today remains a a tourist destination for many people in the world and we want to see the Acropolis these the remains of these temples what we probably aren't seeing is exactly what Paul saw and what disturbed him. And when you think of that when you hear the word Athens and you think of Athens you might think of the great philosophical tradition Socrates, Plato, Aristotle you might think about Athenian democracy you might think about Greek culture and Greek learning. In many ways all of these ideas have sort of been sanitized and Christianized by the European Renaissance and the Enlightenment. Those are the images that flood our minds but it's not exactly what bothered Paul when he went to the city. Now why would this city of philosophy be so full of idols? Well our minds immediately go to the philosophers and playwrights and when we think about them we usually think about them in sort of a white and sort of a washed secularized version. Part of this is because the strange way that words are more durable than stone. Now Paul is going to have to engage both with the guy in the street looking for help from money or power or something in the world to help him out of his the corner that he's in and he's going to get into it with philosophers, lovers of wisdom who spent all of their day in these schools or in forums talking about ideas not unlike what seems to happen on YouTube and Discord servers these days. Now even the word school means leisure because of course most people in the world don't have all this time to sit around and talk about these heady ideas. They've got bills to pay and jobs to do and food to get in their mouths and to keep roof and shelter over their head. Wealthy people tend to have a little bit more free time to to not have to work and for this reason the city is filled with idols because all of these statues represent well represent the powers that they hope to invoke in order to save themselves and make themselves prosperous and all of the things that people want. Act 1717 so he reasoned in the synagogue with both Jew and God-fearing Greek as well as in the marketplace day by day with those who happen to be there. So unsupervised Paul of Tarsus simply continues to do what he does he goes to the synagogue and talks to both the Jews and the God-fearing Greeks we talked about those two groups a couple of weeks ago but then he also goes into the marketplace you know is he doing some leather work there is he you know making a little money to be able to get by we're not sure and of course he continues to talk in those places too. A group of Epicurean and Stoic philosophers began to debate with him some of them asked what is this babbler trying to say others remarked he seems to be advocating foreign gods they said this because Paul was preaching the good news about Jesus and the resurrection and of course you can only understand what you know a little bit of. Now a couple of words about the Epicureans these are just some short summary statements they don't by any means exhaust everything about these ancient philosophical groups philosophical ideas that were widespread in Paul's day. Epicureans were therogomaterialists believing that everything came from atoms or particles or nature there was no life beyond this all that was all that was human returned to matter by death matter at death though Epicureans Epicureans did not deny the existence of gods they saw them as totally indifferent to humanity they did not believe in providence of any sort and if one truly learned from the gods that person would try to live the same sort of detached and tranquil life as they as free from pain and passion and superstitious fears as they. You get a sense that these might be sort of like secularized regular people who don't pay a lot of attention to such things but go about their way trying to make their lives as comfortable and pleasurable as they can. Stoics had a more lively view of the gods than the Epicureans believing very much in divine providence they were pantheists believing that the ultimate divine principle was found in all of nature including human beings the spark of divinity which they referred to as the logos was cohesive was the cohesive rational principle that bound the entire cosmic order together humans thus realized their fullest potential when they lived by reason by reason in other words the divine principle for example the divine principle within them linked them to the gods and nature and they discovered ultimate truth for themselves so the Stoics in both groups are philosophical groups this kind of philosophical pondering is probably more in line with what a lot of people think of as philosophy today the Stoics held a rather high ethic and put great stock on self-sufficiency since they viewed all humans as bound together by common possession of the divine logos they also had a strong sense of universal brotherhood so these are the two groups that Paul tends to find more often in the marketplace so they took him and brought him to a meeting of the Ariopagus where they said to him may we know what this new teaching is that you are presenting you are bringing some strange ideas to our ears and we would like to know what they mean all the Athenians and the foreigners who live there spent their time doing nothing but talking about and listening to the latest ideas sort of sounds like a university Paul then stood up in the meeting of the Ariopagus and said people of Athens I see that in every way you are very religious now again that sounds a little strange to us because we tend to think about Plato and Socrates and philosophy in the context of our universities and that seems very divorced from religiosity now that very much isn't the case and in fact there's we might want to think how this particular Greek word gets translated I would think today actually it would be closer to something like spiritual or devout because actually the Greek word is is desi diamond now diamond sounds to you like diamond but actually it's the word much closer to where our word demon comes from and as you might think well why how they are in very way they are in every way very demon ish well the diamond is sort of this this spirit that moves us it sometimes people experiences as a little voice that speaks to us or or a notion that comes into our head or a muse or some sort of animated energizing spirit that we begin to have a personal relationship with and the spirit is sort of flowing it might be it's usually a little bit more a little bit more concrete and personal than let's say the force that you find in Star Wars but you are very much into spirituality these spirits that move the world these spirits that inhabit the world these spirits that take possession of us and they might be framed as little gods cupid of course is a little God it's the God of love that takes us over with passion and anger might take us over there's all these things that sort of take us over and the Greeks are very into this and they have all of these things instantiated in statues around the city to represent all of these gods that are at work in the world today now we're sort of hearing this through two thousand years of Bible reading but as I said it's the immaterial forces that move the world and us along with it Socrates quite famously always listened to his diamond now there's a long complex philosophical history about this and I'm trying to shorten it up because again when we hear very religious we tend to think go to church participate in institutions they weren't necessarily participating in an institution beyond their citizenship and the city and all of the ways that these might personally affect someone and again today we might think spiritual but not religious or spiritual and devout Paul then stood up at the meeting and said people of Athens I see that in every way you are very spiritually devout for I walked around and looked carefully at your objects of worship these are how you are all publicly socially collectively managing these diamonds that are swirling around the world and you have lots of statues because if there's a spirit out there that you're not satisfactorily paying attention to or appeasing or managing it might come and harm the city or harm your life in fact as you can see not paying attention to these spirits might put you into trouble you look to these spirits in order to get you out of trouble and it all seems to work much better in terms of us concrete human beings by by instantiating and representing these spirits as statues and characters and stories and in that way well we can work with the spirit world for as I walked around and looked carefully at your objects of worship I even found an altar with this inscription to an unknown God so there's a diamond out there a God out there that maybe you have forgotten and so well if something sort of comes out of the blue let's use that to sort of appease or engage or attract or get on the right side of this force or power that's moving in the world so you are ignorant of everything that you worship and this is what I'm going to proclaim to you the God who made the world and everything in it is the Lord of heaven and earth and does not live in temples built by human hands and he is not served by human hands as if he needed anything rather he gives himself every brother he gives he himself gives everyone life and breath and everything else now in some ways Israel's God is sort of like the meta divine realm in that sense there is no meta divine realm above Israel's God all there is in the beginning is God and then God creates now it is it also isn't true that this meta divine realm as it is perhaps imagined in many mythologies is impersonal no you can relate to this God he is both arenic as in the space in which we live and personal in that we talk and engage with him our relationship with this God is different because our God is fundamentally different it's not simply a difference of one God versus many gods we mean what we mean by God and how we relate to this God in fact will change your life and so what Paul does really in the short speech is sort of try to relocate their imagination about the world that they live in from one man he made all the nations that they should inhabit the whole earth and he marked out their appointed times in history and the boundaries of their land in other words it's not these boundaries aren't created by all these little gods fighting and looking for more territory no this one God simply does it God did this so that they would so that they would seek him and perhaps reach out for him and find him though he is not far from any one of us in other words it's not just the God way down there in this land or the God over there and that land or the God who can only come out when there's a thunderstorm or the God who is only present when you have this certain feeling this God is everywhere and always for in him we for in him we live and move and have our being and so what Paul is doing now is quoting from the poets and the writers that they would be familiar with to try and present the God of Israel in their terms as some of your own poets have said we are his offspring now again the gods were offspring of perhaps the sky and the underworld or the heaven and earth and all of these things we ourselves are his offspring therefore since we are God's offspring we should not think that the divine being is like gold or silver or stone an image made by human design and skill in fact if you go all the way back to the Ten Commandments the reason God says don't represent me in stone or in images is for this very reason that he in fact cannot be represented as just one more thing in the universe that's not the way to think about the God of Israel in the past God overlooked such ignorance but now he commands all people everywhere to repent for he has set a day where he will judge the world by just with justice by the man he has appointed he has given proof of this to everyone by raising him from the dead when they heard about the resurrection of the dead some of them sneered but others said we want to hear you again on this subject at that Paul left the council some of the people became followers of Paul and believed among them Dionysius a member of the Areopagus and a woman named Damaris and a number of others why does the resurrection trip them up so much if you remember last week we read NT Wright saying that for many in the ancient world Homer was the Old Testament and Plato was the New Testament and so part of what the Greeks were into was the thinking that immateriality was somehow preferable to materiality and so once you were you had escaped the bondage of the body you were in a better place in a better way but the Hebrew conception of the universe says no we are exactly as we need to be physical beings and so our restoration involves the restoration of this physical world we talked about that last week now the seed sown takes time obviously a few people listen to Paul and this has been the pattern that Luke is very open with in at each city a few people begin to find to follow him and to seek him and well how does that change anything well a couple of weeks ago I had someone contact me who lives in Thessalonica and I found that quite interesting because I was working on the book of the book of first Thessalonians for the sermon and he wanted to ask me questions Christianity in fact won and so here's a Greek Orthodox student wanting to talk to me around the world these tiny churches began with just the seeds of the crucified Jesus to put into the ground and to rise up rising up to defeat death and that's been the Christian story these tiny little churches these tiny little few people gathering together beginning to without idols without statues in front of them focusing them and saying okay here is my God began to pray and began to worship and bit by bit by bit the world began to change now what do we wish would have happened well probably the Apostle Paul wanted to hear something like oh Paul you're so smart we all now believe in the resurrection of Jesus today and we'll toss out all these statues and call him King can probably not find hardly any of those statues in Athens today because they all were put away centuries ago because they were found to be simply useless they weren't running around trying to figure out how to represent these diamonds all over or these little gods and do obeisance to them what happens in fact is they all began to worship the one God now look at how Christ and his spirit work slowly painfully persistently it takes time for his spirit to colonize us and make us his own now the helpful thing here is in the past God overlooked such ignorance but now he commands all people everywhere to repent for he has set a day when he will judge the world with justice by the man he has appointed he has given proof of this to everyone by raising him from the dead the message of the resurrection continues as it was then as Paul calls it in the book of first Corinthians a stumbling block to the Jews and foolishness to the Greeks but it is finally the weight of that truth the love and the beauty that slowly begins to move us into his likeness to be his witnesses to allow his spirit to move through us and to change us when we in our anxiety are no longer constructing a bowl out of earrings taken from Egypt ready to be rid of us that we are no longer constructing an image of the God by which we can sort of focus our mind because no image is adequate to represent God and in fact any image from the creation that we that we create is inadequate and will lead us astray the icon of the invisible God as the book of Colossians says is Christ himself so how do we bear witness to him whether we are philosophical or whether we are simple well for some it will be with our minds with our words with our sharing those of us who work with our lips and our thoughts and our ideas for others it will be concrete it will be hands and feet and money and gifts and service that's how we bear witness to God and celebrate his victory it will cost us all however because love is always costly the day of judgment comes and the day of glory does too so we ought to be prepared Paul keeps reminding this us of this and we ought to listen