https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=4egpKhkeDy0

 Hi, this is Paul and I am back from vacation. I had a wonderful trip, went out to Utah, saw Bryce Canyon for the first time, drove through Zion. I've been through Zion a number of times, drove through Yosemite. I've been in Yosemite a number of times, spent a lot of time relaxing. One of the things I do a lot on vacation is books. And my wife and I did the audiobook. There's a lot of distance to travel out here in the American West, so we spend a fair amount of time in the car. And one of the things my wife and I enjoy doing is audiobooks together. So we did Midnight Rising, which is a biography of John Brown. John Brown, I think, is a fascinating figure and he's timely in terms of the culture war. You have all, you have the intersectionality of faith and politics and, you know, the progressive movement in terms of abolition and some of the other movements that would follow in the progressive movement beyond abolition. So I'll probably be weaving some John Brown into some of these in future videos. I also read Peter Kreef's Between Heaven and Earth. This book's been out for a while. My father had it. I hadn't read it. It's a dialogue between, imagined dialogue between John F. Kennedy, C.S. Lewis, and Aldous Huxley, all of whom died on the same day. And Peter Kreef, who is a, he grew up in the Reformed Church. I grew up in Northern Jersey, same place I did. Went to Eastern Christian, went to Calvin College, and then went over into the Roman Catholic Church and has taught at Boston University for a number of years. And my Dutch friend, Job, says his last name means lobster in Dutch. So there you go, Peter Kreef. Kreef is a controversial figure. He's a fairly conservative Roman Catholic. He likes to wade into culture war things. I think this dialogue between the three of them is a little contrived and, of course, C.S. Lewis wins. But for those of you who are interested in a lot of the issues between, let's say, modernity and, let's say, Western takes on Eastern spirituality and small, low, Orthodox Christianity or mere Christianity, Peter Kreef kind of walks through the issues. And that's one of the things that I think Peter Kreef does well. He also has a book that's a handbook on apologetics and are an outline of apologetics. And one of the things I like about Kreef is that he does tend to walk through the issues well. Now, for Kreef, of course, he always comes up with the conclusion that he desires, which you may or may not agree with. But he's a competent philosopher, and he walks through the issues, and he's a clear writer. And so, between Heaven and Earth, I don't know that many of you will find it a compelling book in terms of changing your mind about anything, but he nicely runs through the issues. Another book that I continued, I'm re-taping this because my dog barked last time because he's chasing the cat, 1493 is another book that I'm continuing to go through, which is a fascinating book. It's a longish book. It really goes through sugar, tobacco, the Columbian Exchange, a bunch of things that really shape the modern world. And very, very interesting book. One of the things that I think is we don't pay enough attention to in the culture wars, paying attention to history, because many of the issues that we're dealing today, they are not new issues by any means. And so, reading history helps shed light on what we're dealing with today. Another book that I dug into again is Plato's Republic, and I'll be talking about that book quite a bit more, probably, in the next weeks and months, because I'm going to dig into it. Because with reference to Jordan Peterson's City of God, it's probably a good place to start in terms of thinking about, well, what do you mean by a city of God? What's on the top of the hill? How can we talk about it? What do our words mean in this? And really, the Plato's Republic goes into the word that is often translated justice, but another valid translation of it is righteousness. And as I dive into Plato's Republic with respect to Jordan Peterson, and then eventually Augustine, we'll be doing quite a bit more talking about that. And some guides for that will be some of these great courses series. One great course that I really like a lot, Books That Matter, The City of God, I've listened to that one a couple, two, three times. It's got a terrific transcript and an outline of the course, and I get these through Audible, and I really like it. Less helpful, but I think competent and valid treatment of Plato's Republic. I'm probably going to be looking at Plato's Republic in Greek and then various English translations and probably looking around for more good resources on Plato's Republic. So if any of you out there have any recommendations on Plato's Republic, let me know. Put it in the comment section or send me an email. Upcoming on my video channel, I'll be doing a conversation with Jonathan Peugeot a little bit later this week, which should be interesting, giving all the interesting stuff that's happened in the Peterson world. I don't know how many videos I'll get out this week. Living Stones need some attention. We're reaching the end of August, and there's usually two good times in the year to start new things, and that's September and January. I did the Parenting Through Adulthood course last year, which was a once-a-month Sunday lunch venue, and I'm thinking about doing something like that with these great books like Plato's Republic and Augustine's City of God. Here, I think it's a better way to get into the issues of religion and politics than what I see practiced currently. By saying that, I don't mean that I want to get into politics as much as I think the church has to get beneath these conversations in terms of what are we talking about when we're talking about religion and politics and justice and righteousness and well-being. So I'm thinking about actually developing a course on that. If I do it similar to Parenting Through Adulthood, it will probably be part video and then live meetings maybe once a month Sunday afternoon. A bunch of my members like going out for lunch together, and I want a venue where both members of Living Stones who are long-term people there and also people who are maybe not church members, maybe don't believe in God, maybe don't do church at all, might be of interest in having an event like that. So I'm thinking about something like that. And as I said, I'll be doing a deeper dive into Peterson's comment, City of God. I'm going to talk more about this too because I'll do another video pretty soon on just my commentary on that because I've been thinking about it. I had a week to think about it without making videos while I was on vacation. The main thing here isn't what Peterson believes or doesn't believe. Now I know especially for a lot of evangelicals, that's a very primary focus. Peterson's reluctance to—I watched his PBS Firing Line conversation—you know, part of his reluctance is not unwise because he understands that making a statement in one way or another will have tribal implications, and he wants to try to skirt that for now. And I understand that. And that in itself is a complicated conversation. So why spend so much time on Peterson? I get that question a lot. Why are you spending so—I get it from my wife—why are you spending so much time on this guy? Well, to me, the point of it isn't the guy. The point of it are the conversations that Peterson has been able to create. And to me, that's really the greater interest, and that's the interest that I have in it. And what I've discovered through the Meetup and through my videos is being able to have a longer conversation about substantive and important things like religion and—not so much politics—but religion and philosophy and history and belief and what is life about, the meaning of life. This is what Peterson has really helped us get into. And again, however—whatever you think about what he's done and his take, now you can—everyone's opinion and everyone's offering is subject to critique, and it's in the process of conversing and critiquing that I think we begin to have helpful conversations and find things that help us. And so I think the great—the more I think about this, I think the great conversation that Peterson has made beyond all of the new thought venues that he's opened up for me is he's become a figure around which a community has gathered to talk about these big things in life. And that's—you know, I think that's the critical and the central thing going on here. And, you know, how else would I be able to set up a conversation to talk about Plato's Republic or Augustine's City of God? And, you know, Dallas Willard did a similar thing, but Dallas Willard's impact was mostly—maybe some through USC and the students that he had—but his impact was mostly within a segment of the English-speaking Christian world. And Jordan Peterson, what he's done, has been able to facilitate conversations across these tribal lines, which makes him standing kind of apart from the tribal lines really quite important. So I'll talk more about that in upcoming videos. For patrons, I—you know, I had real misgivings about setting up the Patreon thing, partly because I don't like pay for play. As a pastor, it kind of rubs me the wrong way. There are individuals in my church that give a lot of money and really keep the church going, and there are other individuals that are in the church that are very poor and don't have any money. And I am the pastor for all of these people, and part of being a Christian means I try to be pastor for all of them at the same time. What YouTube has done is kind of made me pastor of a whole lot more people, more people than one person can manage. So Patreon then kind of has a role of filter those who are most committed to my project and most committed to participating in it. You all become my patrons, and I have to find ways of saying thank you. So I'm thinking about doing a question and answer video. I have to kind of figure out the mechanics of that via Patreon. I see Peterson does it, and Peugeot has done one. So I'm kind of following them in terms of learning this thing. I know how to pastor, but the YouTube stuff, that's all new to me. And I want to do some virtual meetups. There'll probably be two, three, or four people in a room, perhaps focusing around a subject, some of which might be offline, some of which might be online. I still have to figure out the nuts and bolts, but as we get going through September, I'll be working on that and trying to figure that out. I've got some in-person meetups coming up this, I think it's Wednesday night, this Wednesday night at Living Stones in Sacramento. You can go to meetup.com. That's where we have our, that's where I post the meetups on meetup.com. 7 p.m. August 22 at Living Stones in Sacramento, we'll have our regular Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetup. The little group that's been coming up from Fresno asked if I could come down and meet with them. And so September 10, I'm going to be driving down to Fresno and meeting up with them. And we'll be doing a little meetup then in Fresno. I am now a synodical deputy, which is a little thing that we do in the Christian Reformed Church. I'll be visiting classes meetings in other parts of the West. So I will be in Los Angeles in September 25 and I will be in Denver, Colorado on October 5. And I'm trying to figure out if there's interest or desire to meet with individual individuals or, or small groups of people. When I go down to those places, I'll probably talk to John Van Donk. He's my friend in LA and Southern California has been trying to get a meetup going down there. So that's what's happening. Like I said, I'm back from vacation and it's good to be home and I'll undoubtedly be making videos. I didn't find I missed making videos so much. I was just having a wonderful vacation with my wife and visiting terrific places and taking a lot of pictures and doing a lot of driving and spending time listening to audio books and reading regular books. And that's just what's fun for me. And it just gives me some head time to think about new things. And that's just, if anything, increased the fodder for video making and expanded the time. Having that kind of, having a week where I don't have to plan a sermon or do anything special or necessarily answer email is, is a really good thing. So this was just a, I'm back and more will come. So thanks for watching. Thanks especially for those of you who have subscribed. If you haven't subscribed, hit the little subscribe button. For those of you who are patrons on Patreon, there's a little link to that on my YouTube channel page. I should probably figure out, spend more time figuring out how to do this. My sister, my older sister, she goes by Anne Clay. My older sister started a YouTube channel where her and her, her and my brother-in-law are fixing up their little New England farmhouse. And so if you're curious about my, my sister, Chasing the Dream, Anne Clay, maybe I'll put a link. She, she loved more subscribers, but she's, she's pretty funny to watch and she's figuring out YouTube, but she's doing a lot more of the YouTube things that I'm too lazy or neglectful or indifferent to do. So maybe I'll, maybe I'll be a, maybe I'll be a better YouTuber next year. So thanks for watching. And those of you who share money, especially to Living Stones, that, you know, keeps our little church afloat, we have online giving, that's, there's a link in the bottom. And those of you who, who share money directly with me on Patreon, which I also appreciate, both of those are good. I'm, you know, I've got a fragile little church. I don't know where the little church goes. So I keep thinking about what God is doing in this strange new aspect of my career, making YouTubes about Jordan Peterson and other things. And I'll use the God talk liberally. I'm a pastor. You expect me to, so, you know, I'm always praying and trying to figure out, okay, Lord, what are you, what are you doing with this business? What are you doing with this thing? But I've been greatly blessed by you. Sorry, I haven't been attentive in the comments over the last week. I've been in many places that haven't had internet connections. So thanks for watching and thanks for your support.