https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wi3MknfGejM

 recording now. Here we go. We are doing it. Nice. Well, I just want to say it's it's I mean, everybody says it, I'm sure but it's it's a pleasure to talk to you, man. I've been following your videos. That first one that pastors take on Jordan Peterson or whatever it was titled that that fell into my new speed, I think pretty much right away. And it's exactly what I was looking for. And so I've been watching it right from day one, pretty much. Wow, that's two years. Thank you. I'm the one that should be honored. Hey, man, it's it's been your stuff has been extremely, extremely helpful over the last couple of years is maybe we'll get into a bit of background and whatnot. But just, you know, you walk around the halls of the church and people don't really this whole Peterson phenomenon, it doesn't get talked about a lot. And when you do, you kind of get some funny looks or maybe you throw some something up there. And there's a couple of Petersonians out there. But, you know, there's not a lot of people talking about it. And so it was really helpful discovering See, I was kind of concerned, I guess we'll get into the background. But you know, I always you're in a little bit of a silo with some of this stuff, our little corner of the internet, nobody around necessarily knows what we're talking about. So there's hypothetically a risk of wandering off into heresy by accident. That's, that's almost a certainty. But hopefully, we won't get too far into that. It was it was just really helpful having a guy like you with your background with your knowledge base with, you know, similar theological upbringing and whatnot, speaking in some of this stuff and kind of serving to guide a little bit. So it was really good. So I appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you. Yeah. So tell me a little bit about you. What about me? Well, 35. My wife and I just had our first baby girl last year. Now she's going to be she's going to be one next month. So congratulations. Thank you. That was it was a long time coming. We were we're trying to have kids for five, six, seven years, something like that. So we were waiting for that little girl for a long time. So it's it's still we're almost a year in and it's still kind of surreal how it's like we're looking at it and think man, you're here. It's so we're waiting for you. And now you're here. Wow, that's wonderful. Yeah, it's been really it's been really fun. So you know, tiring and all the things but it's really good. And you don't at least I did not appreciate my parents. And so I mean, you appreciate them but until you have your own and you think, Oh, oh, that was a must have been a lot of work. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. So but background actually similar to your family. I'm the oldest of five kids. And actually, my mom homeschooled all of us. Wow. Yeah. So speaking of appreciating the effort of one's parents. Yeah, yeah. To bearing to bearing ages, we all went to school at some point, I think I stayed home the longest and I only went to high school in grade 12. But that was our background. And you know, growing up in the church, we went to Alliance Church in here in Abbotsford, BC, actually I'm in the same town that what's his name? Oh, come on, they do that. The University of Fraser Valley that you spoke run, run dark, run dark. Okay. Yeah, so it was kind of fun when I'd actually heard of him before. And so when he popped up on on one of your chats, it was kind of fun to see him. So yeah, just slip down the road from that dude. So but yeah, you know, growing up in a Christian home, you know, involved in church all all through growing up kind of fairly traditional evangelical upbringing. Although at the time, I didn't know that it was traditional or evangelical, I just knew how everybody lives, right? Yeah. So yeah, there was that my parents were involved in leading worship at church all through growing up, I got involved in, you know, playing drums at youths and a church all through high school. So kind of pretty traditional churchy background that way, which is obviously has blessings and, and there but at the same time, there's, you know, you'd hear people coming in and having this conversion story or this, you know, I you my life used to be this way. And now it's, you know, this other way. And so you kind of just not the ones I don't really know what that's like, but right on. So there's a I don't know, there's there. I never walked away from the church, or really, once I didn't have doubts, I didn't, I always affirmed all the propositions that we affirm. Which is, you know, you get for Becky in the background. That's right. But I didn't know why I affirmed any of those things. And it didn't necessarily seem like the people around me necessarily, you know, we just, you know, you settle into the churchy language and, and everybody kind of nods along at the functions. And so, I don't know, I got into my my 20s. And I was now like I said, I'm 35. So I kind of wondered, how the heck did I not ever have a stretch of walking away from the church, but I think in my 20s, I left the church that I grew up in, my parents still go there, but went to a different similar background church, midnight church, you know, contemporary and actually, it's fairly large church at this point, partially due to them bring on a new other young adults pastor got moved to lead pastor like a decade ago, and the church has just been growing and growing. And I suppose it's sort of kind of turned into hate to use the term, but the mega church type of thing, which has, it has strengths, but it's got its drawbacks and whatnot, too. But I think it was really influential through my 20s in, in keeping me in the keeping me in the faith in some sense. But I feel like I sort of well, so you know, I met my wife when I was 25. And we actually dated for nine months and got married, which I don't necessarily recommend to people. We're celebrating our 10th anniversary this year. So it's worked out for us. So that was good. But that was definitely a bit of a funny backwards. In hindsight, you think you're so old when you're 25 and thinking, Oh, my gosh, I thought I'd be married five years ago, I'm never gonna get married. And then, you know, so we found each other and the family backgrounds lined up. And we kind of, you know, all the big things were kind of were on the same page. And so we sort of just sort of held hands and said, All right, let's do this thing. And, you know, in hindsight, we got married, and we didn't know each other. Like, like you would in nine months, right? Yeah, yeah. Well, the truth is, in a marriage, you might know each other at 25. But at 35, you're both going to be different people than you were at 25. And so, yeah, yeah, so it's been a real process of getting to know each other, learn each other, both as you say, as we've been, you know, I'm not I'm not in any way, hardly the same as I was at 25. Yeah. Which was a big adjustment for my wife as I sort of, you know, transitioning into different ways of thinking and whatnot. But I think come I remember actually, at our at our wedding, I during the vows, because we wrote our own vows and whatnot, I even at the time, I part of my vows was that I said I would be the spiritual leader of our home. I didn't know what I was talking about. I knew that that was a thing that I was supposed to do. And that was my responsibility at the time. But again, it was another one of the things that people say. And you kind of like, Oh, yeah, that sounds right. I'll say that too. Well, and like, you kind of know it's true, but you don't really know what it looks like, or how that's going to play out or, you know, and at the time, I didn't have any sense of why I believed anything I believed. So you know, you're sort of uttering the words and I guess having some hope that, you know, the rest would get backfilled in over time or something. But yeah. I would say I probably got to my, I think it was around 27, where I started sort of questioning things more, you know, I was watching, you know, Rogan's podcast and different things like that. And, and I would hear a lot of what I would now consider more strong man critiques of Christianity. But at the time, I thought, Yeah, that's a good question. Oh, that doesn't make sense. Oh, yeah, that. Yeah, why do we do things this way? You know, so so all of these seemingly reasonable critiques of Christianity started presenting themselves and I kind of thought, huh, I don't have answers to any of this. And it seems sort of prudent. So maybe look into that. So I kind of had a similar I watched your video this morning, you referenced Pascal's wager and I sort of even at the time, I sort of had a similar take in that, well, either this stuff's true or it's not. And even at the time, I thought to myself, I know people who I consider to be very intelligent and reason. And surely they must have an answer to these questions that I don't have answers to, or at least maybe they will. So I sort of had had made a decision to just sort of ask whatever questions I had or heard of. And if this stuff was actually true, then there'd probably be good answers for it. And if it wasn't true, then there'd probably just be bad answers. And either way, I figured I should probably know that but rather than kind of interesting, I'm not sure why I did it. But even at the time, I thought, like, it doesn't make sense to just walk away from this stuff, because the stakes seem rather high. If I don't believe it, and it is true. So before I just wander off into my own little way of being, I should maybe scratch beneath the surface and kind of look into things. So and again, that's where, you know, our large church was helpful. There's a lot of educational things, you know, I took a two year theology class, there's church history classes, you know, any number of things like that, because like, I didn't know where the Bible came from. Or, you know, when you actually think about it, really, this dude died and was resurrected. That's, that's what we claim, because that's kind of a big claim. And does anyone know why we think that or like, we just said, says it in this book, okay, where's the book? I didn't have any of this. Yeah, yeah. You know, so, so that you sort of, and this isn't, this isn't probably too unique to me, but you kind of hit a wall where you think really, these are these are, these are very big statements that we claim to believe. And so, you know, I just sort of jumped into that process and digging and learning and, and, you know, starting to read a little bit of Lewis and, you know, I mean, a number of, you know, Gary Habermas or some church history books or, or different things like that. I kind of, you know, heard NT Wright out there, those sorts of things. And then sooner or later, I guess fast forward to 2015, or no 2016. And I think I even heard Peterson on a podcast previously, maybe in the October ish, but in November when he went on Rogan that first time. You know, I like what he had to say, but he got to that third hour when at one point he stopped and he said, I'm something, I'm also a deeply religious person. And I kind of peeked my ears up and I thought, Oh, okay. Because I was looking for people that seemed intelligent, reasonable. And, you know, he's, he says a lot of things that you kind of haven't heard before, but you kind of nodding along saying, Yeah, yeah, that does make sense. And so for now him to even kind of stick his toe in the fray of this Christianity stuff, although not saying a lot of things that as a Christian, you kind of not along to but, but also like, yeah, but I never heard it said like that, or, yeah, I'm with you, but take one more step further. You know, he wasn't doing all the traditional churchy stuff that you hear from the fall, but much like you, you're hearing the students, okay, is he like just some kind of Christian? It's just quiet on campus? Or like, what is so it was a bit of a process of trying to figure out where his head was at. He was just a quiet Christian or what, you know, what was going on, but I his stuff was, you know, getting into the biblical lecture series, and he was just giving a lot of language that I felt was really, really helpful with where I was at at the time. Oh, maybe to back up, I've always really struggled, like I said, I've grown up in the church, but I never been comfortable. Just, you know, just using kind of churchy language, like, oh, you know, the spirit was calling me to do this, or, you know, I prayed, and, you know, by God's providence, this thing happened, or I just talked to the Lord, and I couldn't do any of that stuff. Like, my and, and to her credit, my mom did a really good job of very much being that way growing up and, you know, reading, you know, Bible stories and all this type of stuff. Shoot, in hindsight, you can really, I can really see what she was doing at the time trying to raise her kids in this in this way of thinking. But I was never, I was always uncomfortable when she would talk like that. You know, it was good. It was influential. But I was like, yeah, what are you talking about? And almost, almost up until present day, I've not been comfortable using using a lot of the traditional language. And when I booked this conversation, that was one of the things that came into my mind to discuss. And I was trying to, so I've been thinking about like, why is that? Actually, when Jonathan Pagio talked to Vickie that last time, he made a comment at the beginning about some of the language Vickie's bringing into this and how helpful it is, because a lot of the language that we in the church use, I think he said, it's basically ruined. And I sort of nodded it along to that. And I don't know, I don't know, in a sense, that seems like a little bit too strong of language, because we use that language all the time at church and churches are, you know, it's not like, it's not like Christendom is not still a big force. But so I don't know if the language is ruined, per se, but that's how I felt. So that I couldn't utter the words certain certain words, because I didn't have a high enough resolution understanding of what we're talking about. And I felt a bit funny, maybe maybe this is me sort of like, projecting back, feeling a little bit funny about uttering this language, that I didn't know what I was saying. Even if I thought it was the case. I just didn't feel comfortable saying a bunch of things that I didn't, I, you know, if like David Fuller said, when he was talking to Andrea there, that was a good video. I hadn't encountered that before you did the commentary over it. When he when he was actually talking about talking to people in your church, and he and he would take that step further. Okay, what do you mean by that? Yeah. Oh, and the church people are like, yeah, no, when we use this language, that, you know, it's kind of like, shaking hands with someone of a different culture, like, well, wait, wait, how do we even though, well, why do we do this thing that we I mean, that's exactly how it is. Yeah, yeah. And I think that there's the more I've thought about it, like, it that that phenomena has caused me, given me some pause or some some sort of almost before I think, hesitation about using some of that language. But at the same time, I want to be maybe charitable in that, using an other verbiage that Peterson introduced, like the low resolution, high resolution stuff, like this stuff's complicated. And it turns out it's the most complicated thing that there is. And and it's just one complicated thing amongst a whole sea of complexion in the world. So an individual can't, you can't expect somebody to have this deep theological understanding of all of these different things from just, you know, Jim Smith down the road, necessarily. So so and I suppose that's part of what's so great about Christianity is how scalable it is across from the highest of intelligence levels and the most inquisitive minds to the, you know, guy with Down Syndrome that he just believes in Jesus. And we just so so I suppose it's, even though it's caused me some some internal struggles, it's a it's a for sure, I think probably a good thing. And not necessarily a critique to levied Christians that oh, they don't know what they're talking about. Because this stuff's complicated, then. Well, at least they have a language and know that's a really good point, because that language does scale. And that scalability is I mean, that is exactly when I when I look at people trying to do well, this is it and they have this stuff which here is we Christianities work through so many things that yeah, there's problems with it. But there's also huge capacities within it. Yeah, and that was one thing that you've you've hit on a bunch of times is just the the institutional knowledge or knowledge isn't necessarily the right word, but 2000 years of sitting at the on the forefront of 2000 years of Christianity behind us that there's where the benefactors of all these things that have been thought through and and all sometimes all that gets to me the individual is this low resolution notion of just love your neighbor or just do whatever the thing is. But there's there's so much more behind that. And just because I don't necessarily know the full history of thought that got to this point and all I can say is well, just have faith and you know, things will, you know, it'll work out in the way God intends or whatever. And that can sound kind of hollow necessarily, particularly and I tend to be very a little bit on the skeptical side, I sometimes almost hear things the way the antithiest is hearing them, which also gives me hesitation on using certain language because it's the same language that I don't know. It's I just Yeah, I've struggled to to embody some of the traditional language. But I guess that's where guys like Peterson have been so helpful in coming in. And I guess coming up from the bottom in sort of backfilling sort of some some of this stuff. So in some sense, that's that's been really helpful for me. In terms of and just trying to figure out, you know, well, now we've got this little baby girl and now the question is, okay, how am I going to raise this, this little girl? How am I going to help give her the tools to think properly and to be a filter as things are coming in and then and of course, something you know, high level in some sense, but and and you're starting with a baby. Yeah, so right away. And and then what you'll realize in a few years is that she's been learning the whole time, whether you've been intentional or not. And that's a good thing. And then there's some other things she's learned from you and your wife that are not so good. And then you'll learn that some of those things maybe aren't even learned but somehow passed in on in and it's it's a it's the whole thing is just an amazing, miraculous thing that happens. And yeah, chanting and frustrating and just so what congratulations to you for for for endeavoring on that journey. Well, thank you. It's a it's a privilege. It's definitely a responsibility. But it's really fun to I don't know, we just every parent, I guess, thinks that but we just think this little girl is specialist little thing there ever was so it isn't. And isn't it great that your daughter is is in a house where that is the case because I'll tell you one of the things that, you know, came from this is I get emails from obviously so many more people but you get emails from people who have been raised in situations where what you just said about your daughter is definitely not the case. And my, you know, and you begin to have an appreciation for just how fortunate your little girl is even though lots of bad things will happen. I mean, and you as parents at some point will look back and say, Oh, did we mess up in some of these areas? You will? Sure. Well, and in some sense, I'm like, I'm trying to be pragmatic about this stuff. And that's maybe a way of reason. Peterson has I've been drawn to him is he's very pragmatic in different things. And I'm sort of entering into this with the understanding that I'm not going to do everything, right? We are going to make mistakes. And to some extent, that's okay. It's just how it is. But we're just sort of doing the best job we can and being very conscious. Like you said, that it's not the things that we it's not just the things we say she's learning from us constantly, right? So the way when I come home and I come and give my wife a hug and a kiss, and this little 11 month old girl is seeing that that's having an impact. You know, all of these things. I remember my mom asked me a question a few months ago, she said, Hey, do you remember when we were kids and I did, you know, such and such thing? And I said, No, I don't have any memory of that. But that doesn't mean that just because I don't remember it right now as a 35 year old, that doesn't mean that it was a way said like, those things even if just in my little conscious mind, I can't remember it doesn't mean that that didn't have dramatic impacts on the person that I became and becoming right. So so that that's definitely something that we're we're sort of keeping in mind. Yeah, so just and yeah, just Peterson's notion of sort of aiming for the highest good and the idea that everything we do does matter and does have an impact. That those things are very, very I don't know, some people can find that stressful, but I find it very fulfilling. I mean, speaking of this meaning crisis discussion that that we're sort of having it. That's very impactful that everything that I do today can can have lasting impact the way that I treat this little brother way I treat the way I you know, make sure I'm getting exercise so that you know, I physically am healthy and my mind is healthy and maybe little things that I would get irritated about maybe I don't get so irritated, you know, all these different things like, it's all it's all just teeny little like incremental changes. But but it all has has value, ultimately, which is something that is helpful and motivating from a day to day perspective to right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's any number of sorry, there's any number of directions we go I've got a little list of notes in front of me here. And we're definitely not going to get to all of them. One thing, one thing maybe, I don't know if to get your thoughts on it is good is a good way to phrase it or not. But I in my mind for the last quite some time, I've sort of been having a dialogue with Dallas Willard, Jordan Peterson and NT right, sort of in conversation or not even in conversation. But those those three have that would be a fun conversation. Yeah. Yeah, that would be an interesting conversation. So I see that they all three of them sort of overlapping, at least for me, at least in in where I've been over the last while. So so NT, right? I mean, getting back to my questioning everything, you know, what do we mean by this resurrection stuff? How's that pop in all this stuff? I have his his resurrection to the Son of God book, but golly, that's not the easiest book to get through. And I ain't the best. I'm more of an audible guy. And there's no audio book. There's no audio, but every book should have an audio book. That's my belief. Totally, totally. So so but NT, you know, I've obviously listened to a lot of his stuff on through unbelievable and asking to write and I caught most of his Gifford lectures last year and whatnot. And so anyway, so him giving some foundation to to the notion of resurrection and that that's, you know, a reasonable thing to think about. But then more specifically, you know, what does it mean to be a Christian in my head growing up? Well, you know, you believe in Jesus. And when you die, you go to heaven, right? You go to heaven. And so depth. So NT Wright was has been very helpful for me in getting getting to low resolution, high resolution. That's fine. It's fine. They die and go to heaven. But that almost gets detached and becomes the thing you die. And then you go up to heaven. Right, right. And very much God to very much, you know, this sort of ethereal in the cloud, you know, whatever. And so and that's very much the sense that I had. So him him coming in and saying, No, no, no, you know, nothing that's that anyone in the church would disagree with, but just saying, you know, resurrection bodies, you know, renewal of heaven and earth, you know, this whole thing. That is what we mean by go die and go to heaven. So that so that was just something I, in some sense, didn't really hadn't really heard put so clearly because I just sort of, you know, you grew up in the church in heaven and you know, it's even in the worship songs, all this stuff, just sort of take it in, right? Yep. Yep. And the low resolution notion becomes the totality of how the thing what the thing is. So anyway, so him and then you've got Dallas Willard, I've only read The Divine Conspiracy. And by read, I mean, listen. Oh, that's right. That one is an audiobook. It is. Yeah. I read it years ago. I read it when it first came out. And I and it just boy that but just grabbed me. Yeah, and I'm going to be preaching, I'm gonna be preaching in the I'm gonna be preaching through the Sermon on the Mount soon. And at least parts of it. And that's I remember tapping in him. Yeah, just kind of grabbed me. Yeah. So so getting so thinking about pragmatics and the importance of how how we are to act, maybe upping the resolution from the WWJD kind of, you know, just language that we might use like him coming in and saying, talking about and I'm probably in a butcher. It's been a while since I've read the book, but him him just sort of talking about sort of this, this, the things that we do kind of having an impact in the bringing forth the kingdom and and I should probably reviewed it so I could kind of talk a little bit more about it. But so I had NT right in my ear talking about the renewal of heaven and earth and the resurrection bodies and then you've got Dallas Willard coming in saying, things that we do can have lasting impact and you know, all of this sort of stuff him kind of using Christian language and now you've got Jordan Peterson over here. We're here talking about you know, all this standard stuff, the things that we do have value that the equilibrated state the importance of, you know, the things that, you know, what's in my best interest is in my best interest today, but tomorrow, the next day in the week after and it also needs to scale to my wife and our daughter and people around all of that stuff. Yeah, but he's, he but he has struggles to ground it in something that we would, yes, consider bedrock, right? But then those two guys are coming in. And so I just felt, for me that putting those three guys together was really helpful. In a kind of boots on the ground way of providing some some meaning and kind of direction in some sense of how I but we as believers, ought act in a little bit more concrete way. Maybe. Sorry, I'm doing a lot of No, that's good. That's good. And I like the three because I mean, NT Wright is a historian, New Testament scholar, you know, obviously has his own sort of take and if you read his books, you know, he's a guy writes so many books. Yeah. But if like, I remember when was it simply Christian? I mean, I remember when that came out, that was supposed to be sort of his attempt at mere Christianity, simply Christian. But as a, I appreciate Wright for really for the historical stuff. That's, that's a, you know, I've got his I've got so many of his books, but and I use his, I've got his whole, he's got commentaries on like the whole New Testament. And they're very, they're almost devotionals. And so often, if I'm preparing a sermon, I'll just pull up his commentary and read through because it's just like a devotional in a sense. And so you can get a sense of, of, of Wright's, of kind of his, the feel of his faith from the inside. And that's not really for me, where I really kind of sink with Wright. Dallas Willard, you know, now that I'm a little bit more familiar with Husserl and, you know, where he comes at things philosophically, Dallas Willard just comes at Christianity from a layman's point of view in a very fresh, rigorous, applicable way to make Christianity very tangible in one's real life. And that's sort of Willard's strength. And then of course, Peterson, like you say, I mean, you, you're going to get lots of practical wisdom. And I use wisdom sort of in the Old Testament general revelation stuff from Peterson, you know, in your room, you know, he's the, he's the, he's the uncle who, who is, who is telling the nephew, you know, it's very book of Proverbs ish. And that's really Peterson. And so there are fun, three people to get together early on, right after I'd done my conversation with, with Peterson, I was immediately contacted by a friend of NT Wright's, and then put in contact with NT Wright, and asked him, you know, would you like to talk to Jordan? He said, I'd love to talk to Jordan. So then I contacted Jordan said, Jordan, would you like to talk to Tom Wright? I'd love to talk to Tom Wright. And my, my, I wanted both of them to read each other's books first, because I've watched enough conversations on YouTube to know that. That's right, two people come into a That was sort of Alastair McGrath and Brett Weinstein, neither of them knew each other very well. So and then then this kind of a missed opportunity. But, you know, later, NT Wright was a little frustrated, because it's like, you know, I, at that point, Jordan Peterson was riding his status rocket. So the conversation never happened. My, my hope and prayer is that Jordan will, at some point be able to sort of reenter the public conversation. My hope is that he's not too distracted with all of the more political culture or stuff. And I would love to see he and Tom Wright have a conversation. So yeah, I really love to have Dallas Willard in that mix. But of course, that's the way Dallas Willard has gone to glory. So yeah, I'll have to be a little Peter creeped, you know, book that together in conversation. Totally, totally. I wanted to run well, there's, I wanted to talk a little bit about Providence, but probably more about logos. So actually, at church, we're doing I mean, actually, a good friend of mine, we are table leaders that are men's Bible study at church. And we're going through the Gospel of John last semester and this semester. So we just started last week, John 13, I guess, which then made me think, I should probably watch all your Sunday school stuff on on John, but then I went to the church page and thought, Oh, you're going through really slowly, which I like a lot. Really slowly. But also, it's like, Oh, no, there's that much content, I gotta go through too. And there's so much so many things. I've got I've probably got audio recordings of my Sunday school class back to 2011. We spent 75 weeks in the book of Revelation. I know, and that would kill any Sunday school class. But but these, these people in this bulletproof, they don't. That's amazing. Isaiah almost killed some of them. I bet I haven't. I very much taking an approach of there's nearly an infinite amount of things that for me to get to. And my job is not to do it all right now. So you know, Isaiah, trying to get a handle on Revelation, that stuff I haven't even started yet. And it's not even on my list at this point down there. I'm only 35. Hopefully, I got a lot of years ahead of me. I'm gonna get there at some point. But for now, I'm taking things one one piece at a time, starting, I guess, in the Gospels, I suppose. But so getting back to like, growing up in the church, and I knew you've got a similar background that way. You know, all of this stuff. Well, one thing, one thing that I think Jordan Peterson, and this whole sort of, you know, corner of the internet has done is for at least for me, it's felt like it's sort of like breathe life into a lot of, you know, this, this, the Christian thought that when you grow up in it, it just sort of is just always there. And it's just sort of almost a little bit flat. Does that make sense? Like, I don't know, Perfect sense. Yeah, you know, so, so he was really helpful to me in in in breathing some life into that, not just him, like I say, other people. But so for example, like, you know, what are you supposed to what's a classic Sunday School answer of what it is to be a Christian and believe in Jesus, love Jesus, trust, you know, act like Jesus, you know, all these different things. And again, you pull a David Fuller and say, Hey, what do you mean by that? And I don't know. I don't know what that means. I don't know, act like a dude from the first century that was in the Middle East, like, or love that. Okay, okay, I'm trying my hardest to love this dude from 2000 years ago that I don't really know. You know, and you're a 12 year old or a 20 year old or a 35 year old. I don't know how to do this necessarily. But in some senses, and in other senses, it just, I mean, possibly part of why I would consider myself a Calvinist too, is that even though I'm levying some of these questions and critiques, it seemed to just, I seem to just believe it. It seems there's something that's drawing from me that way. So, so anyway, I want to say that. But when, and I know other people have talked about it before, but and I don't mean to lean on Peterson too much. But when he started talking about logos, and you know, his dichotomy of chaos and order, and at least the way I'm poorly going to unpack his definition of logos is like this ability to, to create habitable order from chaotic potential, I'd say. And so then you get to, you know, the Gospel of John, and John one in the beginning was the logos, and the logos was with God and the logos was God. So okay. So now, I'm doing this Bible study at church, no one's mentioned logos once. And as we went through the first half of John, I'm seeing, I'm looking at it through this idea of this superordinate principle that is almost the emanation of all that is true. All that is true and right comes from the logos, God, Jesus, whatever language we want to use. And through that came all of being, I don't know what we'd say, came into being, let's say. And then like, I think you use the language in the past of that we are, oh, another thing that we all interjects just sort of gone along to is yeah, we're made in the image of God. Yep. Don't know what that, you know, again, there's all these things, and we're like, I don't know what that means. But that we're, I think he used the language of that we're sub creators, and that, you know, Peterson's verbiage of we have a spark of divinity. We, we, we have this ability to, to look at chaotic potential and convert it into habitable order, whether that be, you know, I converted our, our two by four exposed, two by four stud garage into a fully finished gym that, you know, so I walked into that space, and I saw the, the chaos that it was. And and through, I don't know, I saw what it could be, right. And so I think he used the example of, you know, if a dog comes running into the room and starts barking away, and then somebody comes in and said, you know, it's, it's chaos, what's going on? Somebody says, Oh, no, no, don't worry about it. That's just my dog is a little silly. He's not gonna do anything. It's all good. Speaking, I've used that that metaphor when talking about this with two people, because I thought that was really helpful. So anyway, so I'm sorry, I was unpacking logos a little bit. But so getting back to how me as a Christian ought act. Well, you know, follow Jesus. Well, okay, if you if you if you kind of tease out what that means a little bit more to Jesus, it is logos and and the origin of all truth and how things ought be, you know, all through at least the first half of the Gospel of John, he's saying I'm the way the truth and the light. Or, you know, there's all of these references that when I'm kind of thinking about this idea of logos, I'm seeing it everywhere. Yeah, you know, I'm the light of the world. Oh, so through following Jesus, then I can see things as they really are in all of these. But if you just say, well, just follow this dude from 2000 years ago, and you know, and nobody, nobody is necessarily explicitly saying that that's sort of what implicitly kind of low resolution, at least I as just one random person within evangelicalism, just sort of absorbed this low resolution notion of, well, you got to love this guy. And he did these things and which, by the way, if you think about the things he did, the resurrection and whatnot, they're kind of big asks and all these, just believe it all and just follow. I was would just be sitting there thinking, I don't know what to do with this. Like, on one hand, I'm kind of nodding along. And honestly, do have a sense that this is right. But also, in another sense, none of it makes any sense to me. And so so that was, it's for me been really helpful to think of Jesus not, not, not eliminate in my mind, the works of Jesus in the in first century Middle East, but overlaying that with this concept of logos, and what that looks like, and what that means for me has really sort of, again, breathe life into all of this stuff, and kind of set off, you know, light bulbs in my mind. So anyway, I kind of just wanted to throw that out there and see what you thought of it. Well, I think it's heresy. No, I think that's I think it's like you're doing exactly what you're supposed to be doing. Because, and you know, I loved, I loved David Fuller's honesty in terms of telling that story to Andrea, because it's exactly what it's like. And, and it's not just, you know, so David Fuller was raised a Methodist. And then you know, one way or another, he winds up in this crazy little church in Sacramento, California, watching this pastor, you know, do his stick. And but we all have those experiences. And there's so much sleepwalking through the church. No, we ought not to be sleepwalking through the church. And, you know, I know, you know, when I started to listen to John Verbeke stuff, I had exactly that experience that, okay, John's, you know, John's not a Christian in the way that you and I are Christians. He's coming at things from a very different perspective. But he's bringing tools and language that helped me to understand what's going on with different eyes. And Jordan Peterson did that too. And Dallas Willard did that. And NT Wright has done that. That's the process of learning. I mean, you're always taking mapped territory and unexplored territory and continuing to integrate or up the resolution. And that's that living function that you're doing is, is so vitally important for your continued growth. Because, you know, we, when I was in the Dominican Republic, the education, educational methodology there was, in to a certain degree, pre modern, it was rote memorization for the people. And given that context, that's not a bad thing. Because the Haitians, they could at any minute be grabbed, put on a truck, dumped at the Haitian border, you know, very little stability in life. And, you know, one of my missionary mentors said, we want to give the people stuff they can put in their head, because it doesn't matter what gets taken away from it. If it's between their ears, it's there. So, okay. But in the context we're in, especially in a context of rapid change, if you're actually going to be able to do the translating, let's say from this church language, and as all of the contextual things change, you're going to have to have a much deeper understanding of what's eliciting that church language, so that when the language keeps changing, you can say it in the new language. And that's a vital skill for the future of the church. And I mean, right away, when we started, you said, you know, heresy, that is always a heresy is an ever present danger in that process. But as you know, Sam, Sam, the biblical Unitarian, who read Alistair McGrath's book heresy and said, well, I don't know if you're reading the book, right, but you probably got a better take on it. That's probably true, because I read the book. And sometimes somewhat like, you know, we like, you know, I was telling Nancy today, lunch with Nancy and Freddie today, because it's their birthday, they both had birthdays, the birthdays are very close. So I took them both out to lunch. And that's right. Nancy's hit Freddie's mom, Nancy's Freddie's mom. Yeah. And I told Nancy, I said, you know, Nancy, hearing your sermon report is really helpful for me, because I'm up there preaching. And the sermon is one thing in my head, and it's coming out my mouth. But something's going in Nancy's ear and, you know, passing around in her head. And then the thing that comes out of her mouth, well, that gives me an indication of, you know, because as a preacher, I'm not only responsible for making sure I have, I'm theologically correct in terms of what I'm telling the church, but it's got to be in a way that actually penetrates and produces good fruit. Sure, sure. So that work that you're doing is, is the work of the church and a vital service to your church and to your small group. Because I mean, and hopefully, I mean, the reason that we do small groups in church is so that, you know, we can take stuff and whereas in the main worship service, your pastor is, you know, spreading something out there for all of you to see, well, in the small groups, it's supposed to all get, you know, chewed. And that chewing process means, oh, you know, some things, it's but you're grinding it up and you're putting in a little things and you're taking it apart and you're remitting it together. And that's a vitally important thing for the overall health of the church in a context where change is rapid. And yes, there will be heresy, but heresy and orthodoxy sort of co develop as we go through time, we've seen that in church history. And so we trust the Holy Spirit, that in this process, I mean, that's really what Protestantism is about in this process that canon will be helpful for continuing to help Christians figure out how to live. And that's the work of the church. And that's the work that you're doing. And, you know, I'm, I think it's helpful evangelistically. And but but even just for the ongoing evangelism that happens in each of us, that we do this work. And so listening to Jordan Peterson or John Vervecki or Dallas Willard or NT Wright, doing all of that is is the work we ought to be doing. That's my dad. Yeah, well, that's good to hear. That's helpful. I am. I remember when I again, I've always been a bit of a skeptic in some sense of Christianity from within in some sense. Yeah, you know, people with historically, oh, you know, God led me to go here. You know, I was just getting a sense that I should leave the house today and well, you know, whatever the thing I'm most I don't know what to do with that historically. But I in in some roundabout way, actually, Esther's quote that she that TS Eliot quote that she said to to what's that? What the hex is name on the NT Wright or on the unbelievable show the Oh, Murray, Douglas Murray about about searching and finding what you were searching for back at the beginning or whatever that was. Yeah, that kind of even though I butchered the quote just now that that spoke to me in some sense because I I think in part because of your God one like this, the teasing out the God one and God to stuff has been really helpful because when when I think probably during the biblical lecture series when Peterson was talking about, you know, where do thoughts come from? What popped into my head? I said, Well, that's not a very scientific answer. And it's it. Well, immediately now, you know, I'm thinking, I'm just trying to figure out how to put all this stuff together. We talked about the Holy Spirit and providence and and you know, when he said that on just popped into my head these thoughts that I think, yeah, what do we mean when we say the Holy Spirit was calling me to do this or leading me here? I just had a sense that you know, a friend of mine just donated a kidney last month. And he just always had a sense like that was something that he should do. He knew he had the blood type type O or whatever that's compatible with lots of people. And he just sort of had a sense that maybe that was a thing for him. And then somebody in this small group needed a kidney. And he said, I, I might be able to give you one. He just did it. And it's like, yeah, heck of a thing to do. And so I look at that now more and I, I have much more open posture, I suppose to consciousness and another thing we don't really talk about in the church. But what, again, what do we mean by the Holy Spirit was leading the Holy Spirit was leading him to do that? Okay, is maybe what we would say. And even as I say those things, I kind of cringe because it just sounds so Christian need to me, but I affirm it. I agree with it. But I was like, what do we mean by that? Well, I don't know. Just trying to. Now, because that dude donated kidney, that doesn't mean that I have to donate a kidney or that you know, because because one posture that can happen is, oh, look at all these things other people are doing, I should be doing maybe some of that. Or maybe I should be. And I guess one response is, well, yeah, maybe you should be. But in another sense, like you said, I like bringing it back to me, I do seem to have an interest or a frustration with some of the way we use language and trying to understand and dig up new ways of discussing things that make sense in our context. So and I don't know why I have those desires or that interest or those proclivities. However, we've got this Holy Spirit conversation on the side that well, and so now more than ever, I feel more of a sense of not understanding, I definitely don't understand it. But a sense of okay, I kind of have it have some sense of maybe what what we mean when we say some of these sorts of things. He just always had a sense that he should, you know, maybe he could donate something sometime and then a situation presented itself and said, Oh, there it is. Okay, I'll go that way. I have a sense I should go that way. And so I guess my point is I have a much more open posture towards the notion of providence and what we mean when we say that. And it's very much in in in part due to the God one stuff has been super helpful to me. bearded guy up in the clouds say, Oh, you should do that. And you should do that. There's no there's this things, you know, coming from the bottom. I think I showed talked about maybe in that verbatim interview, we talked about, you know, listen, if you, you know, you, you treat your wife poorly, and you you cheat on her, and you do all of these things, and then she leaves you and your family breaks down. That's, you know, that, you know, we could say that's, that's providential. That's, that's, there's a there's a ideal mode of being. And if you're not in line with that, things are going to happen as a result. And we can easily and I and I would be like, Yeah, but that's just because you treat your wetbed and you probably shouldn't do that. And that's why that happened just sort of, you know, explaining it all the way. But it's like, Yeah, you can't explain it, but it doesn't get underneath. Why? Why are why are things the way that they are? Yeah, why? You know, so I guess I'm just sort of talking, talking this stuff out. And that's cool. That's what you got. Well, that's what I do. That's what I do for hours and people listen to it. I mean, people always thank me and I should be thanking you people for listening and, and giving me feedback back because I see, especially the videos where I'm just talking to the computer or making commentary. I see that as enormously selfish because I have to talk this stuff out in order to figure it out. And it's all in the midst of a video that I think about something and learn it. Yeah, I never would have thought about it if I didn't do the video. So totally, totally. Yeah. So it no, I mean, it's, it's the I love your conversations with people, but your your dialogue videos are equally helpful. And yeah, this process of just like you say, think, like, talking is thinking, right? Yeah, talking is thinking. That's a Peterson thing. I mean, Peterson was saying that one of his lectures on some video I heard it was like, Yeah, that's really true. That's really true. And I also feel I also feel a little rude in terms of my videos, because like, you know, vervekian, Peugeot are having a good conversation. So shoot, I want to get in the middle of that conversation. So I make a video where I put my big nose in. And it's like, it's good. I wouldn't want you to stop. I wouldn't want you to stop. Yeah, well, I'm not about to stop. I just told the last guy, I mean, for every video I make, there's I have 10 in my head. And it's like, Oh, I can only imagine. Yeah. And it's probably I've already made too many videos. But I wouldn't say that. Well, I don't know. I don't know all the ones you don't post, I suppose. But Yeah, yeah. Well, actually, they don't get made because they just, you know, just one second, it's like, boy, I want to make a video with this and this and this. And I want to work on this idea. But I just don't have time to sit down and make that video. And it's like, okay, I look at my schedule. Okay, I've got a few hours here, I can make a video. So then I make a video. Or we are here, I can plan a video. And then that's how my work works. But I have to run. I don't have a lot of extra time tonight. Yeah, no worries, man. I really appreciate it. I um, yeah, I don't know. I've kind of already said what I got to say. And to some extent, I'm sure things could go on in different directions. But yeah, it's strange to after two years of watching on that TV screen behind me. It's strange to have you sitting here on my phone dialoguing back and forth. Honey, the TV is talking back. Yeah. Honey, let's go talk to the doctor. I can't say my wife has been all that interested in the hours of dialogue that she hears in the background. But that's not an uncommon thing. I remember when we first started our meetup. And one of the things was, yeah, I listened to all this Jordan Peterson. And I wanted to talk to my wife about it. My wife's like, I don't want to talk about any of this stuff. I mean, find someone else to talk about. I don't know. I'm sick of hearing Jordan Peterson. Find somebody else. So they all came to the meetup. Yeah, well, try and find conversation partners for this stuff. You just got to listen to 100 hours of Peterson and it doesn't hurt if you take an in-for-vacay and you know, here's Jonathan Peugeot, figure that stuff out. It's not easy to find conversation partners necessarily. I will say as just before we go, I'm really looking forward to you coming to Vancouver in March. I will definitely be there. That'll be really cool. Well, good. I'm looking forward to it too. And I know already that this trip will in some ways be frustrating because I get to meet you and what I'd love to do is just sit down and do another hour with you. But there's going to be five or 10 of you in the room. It's going to be like, oh, so. And my goal, I mean, I've said this, I've said this before, but the most gratifying, lately, I haven't spent a lot of time on the Discord server. I usually hop on, I do some scrolling and some of the different forums and I look at some of the conversations every now and then I'll drop in. But there's a lot going on in that server. Yeah, there is. But it's gratifying to see the conversations. And even though Peterson has sort of been, you know, absent for the last six or seven months, new meetups keep starting. And that to me is so amazing, because, you know, this isn't just sort of being pushed by Peterson, this is organically coming up and people saying, you know, we need to have conversation, we need to be in relationship, we need to establish community and we need to meet together with a degree of regularity. What are we going to talk about? We don't know. But we know when we get together that we will find things to talk about and we will build community together. And that's happening. And for me, that's the most gratifying thing. But you've, you know, and as many people have told me, you know, you've already got a church, you've already got a community, you already have a small group, now you have these weird people from the internet talking in your ear, and maybe the people around the table in your church aren't there. But there's enough of a connection which, you know, so in many ways, you know, you've already, you're already well situated and well blessed. But yeah, yeah, that's for sure. That's for sure. You tend to see the things that you see the holes in your game more than you see all the blessings and all the things that are working really, really well. But yeah, so definitely the case. So I've got this recorded, I can send this to you to proof it first or? You can post it if you want to. Okay. Yeah, I mean, like I said, I found the conversations you've had with so many people so valuable and hearing these different perspectives. And, you know, like I all I knew about, you know, the Catholics and the Eastern Orthodox from my little evangelical silo was they're all wrong. And what we're doing is what's right. Different voices is like, Oh, okay, I see that perspective. Oh, that you know, it's just been really helpful. So if anyone would find this helpful, then by all means post. All right. Well, thank you, Jesse. This has been a pleasure. And I look forward to shaking your hand. You got me to over. Yeah, sounds good. Thanks a lot. I appreciate it. Take care. Bye bye. Good night.