https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=mK3v3VO3idA

 Hi, this is Paul. I want to do a video on what I'm sort of calling Dread Christian Nationalism, something akin to the Dread Pirate Roberts in The Princess Bride. In the wake of January 6, a lot of Christians from evangelical moderates to what's left of the main line have been talking a lot about the rise of Christian nationalism as if this is a new thing. I think this is exactly the opposite way of seeing it. I think it is the recession of Christian nationalism, at least in the forms that we are familiar with identifying that is actually the big news of the last 50 or 75 years, not the other way around. And the strangeness of the Christian response to this is not so much the surprise that it's here, but rather the revisionist history where usually an attempt to sort of be the cultural defense attorney for Jesus and the church, we try to make it look better in the past. Now, see, when I talk this way people don't quite know what to do because they assume I should be holding up one side or another and I think we're probably better off just trying to be as honest as we can about what Christianity looked like in past eras of American history and what it looks like now. Part of this difficulty has a lot to do with Protestantism at its heart. Why is a Protestant minister such a critic of Protestantism? Deep within Protestantism is very much a desire to go back to the sources, to go back to the original. Someone just sent me a video of the guy's name, Vin Armani, talking about Peterson and Joseph Campbell and psychedelics on a podcast. It was a very interesting conversation. It might show up in one of my videos. But the move again for him was, well, we have to get back to a more experiential Christianity, which would mean psilocybin or awoska, and make Christianity purely experiential again because in a way once you have to read about it in a book, well then it's sort of second order. That's a really interesting move because in terms of theology, it in some ways mirrors neo-orthodoxy and Karl Barth. There's a lot of these strange similarities that pop up. Part of this has to do with Protestantism because if the heart of the Orthodox and the Roman Catholic is continuity, apostolic succession, we don't change because we have it. The heart of Protestantism is we always have to get back to it because we're always losing it. But the it we're getting back to is never divorced from the now. And that's the peculiar thing about Protestantism. Now, in defense of Protestantism, it's at least possible that Protestants can perhaps be upfront about our contemporary cultural bondages and in our attempts to get back, whereas for traditions that really try to preserve something in the past, so many other changes just sneak in unaware and we're not quite sure whether to own up to them or what to do with them. So I want to address some of that with respect to Christian nationalism as we call it because I'd like us to, you know, I think there's a valuable conversation to be had in terms of what kind of nation the United States is. Is it a Christian nation? Well, was it sort of a Christian nation in the way the West is Christian a la Tom Holland's dominion? Or is it a Christian nation in sort of a direct way that, let's say, certain types of conservative Christian activists want it to be a Christian nation? I'd say Christian nationalism has always been a big part of the U.S. and I'll assert that even the side that is looking at Trump supporting flag waving, cross bearing, praying, people who very straightforwardly identify as Christians in the Washington Mall on January 6, who either are observing bystanders or actual participants in the storming of the Capitol, that there are other kinds of Christian nationalists, too. And I'm not sure that Joe Biden is in any way less a Christian nationalist than Donald Trump. It's just that a lot of the definitions of Christian change. And one could very easily argue Joe Biden is a better Christian than Donald Trump. Joe Biden goes to church. Joe Biden is a Roman Catholic. And I had that conversation with with with Kale Zeldin and and and Brett Sockel. But the question is, what is Christianity? And that's the you know, to me, that's where Tom Holland's work, and in some ways, Jordan Peterson's work really comes to the center because what we see is that, and I'm going to point out in this video, a bunch of different ages of Christians and types of Christians, each of which quite understandably relates their brand and version of Christianity to the nation and how that plays out. Now, this is a long story, far longer than even any of my lengthy videos could imagine. And so part of tracking this, we're going to need a little bit of we're going to need a little bit of orientation. And so I'm going to use George Marsden and George Marsden's work. George Marsden was a professor of history at Calvin College. I was able to have the privilege of having him for one class. He went on to teach at a variety of other religious institutions and has been one of the, I think, most important historians charting the strange tale of what we mean by this word evangelical. And perhaps a place to start with this story is George Marsden's really amazing biography of Jonathan Edwards. To get into this point, it's difficult to know whether we should regard Edwards as an American, although he was born on this continent, or as British, because that would very much be how he would see himself. He is arguably one of the most important American theologians and early American philosophers, and his sermon, Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God, is still required reading in many high schools and colleges. And Edwards is a really important place to start, partly because of what the world looked like when he was there. 18th century Britons viewed their world as monarchical and controlled by hierarchies of personal relationships. On both these counts, their assumptions were almost opposite of those of most Westerners today, who tend to think of society as in principle egalitarian and in fact controlled by impersonal forces. 18th century British American society depended on patriarchy. One's most significant relationships were likely to be vertical rather than horizontal. Fathers had authority over families and households, the cornerstones of good order. Women, children, hired servants, indentured servants, and African slaves were all dependent upon persons directly above them. Society was conceived of as an extended household. In this arrangement, paternalism was a virtue, not a term of opprobrium. Although British people spoke much of liberty, few had personal freedom in the modern sense. Gentlemen ruled largely through a hierarchical system of patronage extending from the king down. Good order, especially for the lower ranks of society, was enforced by strict surveillance and stern punishments. Ordinary life under any circumstance was often cruel, plagued by epidemics, unrelieved pain, and constant uncertainties about life itself. Many essential tasks were painfully difficult and time consuming. Personal dependency was one way to deal with a harsh and insecure world. Adding to the distresses and periodic terror in Western New England was its location on the frontier of British settlements in an era of frequent warfare. In fact, there's a description of a raid on the home of a grandparent of Jonathan Edwards here. Edwards lived at the vortex of conflict among three civilizations, the British Protestant, the French Catholic, and the Indian. Each was fiercely struggling to control North America. We now know how those contests turned out, but the outcome was not apparent to Edwards' generation. This international context was enormously important to Edwards. He spent vast amounts of time concerned with both Roman Catholicism and the Indians and their respective and very different places in God's plan. Edwards framed his fundamental theological concerns and especially his view of history in the context of his perception of world wars, which he viewed as intimately linked to the prospects of the gospel. Now, Edwards here wouldn't consider himself an American nationalist. He was a British nationalist, but he very much tied his imagination of the future to the prospects of his particular subgroup within English history and their eventual dominance. That was in some ways where his hope was found. Was he in that sense a Christian nationalist? I would have to argue absolutely, but in some different ways. To make sense of Edwards' life, one must take seriously his religious outlook on his own terms. That might be said of any figure with strongly held views, but the point needs to be underscored regarding Edwards for several reasons. Because Edwards is associated with a number of living Christian traditions, current opinions about him are likely to be shaped by our reaction to these religious movements. Edwards was loyal to the theology inherited from the 17th century Puritans and their continental Reformed or Calvinist counterparts, and he was pivotal in the emergence of international evangelicalism in the 18th century. Puritans and Calvinists have always elicited strong reactions regarding their role in American history. Evangelicalism now comes in so many energetic varieties that it is difficult to view one of its progenitors without looking through the lens of later popularizations. Edwards anticipated some traits of later evangelicals, but the fact that he was a Calvinist thinker, that he was rigorously intellectual, and that he was working in an 18th century context makes him very different from his evangelical heirs. Our challenge is to try to step into his world and understand it in terms that he himself would recognize, and I think that goal of Marsden's is critical. The central principle in Edwards' thought, true to his Calvinist heritage, was the sovereignty of God. The triune eternally loving God, as revealed in Scripture, created and ruled everything in the universe. Most simply put, the sovereignty of God meant that if there was a question as to whether God or human beings should be given credit for anything good, particularly in matters of salvation, and of course that was very much framed how they framed it, the benefit of doubt should always go to God. Edwards avoided allowing God's rule to be thought of as a distant abstraction, as it could become, and a little bit later via the deists you're going to see some of that movement. Rather, he emphasized that God's very purpose in creation was a great work of redemption in Christ. Everything in the universe pointed ultimately to the loving character of the triune God. If the central principle of Edwards' thought was the sovereignty of God, the central practical motive of his life and work was his conviction that nothing was more momentous personally than one's eternal relationship with God. That, I think, even with today's assumed popular definition of evangelical, that would continue to hold as true. Many Christians affirm this proposition, yet most have not followed its implications for personal relationships with utter seriousness. Most who have taken it seriously have been activists rather than thinkers. Edwards was both. He built his life around disciplines designed constantly to renew that eternal perspective. In his sermons and writings, he turned his immense intellectual powers to rigorously following out the implications of God's sovereignty for understanding humans' eternal destinies as defined by his biblicist and Calvinistic heritage. If there is an emphasis that appears difficult or harsh or overstated in Edwards, often the reader can better appreciate his perspective by asking the question, how would this issue look if it really were the case that bliss or punishment for literal eternity was at stake? Presenting Edwards' life in terms that he would recognize and a wide variety of readers can understand may be a sufficient end in itself. If we can enter imaginatively into another time and place and into the experiences of people different from ourselves, we have achieved one of the goals of literature. For that reason, I have tried to tell the story of Edwards and his family with relatively few interpretive intrusions. I hope I have done this in a way that is, as much as possible, objective in the sense of fair-minded and true nevertheless. Nonetheless, we all have our points of views. This is where Marsden really shines. As one astute historian has recently reminded us, objectivity is not neutrality. Even the fairest observers have biases and blind spots. They have, and they ought to have, interests. The best way to deal with these universal phenomenon is to acknowledge one's point of view rather than posing as a neutral observer. That way, readers can take an author's viewpoint into account, discount it if they wish, and learn from it to the extent they can. At the same time, authors who are self-conscious about their point of view can use such self-knowledge to limit unintended or unfail warping of the evidence to fit their perspectives. I jump ahead a little bit here. The largest theme concerns a question that has been near the center of American experience, but one that is not well integrated into our histories. How does a religion that claims universal and exclusive truth fit into a pluralist environment? In many ways, this is exactly the question that is at heart in our current anxiety over dread Christian nationalism. What is the truth? If you follow rebel wisdom and many of the other spaces that we're looking at, this is the question of sense-making. How can we make sense of a world that seems to be pulled in all sorts of different directions? This, of course, is not at all uniquely American issue. Arguably, it was also the central question for British culture in the first half of the 18th century. Much of the enlightenment thought of that time was a direct reaction to the conflicting absolutist claims of the preceding era of deadly religious wars. In other words, go all the way back to my earlier videos, a big piece of the enlightenment is trying to see can we get a handle on confessionalisms that are tearing us apart? Can we find a firm footing someplace outside of at least the ancient preoccupation with the text? Maybe we can find it in reason. Maybe we can find it in nature and therefore perhaps stop killing each other over conflicting interpretations of the Bible, which the Protestant Reformation obviously unleashed into into Northwestern Europe. The most explosive issue in British politics was still whether the monarchy would remain Anglican or revert to Roman Catholicism as it had been as recently as 1688 under James II. If Anglican, how should the nation treat Protestant dissidents whose Puritan forebears had fought a holy war against the Anglican monarch in the 1640s, prospered under Cromwell's dictatorial commonwealth in the 1650s, and been harshly repressed in the restoration of Charles II in the 1660s? In the early 1700s, all was hardly forgotten or in many cases forgiven. English dissenters such as Congregationalists and Presbyterians enjoyed toleration but were excluded from public office and political office and the universities, which would give you a sense of why in such great numbers they came to America. And if you read a book like 1493, America was a dying field. People died of starvation, Indian attack, and whenever England went to war with France, well that spilled over into the American continent as well. In Scotland, joined with England to form the United Kingdom in 1707, the established church was Presbyterian. In this more pluralistic environment, many of the leading champions of a more liberal rational Christianity were the heirs to militant Calvinists of the previous era. And so now we see the continued rise of this liberal rational Christianity which is developing in the UK and which will come over to the Americas, and we're going to see that alongside of the heirs of the Puritan tradition, as many of them sort of get swept up into that as well when we take a look at the next book we'll be looking at. And words came of age at a time and place that would give him an acute sense of juxtaposition of old and new outlooks in this revolution taking place in British culture. The son of a strict Calvinist pastor in the river town of East Windsor, Connecticut, Edwards grew up in a world where many of the ways of the 17th century New England Puritans were preserved pretty much intact. 17th century Puritanism in turn was in many respects closer to the world of medieval Christendom than it was that of even 19th century America. Now that's really important to think about, but medieval Christendom protestantly, okay, because generally speaking we think of medieval Christendom, we think of Roman Catholicism, but what these groups had done moving to America is establish their own kingdom of God there in the new land, and they intended and expected that their successful kingdoms would inherit the earth. They were in many ways Christian nationalists, very much at war with trying to convert the Indians and trying to beat the French and really trying to convert the Indians better than the French were, because the Jesuits were there. The French in some ways had a little bit of an advantage because the French were sort of trapping and doing some of those things. They didn't come over in the same numbers that the English did, and so they weren't in such competition with the Indians for land and for all of those issues, and again that whole history is just enormously complex. Puritanism was part of an international Calvinist movement to reform Christendom, and so coming over to America, in a sense you had a blank slate, well it wasn't exactly blank, well the, of course we know that now that the, again read a book like 1493, that the pandemics went through, the Native Americans had no natural immunity to these things, lands, you know populations went down, I mean there's all sorts of that, that story that actually just in the last 20-30 years we know better than we knew even just a number of decades ago, all of that is happening. So Puritanism was part of an international Calvinist movement to reform Christendom, not to destroy it. Its goal had been to establish one pure church supported by each Christian state. It's important to remember that when the United States rebelled against Britain and rebelled against the monarchy, while the, eventually once they got around to the constitution that we now have today, the federal government was secular, the word God does not appear in the constitution. The God that appears in the Declaration of Independence is a deist God, Allah, Locke, and Thomas Jefferson, but Massachusetts will continue to have a state church because they are a state, and the United States are United States, and even today, you know, Texas just took off their masks, California still has them, some of that still remains. A precocious teenage intellectual who immersed himself in the literature of the emerging British enlightenment, the world of Locke and Newton and of Addison and Steele, Edwards was confronted with how hopelessly quaint, dated, and even laughable the province, the provincial world of New Windsor would look to British sophisticates. Yet the New Englanders, unlike most provincials, were a product of an intellectual tradition that until recently had been as formidable as any in the world and was, as notably represented, for instance by Edwards' family, acquaintances Cotton Mather, still making heroic efforts to keep in touch. Now, if you read Neil Postman's Amusing Ourselves to Death, you get a sense of that because Neil Postman goes too great lengths to talk about the same geographic period and the literacy rates that were better than just about any place else in the world a bit later after this. Boys and girls of Puritans were giving really good education, often education at home, and many of the best universities, Harvard, Yale, were founded by these people. They felt themselves a little bit far away from the center of the world, which was England, but what they lacked in geography they made up for in effort. Jonathan, after an early intellectual and spiritual crisis, emerged intensely committed to demonstrating how his heritage was not only viable in the world, but also in the world of the New Englanders. He was also a great pioneer in the world of the New Englanders. He was both a viable but the answer to all the questions posed by the new world of his day. Those answers were not only intellectual but also practical, built around awakenings. They were woke. That was, awakenings was the sense of my eyes can see. You know, my eyes were opened. I turned and followed thee. Awakening was the language. And so this was 17th century, 18th century Calvinist woke. And missions as the engine through which the triune God would eventually bring the modern world to his love in Christ. Edward's life presents a particularly dramatic and influential instance of a perennial American story. Countless Americans in conservative religious traditions have confronted the troubling issues of how their exclusive faith should relate to a pluralistic modern American environment. That would be me too. That tension has been felt especially among people in ethno religious communities like Dutch Calvinists in modern America, of which the English Puritans were one of the first instances who brought with them old world ideals concerning the one true religion. Much of the history of religion in America has been written to emphasize the triumph of pluralism, perhaps rightly so. That was meant, however, that those who have never conceded the premise that all or most religions or even most Christian denominations are more or less equal have not been taken seriously in our histories as they might. In other words, victors are writing history. Oh my, who are the victors writing history in American culture today? That solvent, I talked about it in the question and answer today, that solvent burns through a lot. Even today there are vast numbers of Americans who, although committed to live at peace with other religious groups, which is itself an accommodation that really comes about during roughly this period of time, religious tolerance is a relatively new idea. You know, read Roger Williams, someone commented on Twitter about, you know, don't follow this channel if you're not looking to buy books. I don't know where my Amazon endorsement is. Even today there are vast numbers of Americans who, although committed to live at peace with other religious groups, believe it is a matter of eternal life or death to convert members of those groups to their own faith. Like it or not, such evangelistic religion has been and continues to be a major part of the experience of many ordinary Americans. Which group of people are we talking about now? Well, a lot of those people in evangelical churches, evangelical churches that, yeah, a lot of white churches, fair number of black churches too. And in a lot of these discussions, I find people aren't aware of black evangelicals and what they see as central or Hispanic evangelicals. I mean, what Marsden is talking about is very much not only something that has to do with, oh, a lot of white Christians, especially in the American South and in the American West and in the American North, but black Christians and Hispanic Christians and guess what? People coming from Korea, people coming from India, people coming from Africa, all over the world. This is a lot more than us. The dynamics of such religious experience needs to be understood if one is to understand large tracks of American culture. Indeed, the tensions between religious exclusivism and pluralism are among the leading unresolved issues shaping the 21st century. Bingo. All right, here's another book by David L. Holmes, Faiths of Our Founding Fathers. Walks through a lot of this. The Founding Fathers in deism, his assertion is that many of the framers of the constitution were deists and certainly the writers of the Declaration of Independence, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, James Monroe, John Adams, George Washington, Ben Franklin. Not all were deists, some were more evangelical, but this is the mixture of people in America. And these founders of the new nation very much believed that what they were doing would spread around the world. Now, America at this point, the United States was a very weak nation and it had only with the help of France basically managed to gain their independence. And they could very well have lost it in the War of 1812 if the British had wanted to press the point. And even as late as the Civil War, when Lincoln starts roughing up, because basically southern, the power, the economic power of the south was in the cotton, which would be shipped out to England. Lincoln wants to cut off their money supply during the Civil War. And so almost had to run in with the English and America would have lost that war. America doesn't really become a major power until the 20th century. And so, but yet the ideas of America, its experimentation with all of these ideas. So first you have the New England Puritans and their Calvinism, and then you have sort of this more liberal Christianity that starts to arise in Europe and comes over to America. And you see it in the New England Transcendentalists, and you see it in the deists in the nation. You see it in Ben Franklin and George Washington. And Washington, he's an interesting case. I talked about Washington. Again, you can read about all of this in the book. You see it in Jefferson. So America is this strange mixture of a religious fervor, but all of them would imagine and rightfully so that their vision comes from Christianity. And that, well, basically they are on the cutting edge of the world. And in many ways they were right because these ideas, which again, you have to keep track of Tom Holland through this thing and his book, Dominion, these ideas are coming out of Christian Europe and, and they're moving through the world. And they would move through the world to the point that, you know, with the possi- with the exception of let's say communism and resurgent Islamism, for the most part, the American template that was forged at the founding of the United States won the war of ideas. But we're moving into a different period and we'll have to get there too. Now here's a fun book, Midnight R- Midnight Rising, John Brown and the Raid that Sparked the Civil War. Who was John Brown? Well, John Brown in many ways was the radical violent to the South, a terrorist fringe of abolitionism. The, the family descendants that would come from Jonathan Edwards would, would the Beechers, Madeleine Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom's Cabin, these would have a profound effect on what to do with the constant question of American slavery. And if you want to read about a true believer who would not hesitate to shed blood, read John Brown. Was John Brown a Christian nationalist? Yeah, it's bringing in the kingdom of God. Listen to the Battle Hymn of the Republic, read the lyrics. They're bringing in the kingdom of God. This is an evangelical Christian nationalism that stirs to keep the union together and fight the South and win. And this sort of Northern evangelicalism is in fact, one might argue, the dominant religion that carries the day. But you still have New England transcendentalists and increasingly you've got Roman Catholics that are now coming to the United States in the 1830s. There's a lot going on, but was John Brown a Christian nationalist? I would have to say so. Another good resource is American Religious History by Patrick Allitt in the Great Courses series. And he goes into, well, the Great Awakenings, Religious and Revolution, the Second Great Awakening, the Oneida Community and Mormons, the Burnt Over District, the Rise of Catholicism, African American religions. It's really a wonderful, it's really a wonderful great course. But America is a very live religious environment, partly because it's sort of the functions as the off gassing of European religious tensions. And if in fact, a certain degree of religiosity has biological connections, well, these are the people that are selecting to come over. And immigration doesn't make people less religious, even as late as the Dutch, the Dutch migration that brought my ancestors to the United States. People who didn't practice religion in the old country practiced it in the new country because, well, you go to church, you can find people who speak your language. You can find people who potentially have the same cultural background as your, you know, that your sons and daughters can marry. In the Christian Reformed Church, we established our own private institutions, Christian day schools, Christian colleges, and all of this. Religious immigrants tend to accentuate religiosity. In this excellent book, American Grace, How Religion Divides and Unites Us, Robert Putnam notices how for many immigrant groups, immigration in America creates sort of a congregationalization. You know, here in California, I can drive around and see buildings that say Buddhist church. And you have to ask, what exactly is that? Well, immigrant groups come and they see, well, this is what others are doing. These are the practices that others have in order to, you know, buffer the impact of immigration. Well, maybe this is how we can, in fact, survive and begin to acclimate into this nation. This is a book by George Marsden that I think for many of you, and I've heard from some of you who have bought the book and read it, and we're like, wow. This is a book that for many of you will shed a tremendous amount of light on your experience of religion in America. Because Marsden basically begins with the, what was left of the Northern victory of the Second World War, or the Second World War, the Civil War, and I have to stop moving things around, otherwise I distract myself, and notes how, well, a bunch of things happen. The post-millennialism that you hear in something like the Battle Hymn of the Republic, go ahead and search for that on YouTube and Battle Hymn of Republic lyrics and just read how, well, it's the Book of Revelation, read how they thought of what was happening. And that optimism of the Northern victory that comes out of the Civil War begins to break down in the modernist, fundamentalist fight, which will have a lot to do with eschatological anticipation. So post-millennialism, post-millennialism basically asserts that, well, things are going to get better and better and better and better. It's very much a progressivist vision in terms of how the world will go. And we have the right religion. We have, we're increasingly knowing science, things are going to get better and better. And Americans, for the most part, believed they had the answer better than anyone else. Europe, well, Europe, they're mired in the old world. They're mired in their religious wars. We in America have learned, and this is where you get into Marsden's questions about pluralism, we in America have learned how to do this. And of course, at the end of the Civil War, heading towards the 20th century, America is growing and growing and growing in power. And in fact, America's entrance into the First World War will mean a tremendous amount in terms of, well, Woodrow Wilson will basically go over to Europe and imagine, well, we, Woodrow Wilson, now Woodrow Wilson saw Jefferson Davis hauled through the South, give you a sense of Woodrow Wilson's dates. Woodrow Wilson goes to Europe and imagines, we're going to teach these Europeans how to fix this. Well, didn't really go so well. America, just read Marsden's book. It's really an outstanding book. And you're simply going to learn a ton about the shape of America that you grew up in, if you grew up in America. Now, how does this relate to Christian nationalism? Everyone was a Christian nationalist, both sides. Pluralism, yeah, but Christianity, absolutely. But what you begin to see in the modernist fundamentalist split is a pretty significant splitting. And again, this is mostly within white America of your definition of Christianity. What does it mean to be a Christian? Now, does it mean to be a Christian? Now Marsden's definition of evangelical still held, but in the modernist strain, this begins to weaken. This book might shed a lot of light for those of you who are living in Europe, the great and holy war, how World War I became a religious crusade by Philip Jenkins. This was, I didn't know hardly any of this until I had read this book, but it's a dramatic book when you look at, well, really sort of the fever pitch of modernist Christendom and how in some ways the first World War simply shreds it. You'll find angelic appearances, miracles. Now, to many, it would appear that, well, all of the major combatants in Europe are Christian nations. Ah, but what kinds of Christians? You've got French Roman Catholics, you've got Germany, which is part Lutheran and part Roman Catholic. You've got England that still has a degree of anxiety over their Catholicism, but Anglicanism has sort of settled down a bit by this point. So it's a tremendously important subject because from our point of view, we tend to look back at almost every treatment of the First World War that I have heard, including um, what's his fed, what's his head's podcast that did the First World War recently. Almost all treatments of the First World War see it basically through secularity, but secularity is in many ways a critical result of the First World War. The nations going into this war were deeply religious and there was an extreme confidence in terms of the religious aspect with which they went into the war. But of course, the war was just a complete disaster. And then of course, Woodrow Wilson coming over to try to fix everything after the war also didn't work. And then of course, you've got the miserable between war period and then the second World War and the rise of the rise of communism in Russia at the end of the First World War. And then of course, the rise of the Nazis in between the wars. Here's another Marsden book for you, The Twilight of the American Enlightenment, 1950s and the Crisis of Liberal Belief. As I've said many times before, American church attendance reaches its peak in the Cold War. America in during the Cold War was a deeply Christian nationalist nation. One nation under God comes in during the Eisenhower administration. God gets on the coinage during the Eisenhower administration. The 1950s and early 1960s until Vietnam, this was Christian nationalism. But now if you look at this with the American fundamentalism, in American fundamentalism, things are starting to change. The mainline church had their peak during the Cold War. But you already begin to see this division of worlds going on. Roman Catholicism now becomes a significant part of the American religious landscape in the 20th century to the degree that look at how many Supreme Court justices are Roman Catholic. We have two Roman Catholic presidencies. Well, let's see, I was born in July, JFK was killed in November, so just squeaks, just get two Roman Catholic presidents into my lifetime. Roman Catholicism has had a big impact on America. America, especially during and after the Second World War, became the promised land for Judaism. Immigration to America of other peoples happens during this period. The pluralism that Marsden talks about really gets accentuated during this period, but America is self-confident. I didn't do any commentary on this video with Ayaan Hirsi Ali with Jordan Peterson, but I did watch it and I did find some interesting things in it. One of the things that she notes, which was fascinating to me, and again you can listen to the video and find out her story, she goes to the Netherlands and it's a revelation to her. She doesn't have to marry the man her father wants her to marry. She can live a very different life. And one of the things that she's very upset with is that this liberal European world doesn't have the self-confidence to, and it's very interesting where she goes, basically indoctrinate its immigrants into their way of life. But she's not really talking Christianity. She's talking a certain way of life that I think could be rightly understood as secular nationalism, or now of course she's quite anti-woke, but secular nationalism and secularism is in many ways sort of Christianity light. This article I've referred to a considerable amount. In fact I read the article in one of my videos, How the Civil Rights Movement Converted White Liberal Protestants to Secularism. Question is, how non-Christian is secularism really? And again this is where Tom Holland's work comes in because it's sort of, as Tom Holland says, Christianity light. It's not really from the Greeks, it's not really from the Romans. There's a great bit of mixing of traditions and processes through here, but what really gets dislocated in this movement is the church as institution, which at least for white liberal protestants, not so much the black church, but for white liberal protestants, who needs the church when you have your politics? Who needs the church when you have the ideas and ideals of your mostly liberal, and you can look at that both ways, your mostly liberal Protestantism, and that pretty much becomes your religion. On the other side of the equation is, well, this movement, the Born Again. Now which movement are really heirs of Jonathan Edwards, Thomas Jefferson, William Jennings Bryan, the Battle Hymn of the Republic, John Brown, Woodrow Wilson? You see there are these splits that happen, and so Charles Colson, of course, quite famously hatchet man for Richard Nixon, and as his world falls apart, as Richard Nixon, as Charles Colson begins to realize that Richard Nixon isn't going to take the fall for him or protect him, that Richard Nixon is getting increasingly paranoid, that, well, he's going to go to jail, but Chuck Colson has met someone, and not a woman, a man, and Chuck Colson has an awakening. He has a Born Again experience, and it's in the 70s, of course, where to be born again becomes a new thing. Jimmy Carter, front page of Time magazine, Born Again, and again you look at that and say, well, was Jimmy Carter a Christian nationalist? You really have to think that through, and you really have to ask yourself, what do we mean by these terms? Because, of course, Jimmy Carter, Democratic president, um, one term president, didn't do that well in some ways. Ronald Reagan, not a church-going man, Born Again, not so much, but becomes the flag holder of a new movement in the Republican party. So right away, things are getting twisted, because someone, let's say, looking at Ronald Reagan, would say, Reagan is clearly a Christian nationalist. Was Jimmy Carter a Christian nationalist? In what ways? Now, what tends to happen with the Democratic party is that, well, Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton, Southern Baptist, because, of course, the formula was, um, Southern Democratic state governors would be more moderate and able to win the White House. So, Bill Clinton, his, one of Bill Clinton's spiritual advisors was Bill Hybels. Think about that. Barack Obama's first, uh, Barack Obama's first inaugural, Rick Warren participates in that. Now, the second inaugural, you begin to see more development as Louie Giglio is disinvited, because Louie Giglio isn't down for the same-sex marriage stuff. So, very quickly, you begin to ask questions about, well, what really is a Christian nationalist? How about a secular nationalist? How about a globalist? Well, these things are going to get really complicated, because, you know, I just, I just read a, a news piece about how, in some ways, Biden is undoing some of, some of Trump's immigration practices, which is, you know, in the eyes of some, going to bring a new wave of immigrants into the country. Many of these immigrants are going to be Roman Catholic and evangelical Latin Americans. What are they going to do to the vote and the religious makeup of the country? There's a lot going on here. And so, well, so when Joe Biden, who is a church-going Roman Catholic, has a burden for justice overseas, and if you asked him, where does that benevolent nature come from? That assertive nature that wants to keep the world, that internationalism that wants to keep the world safe for democracy, that will, you know, cause not a lot of press on it, cause a, you know, kill some terrorists to push back Iran in Syria. In many ways, Joe Biden, too, is an heir of this Christian vision of nationalism, but it isn't located in the church. You know, we have a Roman Catholic president, and the last Supreme Court justice to be put on the bench by Donald Trump is also a Roman Catholic. Are Roman Catholics Christian nationalists or internationalists? And you think of all the anxiety during the rise of the Kennedy candidacy about whether or not Rome would control Washington. There's a lot going on in this space. I haven't talked about these guys for a while, but they really do make excellent illustrations of what I'm talking about. These two individuals, Rhett and Link, who have their Ear Biscuit Show, they recently have now done sort of a one-year retrospective on their deconversion, deconstruction that they, the videos that they made about a year ago. And in many ways, it illustrates so many of the newer changes in the culture. The one side sees Christianity as a problem, or do they? Some of them see it as a problem, some of them don't. What we really have is sort of a realignment of institutions that this sort of new emergent Christianity, which maybe is atheistic or skeptical, but yet functions with its own value system, its own moral system, which in many ways continually represents themselves as the heir to the civil rights movement, is half of the equation. And this group of people very much imagines that their perspectives on the world should be, you know, the same as the world's their perspectives on the world should be the perspectives that go out into other countries. And America should use its considerable wealth and power to bring these things overseas. That's, to me, a sort of Christian nationalism, just as much as the other side that tends to, but not always, sort of associate with the church that sees other values. And actually, there's a large amount of agreement between those value systems, which sort of gets whitewashed. You know, it wasn't that long ago when we were all nervous because Trump was going to start a war with Iran, and now Biden has a drone strike to keep the Iranians at bay. Doesn't get much news. Why? Well, our Christian nationalisms are really sort of, there are many differences and juxtapositions between them, but both of them rise out of visions of a new world. The difference just tends to be which institutions are critical for that advance. It's my thesis that both sides are Christian nationalists. It's just that the clothing is changing and we don't quite know what to do with the labels. Recently, The Rest is History, Tom Holland's podcast had a very interesting episode on empires. Those of you following the news know that Facebook has basically been going toe to toe with the Australian government with respect to ads. And it's a complex business. But in some ways, we haven't seen, if you look at the history of, let's say, American corporations, let's say fruit corporations in Latin America. American corporations have certainly had predatory practices around the world, but Australia's a pretty significant government for a corporation like Facebook to really take on. Google caved, but Facebook has held their ground. And it's a very interesting fight to see shaping up. And it makes you wonder what kinds of empires we're really going to see in the future. The 20th century saw the rise of the American empire, but it was no longer in the empire's interest to hold land in the way that, let's say, the British empire colonized and held land. America tends to do its colonization through business and values and ideas. So what we sort of have is a Christian internationalism on the left. That's a new imperialism, but it sort of is under a certain cloak that says empire me. And of course, the Chinese are now sort of the rivals in this. It's progressivist. It's really post-millennial in many ways because it imagines, well, with technological and political progress, no longer sort of religious progress. But then you can see someone like, I've got to look up her name. You have Marianne Williamson running for president as a Democrat. Now, you can see parallels here. There are conservative women evangelicals that have produced some pretty significant platforms, but, you know, hers would very much be a spiritual movement. And as Ross Douthat noted in his conversation with Stephen Smith and Isabel Burton, I think that's her name, in the 19th century, she would have started a church. She could have been the next Mary Baker Eddy. But in this context, what platforms does she use? It's not a church platform. She uses the platforms of Google, Facebook, Twitter, all of these platforms. So I would argue it is a version of Christian nationalism or internationalism or a sort of covert Christian imperialism. That would certainly be how Muslim countries would view it. Now, on the other side, well, before I get there, part of the difficulty of that group is in fact that their value system, and again, I think Jonathan Peugeot's video, Parasitic Storytelling, is a revelation. Because if we're trying to figure out sense making in this age, the question of parasitic quality is actually extremely important. In a skeptical age, we're having difficulty seeing the stars. But what we can see is that any ideology that can only endure and procreate dependent upon a host is in trouble. And you can see this with, say, the new woke ideology. Tech giant, if you want to lump capitalism in with all of the other bad things, products of Christianity, that must go. I would argue that it's sort of tough finding capitalism in the Bible. Tech giants are not going to give up being capitalist. Apple, Google, Facebook, Amazon. And this brings me back to Greg Hurwitz. Now, I know a lot of Jordan Peterson's fans don't care much for Greg Hurwitz or his politics. He's part of the Democratic Party. But part of what he says in this video, I think, is very, very true. It's tough not to find anyone who could be a better picture for white privilege than Gavin Newsom. And Hurwitz basically says he wraps himself in a certain ideology as a way to sort of deflect. And Hurwitz's assertion is that this is basically a strategy by which Gavin Newsom can continue to move in this particular way. But it's fundamentally a parasitic relationship. Tech giants are going to be capitalist. Gavin Newsom is going to keep his great wealth. Can woke Puritans not continue to be subject to purity challenges? You know, I catch articles on Twitter about the racism of NPR. And this part of the difficulty, if your system is fundamentally parasitic, as Jonathan lays out, I don't think Gad Saad had any real grasp on, he talked quite a bit about parasitic with his conversation with Peterson, but I think it's Peugeot that has the handle on it. You're going to need a foundation in order to build on something. And it can't be rebel. It can't be anything parasitic. It's going to have to be something that stands on its own. If you have to consider to, if you have to continue to prop up your host and keep your host as a boogeyman, well, you're never going to be able to be rid of your host. You've just got a symbiotic relationship with it. And at some point, people are going to look at, after you've drained the host dry, you're just going to look at each other to feed off of. And you can't go anywhere with it. And again, I think Jonathan Peugeot's vision of this is just dead on right. Part of the problem there in the way that it's parasitic is that meaning is derived from the religious activism. Now it's not portrayed as religious activism, but increasingly it's just seen and revealed to be religious, even by atheists who look at it and don't have any other word for it. But on the Christian side, I mean, it's sort of, and this is why I say it's the big story is not that there are Christian nationalists. There have always been Christian nationalists in America. America is in some ways the contemporary poster child of Christian nationalism. It's just that only one side knows it and the other side sort of denies it, but it's post-Christian. I mean, again, the labels are the difficulty here. One side has abandoned the church as a useful institution and the other side uses it as a shelter. And in the United States, there are significant protections constitutionally for churches, but a writer like Rod Rear imagines that these things will fail. And so his Benedict Option book is an interesting addition because in many ways the Christians, although they've got 17th, 18th, and 19th, and 20th century Christian nationalist cred, they are in some ways the original internationalists in the way that especially Jesus sees the commonality of all of humanity. There's so many ironies in these political days because you would imagine that Christians would be more open to open borders, except for the fact that, you know, and Eric Weinstein makes this point regularly, unregulated immigration is actually in some ways serves the capitalist, the capitalist institutions that are sort of wrapping themselves in a rainbow flag. There's just so many ironies and so many levels of irony in this to have certain groups now, the dreaded rise of Christian nationalists. Christian nationalists have always been here. It's just one group has stopped calling themselves that and sort of found an effective cloaking device. And the church, well, what will happen to the church? It's difficult to know what becomes of the church in the U.S. You know, even on the right now, early polls showed that many outside of the church who were sort of folk Christians in many ways, you know, their champion as Rod Rear called him in an article recently, the championship poster. And his chief asset is that he can own the libs like nobody else. And I remember after Trump was elected, someone in the never Trump realm would say, was this the conservative you're looking for? Will there be a revival within the institutional church? What form will it take? Will sort of the continued, I mean, in many ways, the the great fear of Christian nationalism really marks the decline of the old style of Christian nationalism that are the descendants of both sides of the culture fight. And the really interesting story is, I think what happened in the 60s where suddenly something happens in Christianity and something happens in terms of the church. And there's a great degree of the decline of the old confidence style of Christian nationalism that said, we know how the world should be run, and we're going to be direct about it into sort of the descendant side of it that sort of maintains that with capitalism and business and, you know, America first was really in some ways a departure from that. But then the new side that says, oh no, we're not imperialist, but if you don't do these things, according to how we think they should be done, there are going to be consequences. And so then countries like Russia try to stand against these and of course, in some ways, take on new religious feelings themselves. So will there be a revival within the institutional church? There may be. What will it look like? I have no idea. Will the, whereas in Jonathan Edwards' day when Catholicism was a main threat, will in some ways the West resolve the Protestant Reformation? I don't know. I don't know. But as I see the receding of modernity and the loss of the consensus, the host that the parasite continues to try to derive their strength from, and again, I mean, Tom Holland's work I think is central to this story because he, more than anybody else that I saw, and the fact that this came from outside the church, as did Jordan Peterson, I don't know. I don't know. So there it is. I wish I had a nice bow to tie this up with, but I don't. But I'm going to post it anyway.