https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=EBSqMN5hto8

 All right. Good morning. This is the Friday morning Bridges of Meaning live stream where I usually do quite a bit of question and answer. Now we've had some audio issues this morning. So anybody listening to the live stream on YouTube, if you have comments about the volume level just drop a comment in the chat room and Rick can read it and Rick will I'm sure he's a tinker. So he'll continue to tinker with this all throughout the podcast to make sure that the levels are good. Can y'all hear me in the discord too? Yeah, we can hear you. Okay sounds good. Sounds good. A few questions and a few questions have accumulated in the PVK question and answer chat room or PVK questions for PVK chat room. Before we go there, I'd well next week this may I'm I'm not sure what my plans are next week Friday so I might not be here. We haven't set up anything we talked about getting Peugeot and for vacay asking them if they'd be willing to do a question and answer at some point. Paul and lightener I've got some vacation coming up at the beginning of August and so maybe we'll shoot for some of those substitutes in those days. Otherwise Rick can just answer questions. I'm quite happy with Rick answering questions. So Rick says good. So I don't know what the status will be next week. We're getting better at putting up the promo and within the Bridges of Meaning we'll let you know that sometime at the beginning of the week whether or not we're going to do this on Friday or what will happen on Friday and the admins can figure that out before I dive into the questions. I obviously the a lot of attention this week on the Peterson verveke conversation which I think I can safely say even though saying anything safely about that video seems difficult. Any comments about that video from some of you? I've in my commentary videos mapped out a lot of the initial responses to it by a variety of people. Anyone in the voice chat room have have a comment they'd like to make. Hey Paul, how are you? I'm fine. It's Miles. Oh hi Miles. Yeah, there's a word that's really entered into my salience landscape and taking on some relevance realization for me and that is allegiance. I'm in Canada and my required allegiance is actually to Queen Elizabeth, the Queen, and in the United States your allegiance is to the Constitution. I think there's something to be learned from both of our nations in comparing and contrasting. I just was wondering if you might want to introduce that word into the discussion because it really comes down to I'm thinking we're all struggling to actually figure out what it is we're supposed to be an allegiance to and we don't necessarily even realize that there is this imposed national allegiance required and just a current situation in Canada is with the abuses of various churches against Indigenous people. We now are experiencing the toppling of statues and even the statue of Queen Elizabeth was toppled yesterday at the Parliament in Manitoba. So anyway, just putting that out there for people to think about and introduce into this conversation. Thank you. They toppled the statue of the Queen in Manitoba in front of the Parliament building? That's sedition. Well, this is it. So if we're going to topple this icon to which we are to be an allegiance to and it is connected to the Bible or she is connected to the Bible. She talks about the Bible every Christmas. And similarly in the United States, you have had your experience on January 6th where people who are operating out of their heart, not necessarily logically or actually not necessarily with a necessary understanding of what it is we should all in collective be an allegiance to are sort of operating very emotionally, not stopping to meditate as to, okay, where are we before we start toppling these icons? That's fascinating to me. I wrote a so my practice lately has been I am writing. So I think about I listen to the conversation. I think about it a bit. I do some commentary on it as I'm doing commentary on it. I'm gaining insight and I'm thinking of new things. And if you pay attention, unlike Rick, who listens to these things while he watches his video, does these video games. If you pay attention, you'll notice that it's not uncommon for me at the end of the commentary to have changed my mind about a number of things since the beginning of the commentary. And then lately my practice has been to do a summary of the video on my sub stack. And I started the sub stack a little while ago, partly because for a lot of people, videos are just too long. Videos only really reach a segment of my audience. And so the sub stacks and via Twitter sort of are a way to get the gist of some of the ideas. But what I'm discovering that as I try to summarize a video that I made the day before, new ideas come in and those new ideas will often come in to the sub stack. So if I get some time later this afternoon, so my Friday routine is 10 to noon, Rick and I do this usually between noon and one. Rick and I maybe get ready for Sunday with some technical things or get tacos or talk about how good looking Joey is or something like that. And so then about two o'clock, then I'll usually go through the comments in the real time chat during this talk. And then in the afternoon, I'll make my rough draft for Sunday video, do a little bit of admin work. And if I have time, I'll make another video. And so today, if I do that, I'll make some more commentary on the verveke Peterson thing. And so I'll begin with the sub stack because that was yet another evolution of this. Why am I going on this with respect to toppling the statue of the queen? Well, in the sub stack, I walk through a theme that I've been developing about this being the end of modernity and about the mechanisms of control, the propaganda, how mass media in modernity basically creates spirits with which principalities with which people participate and you can cohere a nation together. This was obviously the technology was pioneered in the Protestant Reformation, that technology was used to destroy the medieval Roman Catholic Church. Protestants use that technology to create their own little zeitgeists and principalities. Roman Catholics very quickly began to employ that technology to create the modern Roman Catholic Church. And so what we've seen in the last 20 years, 30 years, 40 years is the really modernity peaked and began to decline, let's say around World War I. And so Vatican II is obviously a critical element to that. And what we saw in the Trump election, the blue church decrying the end of facts, the rise of fake news. I mean, that was a meme that Donald Trump started using and very quickly the other side started using it. Now in Congress we have, but seems like the only bipartisan thing these two sides can or one of the few bipartisan things these two sides can agree on is that social media is a threat to the Republic. Why is social media a threat to the Republic? Both sides see it as a threat because social media undermines the hegemonic principality creating nature of mass media. So now we have the Queen and you're right. If you grew up in the United States, you stand at the classroom, at least if you're a boomer and you pledge your hand on your heart and you look at the flag and say, I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America and to the Republic for which it stands. Take the oath of office. Vowing to defend the Constitution. The United States is an experiment in Protestantism. It's just what it is. It was founded by Protestants and dissenters from England. It was predominantly Protestant until Roman Catholic immigration began in the 1830s. America very much was suspect of Roman Catholics all the way up to the 1960s when 1960 when it elected John F. Kennedy. By that point Roman Catholics had very much gotten very good at the Protestant game and in some ways given the number of Supreme Court justices that are Roman Catholic began to out compete Protestants. This has been a religious evolution all the way through. You can see it through political lens, social lens, you can see it through how many different lenses but there's been a zeit, there's been a principality, there's been a spirit that has been America for quite a while. I think you see that more clearly when you see that Queen Elizabeth is the defender of the church. And so in the UK and those former colonies who still let's say put the Queen on their money I guess Canada also uses a bird but these are the transformations that are undergoing right now. And so to topple the statue of the sitting monarch is a really big deal and the fact that troops, Canadian troops aren't out there in the street suppressing the likes of which would topple that statue of the monarch is noteworthy and given your Prime Minister who maybe can't come out publicly and say oh yeah and participate in the toppling of the monarch at least the little I know of your Prime Minister suggests that if he could get away with it he might be cheering the crowd that topples the statue of the monarch. But all of this symbolism is all a changing of the guard and we might be entering a phase when a balkanization of massive principalities that were supported by propaganda that created them. So this is part of the reason for all of the unsettling that we have going on. Now as I was working through the Vervecky Peterson conversation a bit this morning I lifted a few quotes, I lifted one quote from John Vervecky in there. It's again as everyone has noted the conversation is very difficult to track because it's so frenetic. Peterson keeps, you know Peterson of course is famously tangential in his own lecture style but this in combination with Vervecky's rather specialized language well it makes it nearly unlistable for a broad group of people. Some people take a step back and say wow that was cool and if I would sit there and ask them well what did it mean? They'd probably give me a blank stare and the psychedelic word in the title is sort of indicative. Well that video was ineffable. Well that's a rather strange remark for a video made up so much of words. I think it's better described as shamanic because it's disrupting normal sense making tools that we have. This was not the kind of conversation one might expect and of course you know I speculated in my first commentary on why this? Is this intentional? Or is this in fact in some ways a manifestation of a spirit working through Peterson and Vervecky and when I say a spirit I don't mean to cast aspersions on them but at the end of the commentary video today I note that when I hear Peterson and Vervecky very much identifying spirits that a spirit that individuals are participating in in various ways and forms my comment is that well if we are in fact going to look at it through the lens of far older ways of talking, spirits should be in plural and those spirits should be discerned but what we're seeing is the departure of modernity and the rise of the ability to understand that there are again we have no other word for it but spirits that there are spirits working through us, working through our institutions, working through our communities and you see a little bit of this even the highly modern book by Max Weber talks about the spirit of capitalism that's the only word we have to use. Now Christians who haven't forgotten their Bible and are either through one theological tradition or another continue to be deeply tied to far older ways of talking and haven't been shamed out of it by modernity are in some ways going to feel more at home or at least their world the language world is going to be more identifiable than for a lot of people in modernity who are looking around and saying what happened to facts, what happened to you know because they're just continuing to point to modernity and of course there's plenty of woke-ish postmoderns that are smuggling a narrative while you know saying that every other narrative besides theirs is suspicious. Well that's really as Peugeot noted that's a parasitic approach to it. I don't think it's going to last so yeah your point about toppling a statue of the Queen at a parliament building in Manitoba that's a big deal and the fact- Yeah if I could just add that the spirit that we're all seeking has to be one that we can all be in allegiance to eventually and the people that toppled the statue were wearing orange shirts and the reason for the orange shirt is that a little girl when she was about six years old was taken forcibly to a so-called residential school which is really an indoctrination camp that existed both in Canada and the United States but they began in with the Indian Act in 1876 these residential schools and this story is that the little girl had been given a precious orange shirt by her grandmother and when she entered the residential school it was stripped from her she had her hair shorn off she was told she couldn't speak her language anymore and all of these things and this is now coming out and what we're we're still grappling with is the question Jesus posed which was who do you say I am because there's nothing in the Bible that would give anyone any authority to take an orange shirt from a little girl and not give it back so if someone comes to it if someone comes to it they're having to deal with this but you know at the end of it we do need to find something that we can you know all agree on and be in allegiance to otherwise we'll just keep tearing ourselves apart okay I'm gonna why do you accept the premise that the people who did that were part of the church why do you accept that premise well because so there's several properties that were owned by there was several denominations involved in running these residential churches on behalf of the government or residential schools on behalf of the government and there's unmarked graves where they're now discovering that there's bodies to be exhumed and of course the indigenous people are very hurt and they're suffering a lot of trauma so the facts are that these were residential schools under the authority of Roman Catholic Church Anglican Church and there are some others okay let's let's let's pause here now because I understand we can get into a food fight and the church can get defensive but the key thing to watch is the changing of that which is acceptable and that which is not if a if a child came into an American public school today wearing a Nazi flag that flag would be taken away why because all principalities work to work against other principalities and the fact that everybody knew about the residential schools a lot of this is knowledge maybe the graves are new but the the the the point to watch in this is in fact the changing of the guard because changing of the guards always happen and why I say this is modernity and even secularity that is going away is because in a lot of ways the conversation you're pursuing in this is still within secularity and I agree completely that well we have to find a new basis for unity if we don't what well I'll tell you what you have the balkanization of principalities again and when I say principalities suddenly the the the lexical the the lexical range of that word is induced because a principality is both a tiny little area in let's say the holy roman empire run by a prince and it's this spiritual force that we're talking about so I don't want to you know we could I think this would be a valid conversation in another sub chat room in the discord server but the the focus that I'm drawing and you can you know you can very well ask the question why did the church do this well I'd say bring that into another sub conversation and did the church or was it the church and state or and and there's a lot of good conversation that can be had but the question of what is an atrocity is exactly what's at stake in something like this because watch those definitions change one person's therapy is another person's abuse and we're watching what had been considered therapy what had been considered remedial now switching to be redefined as abuse and completely apart from the actual instances of that the switching of therapy to abuse now they're using a therapeutic frame the switching of those on a mass scale is what we're talking about with the rapid decline of modernity and its destruction and the question well can we once again achieve unity and can unity be sort of achieved without a lot of loss of the benefits that we have derived via economies of scale by having very large mass principalities but you know these issues have been around you know orwell wrote about them in 1984 these are long-standing things now they tend to play out over time and the pace at which they are is picking up and this is a lot of what Peugeot looks at when he looks at the patterns so I'm gonna I'm gonna land the plane there on the Canadian indoctrination schools on that part of the conversation and and I'll pick up on the questions so but thanks for thanks for jumping in all right well we got a lot of things in here I guess I gotta keep moving when is it okay or even good to cut to commend oneself well actually if you listen to my sermon coming up this Sunday I won't talk about this directly if you would open a commentary on second Corinthians a commentary that is fairly recent because one of the things that they've looked at now in at least Protestant commentaries on second Corinthians are rhetorical styles in the Greco-Roman world and so there's there's a lot going on in second Corinthians super apostles I'll run through a lot of this history in my sermon and in my rough draft super apostles have sort of gathered the attention and the favor of the elites within the church of Corinth a church that Paul has planted and he is trying to pull them away from the Roman cultural infatuation with wealth status and power by for fronting the strangeness of Jesus cruciform kingdom and conquest and so when he talks about commending himself he's doing so within a Greco-Roman rhetorical frame and he is doing it ironically and he is in a sense mocking the highly status oriented posture that the leaders of the Corinthian church have assumed and and that plays out actually within issues of both first and second Corinthians especially in first Corinthians 11 where the apostle Paul takes them to task over what has become their practice of the Lord's Supper so Paul is taking on that language ironically in that context now this does get into the way you ask the question gets into a complex frame challenge which which in some ways is a very challenge which which in some ways is a subset of the of the disruption of modernity because Christian readers read the Bible within a modernistic frame and if you want to understand what Jonathan Peugeot's mission has been it's to break that frame and when you listen to Jonathan Peugeot decry the kinds of things that are in modernistic biblical scholarship and that's Protestant and Roman Catholic I'm too unfamiliar with orthodox biblical scholarship to comment on that but modernistic biblical scholarship most of the commentaries behind me are written in that modern frame which sort of flattens things out in the Bible that's not just the modern frame it's also sort of the the a sort of modernistic naivete that has deeply modernistic assumptions in terms of how we can read the Bible now what I just did was probably unhelpful for most of you because perhaps I undermined my own calling by setting the Bible further away from you but if you want to understand a lot of what's happening with Jordan Peterson's biblical series which is I think sort of an an end of the demarcation of the modernist frame by using a psychological frame and then Jonathan Peugeot's work on patterns Jonathan Peugeot is basically returning the favor on iconoclasm he is using icons to beat to death the tools that destroyed previous generations icons it's one way to understand Jonathan Peugeot's work and that's also a part of this changing of the guard as modernity recedes and as we enter a liminal passage in which well we'll have to see what can be achieved next and it's going to be prosecuted on every level as we saw from as we can see from what's happening in Canada so so and you know again that just prompts all kinds of thoughts about why with all of these changing of the guards they sort of come in layers and so a queen a church a monarchy is sort of pre-modern it was modernized and the fact that in some ways that will be more difficult to work through than let's say the more Protestant paper pope paper pontus with which which we have in the constitution the stuff you know I could talk for a long time on this and I will so but that's not for today that is for question and answer so that's my answer to commending oneself in the book of second Corinthians. Rasputin oh gosh what what a name in this context Rasputin wow I was thinking about what Protestantism has that Orthodox and Catholics don't possess the best expression of a Protestant art that I saw as the Blues Brothers movie that I saw as the Blues Brothers movie do any other art pieces come to mind for you oh almost any modern art is deeply Protestant and again back to Peugeot listen to my first conversation with him where I did with Peugeot what I usually do with everyone I got into their story why do I why do I get into people's stories almost right away because getting into someone's story is a way to begin to locate them in this fast changing world with a degree of concreteness because there's something concrete about all of our stories because they are real in a way when we tell our stories there's a there's a reality to it that is very deep but there are other disconnections from other realities that aren't as deep so when I get people to share their stories I dig into them so Peugeot's story again was he it's really amazing because just buried in Peugeot's story is how many of these how many of these transitions that we're seeing his parents left they were you know French Canadians Roman Catholic French Canadians French Canadians were are some of the most Catholic people in North America and with everything that was going on in you know I've been getting to think lately about the consequence for failing to have a Protestant Reformation as they had in Northern Europe in Germany in Hungary in Switzerland in the Netherlands and in England the consequence for failing to have a Protestant Reformation was to have a French Revolution and a lot of this stuff has been working out in the Roman Catholic Church as well so Jonathan Peugeot's parents being disgusted with what was happening in the Roman Catholic Church became evangelicals and Baptists and I would suspect rather Anabaptist evangelicals this can be seen by the fact that when Jonathan Peugeot went to Africa he went with the Mennonite Central Committee and you have to have sort of an understanding of the map of Protestantism to understand the significance of that Mennonite Central Committee and Anabaptists themselves are now playing a very interesting role in what we're looking at as anarchism because in many ways in Anabaptism there's a very deep spirit of anarchism which ironically sometimes gets expressed in communal living as in let's say Julian's yeah I'm naming names this morning baby in Julian's Hutterite tradition so all of this gets very very interesting if you have an understanding of of the players in the game so but when Jonathan Peugeot was in art school of course in order to learn art you're going to have to learn philosophy because philosophy is art in esoteric words and he read of course Derrida and Foucault and all of the post-moderns and what Peugeot does is come out the other end and I'm in complete agreement with John Vervecky that Jonathan Peugeot is a far more radical Christian than many many of the people who listen to him really appreciate he just is you got a dude here is sort of running around on YouTube as you know as Vervecky has said of him and I think Vervecky's right he's sort of a 21st century church father that's what Peugeot is church fathers were in some ways celebrities in their world and for many their medium was the church for some those who had written their medium was books while Peugeot his medium is YouTube and you know icons so Peugeot is a 21st century church father and he is in some ways leading a revolution in with these digital tools and the disruptive nature of micro media of social media against mass media you know Jonathan Peugeot is running an insurgency and in some ways well it I Jan of Leiden comes to mind and those of you who know church history probably your jaw dropped when I mentioned Jan of Leiden in the context of Jonathan Peugeot now I don't say that in any way to smear Jonathan Peugeot because he is not Jan of Leiden and the Munster rebellion and and all of that because Jonathan Peugeot is a to the best that we can tell is a pacifist and he's not leading an army Jonathan is conducting his revolution in much more of a Jesus way okay but it's that radical and I don't think I don't think apart from history we have enough perspective on just how radical Jonathan Peugeot's revolution that he's leading is or for Vickie's revolution or I'm really trying to not be a revolutionary I don't know that Jacob would really like the kind of revolutionary I would be but I'm increasingly drawn into this revolution because in a sense the collapse of modernity makes anyone find a sub tribe to assimilate with and to and to express the spirit of and you know the same spirit is breaking up the Christian Reformed Church it's going to break up institution after institution now this all happens slowly and Lord willing bloodlessly but these are wars in the heavenlies that are raging now and they're being expressed through YouTube through blogs through podcasts through institutions and you know a year ago when I was listening to Peugeot talk about you know him watching the patterns sort of the coming chaos I you know kind of thinking I'm I'm more convinced now that I'm I'm more convinced now than I was a year ago watching what I've been watching so maybe I'm just getting radicalized I'm another person who's been radicalized by dreaded YouTube so but I'm not a political figure I'm a religious figure which is I think at a deeper level and Peterson's in that liminal space between a religious and a political Vervecky's really trying to be a religious figure and that's what he is now he's religion that isn't a religion and non-theism etc etc but yeah so yesterday I did a I spent four hours in two of John Vendonk's host estuary estuary host support networks and I'm really glad I did I'm really glad that I sort of supported John Vendonk in developing these estuary support groups and I'm drawing from it a sort of a new estuary protocol and I hope either in the summer or the fall to roll that out here in Sacramento with my meetup those who come to my meetup won't see it as a huge change from what we were doing before but I think they will see it as an up in an upping of intentionality and structure and so I think thanks to John and these the about a dozen of a lot of you who have been over the last year I think really developing this estuary protocol we're probably going to see this now we have a little bit something more concrete to structure estuaries around these are perhaps breakwaters that that they have been constructing so I'll be doing a video probably with John and some of the other members of his estuary support host network and we'll probably model some of this estuary protocol and again those of you have been participating on the bridges of meaning discord won't find it radical at all but I think that will be the next part of the iteration but in that conversation we're talking about Protestantism and and another way to understand Protestantism is it is the experimental wing of the church if our ideas if we have ideas so that they can die instead of us the church has did Protestant denominations so that Protestant denominations can die instead of the church so in some ways Protestantism is sort of the laboratory of the church and so far older staid traditions like the Orthodox and the Roman Catholics you know they they put up a wall between them and the Protestants and the radical experimentation that Protestants are doing and they watch the Protestants and sort of like a child has imprinted within them a first draft every successive generation of Orthodox and Roman Catholic has imprinted on them drafts of Protestant that's Protestantism that's sneaking under the radar now the Roman Catholic church has had its own had its own experimental laboratories throughout its tradition and you can find them in various orders and various other sub things within the Roman Catholic church that they play with things and so with the big with the big war of well you know should Joe Biden be allowed to take the Eucharist at a Roman Catholic church part of the reason that's not simply ruled out of line is because within Roman Catholicism you do have a spirit of experimentation that perhaps was really led in with Vatican II and so yeah there's you know I can't even touch on the kinds of wars going on within the Roman Catholic church but one way to think about Protestantism is the experimental wing of the church and this is why Protestantism isn't going away anytime soon I think the protests should at some point die down but they might not until the coming of the Lord but this is this is sort of how to think about Protestantism and so Protestants try lots of stuff and you know like there's often some interesting connections between let's say the charismatic movement in the Roman Catholic church that in some ways followed the Pentecostal movement but there were precursors to that Roman Catholic charismatic movement in many ways because in the time of the Reformation certain more secular wings of Protestantism were seen as anti-miraculous while the Roman Catholic church had Mary crying and healing at Lourdes and you know maintenance of you know maintenance of pilgrimages to shine and la Virgen de Guadalupe and all kinds of other things so the church is always both impacting and surfing these waves that come through and Protestantism is in many ways sort of the radical experimentation I think it's going to be very interesting to watch what happens to the Orthodox church in America because if we've seen anything from American history it's that religious immigrants change American culture and American culture changes religious immigrants and so the Jonathan Peugeot Revolution is going to have a significant impact on the Orthodox church in America and you can already see that as around the symbolic world you have various Orthodox priests making podcasts speaking writing all of these things so these are you know these are radical things that are that are that are underway right now before our eyes and the significance of them is difficult for us to see but that's Protestantism any any quick responses from the chat room on Protestantism uh Paul I love the revolutionary that you are and you are a revolutionary that's why we're here Okay and and part of part of what's really strange about this revolution is that we've got Jacob and there's Vervecky and there's you know Marc LeFevre who's you know I don't understand crazy French and their spellings what's with them so in this hugely mixed up world these revolutions it's going to be wild it's going to be hard to know where the lines fall so all right all right well that's where I disagree with you I I know exactly where the lines eventually will fall wow we have a prophet in our midst so well I'll be interested to hear maybe you should do a video on your channel about where the lines fall because I'm sure you'll find it on your channel about where the lines fall because I'm kind of curious well I mean I'm not a prophet the books are right there there are the prophetic books out there so you're one of the streams there's there's direct revelation there's there's the word from the prophetic books and there's the context it's always the three streams in the hermeneutical circle so all right I'll continue because I got a lot of questions and I don't know if I'm going to do this next week so and y'all have been adding to them so here we go T.S. Apostolos can you riff on this it is also said answered Frodo do not give to the do not go to the elves for counsel for they will answer both no and yes is it indeed laughed Gildor elves seldom give unguarded advice for advice is a dangerous gift even from the wise to the wise and all of course may run ill I don't know if I can say it better and so I fear to riff on it it's true and you can find you can find this wisdom in many corners there are two kinds of therapists therapists that give advice and therapists that mostly listen there are two kinds of pastors pastors that give a lot of advice and pastors that mostly listen one of the things you learn about advice is that most of the time you're sort of wasting your breath most of the time you're sort of wasting your breath and when someone is actually able and willing to listen to advice then the wise often bite their tongues because they have an idea of the consequence of that much power in a person's life one of the things I've spoken about this before one of the things you learn as a preacher and if you want examples of this watch the Freddie and Paul show and listen to the fancy Nancy sermon summaries very seldom do people hear what I intend to say very seldom do people hear what I intend to say what they hear is some mixture of what they're thinking which I have provoked by something I've said but it's always a mixture of my provocation and the ongoing thought stream and the spirits in their minds and Vervecki knows this that's clear when you listen carefully to Vervecki about provocation Peterson knows this and he says it a couple of times in that video in at one point almost calling himself Jesus which I know in my commentary in my last one so yeah most of the time giving advice is pointless because people aren't taking advice and those rare times when people will take and implement advice the wise hold their tongue because that kind of power is really dangerous the elves know that so the elves look at look at look at what I do so often I mean the complaints on the first video the first commentary video were in some ways warranted because I spent almost two hours of two hours and 20 minutes just talking about the Peterson history and trying to gain perspective and a lot of people are like I came here for commentary okay well there'll be more don't worry why did I start that way I needed to because that video was so shamanic if I was going to have any insight into the video at all I sort of had it had to set the table first and say get get answer the question what on you know after I while I was listening to that video was like what is this that was my question what is this and and this very much riffs on in 2018 and a question and answer someone asked a really terrific question of Peterson what do you wish reporters would ask and Peterson said any thinking smart journalist would ask what the hell is going on and Peterson is exactly right and that was my take when I saw Peterson and what was going on around is like what is going on and I still and people still are like in the comment section are like why does Paul keep talking about Peterson you're missing the point it's not about Peterson himself we as individuals are vessels of spirits and we're also deeply connected to our particular vessels and the vessels that we love around us but if you want insight don't just watch the vessels you have to discern the spirits moving through the vessels the spirits moving through the vessels and well how can we do that well Jacob is right read the prophets read the holy books because you need perspective well how can you gain perspective well maybe you've only lived 30 40 50 years 20 years you have no perspective you've not had time to gain perspective you need the perspective of thousands of years as much perspective as we can find so that's why we look at science and that's why we read holy books and that's why we talk to one another because from that perspective we can now have some understanding of what on earth is happening around us so the elves know this they live long so that's a that's a terribly good quote from Tolkien all right hey Paul prophet Zacharias I was wondering if you watched Bo Berman's new special Haldense this is the second time I've had this and I mentioned because again my um I don't I I only watch TV generally speaking with my family and so it's always got to be a compromise and my TV watching for me is sort of a way by which I can establish significant conversations around whatever we're watching so the quality of the content doesn't matter often I've got a book or something in my lap while I'm just too much like my father I grew up with watching TV and my father reading while he watched with me and every now and then a comment from what he saw because TV's too slow and too boring so we would read books and magazines while we watch TV and I'd often wonder how can you watch TV and and read a book at the same time oh because there's so much fluff and vacuity vacuity and in television that you just see one or two minutes of a 17 minute program and you pretty much get the gist that's because he was older and he had a perspective and I was young and hadn't learned these things so I haven't watched it yet but it's on my list I've seen commentary on it and because at least two or three of you have pointed out to me I suspect it I will probably be interested and and you might hear some commentary on it but there's a lot of material out there right now that is competing for commentary in my spirit so I'll try and take a look at it he directed it recorded yeah go ahead um do you have any audible book recommendations oh gosh my favorite book is the book that I'm listening to right now and so my wife and I just started Robert Alter's translation of the Old Testament and the introduction to that translation was tremendous so there's a recommendation but if you ask me for recommendations you'll get something like you should expect to get from the elves you'll probably get the latest thing that I was listening to and thought was really good so you all right about the reformations book that's yeah that's a good one too I learned a ton see I I yeah I I didn't know enough about the counter-reformation and how the reformation changed the catholic church and so that book was really helpful for that for me so that was good it's a controversy book and you know in other forms I'll mention these books and then some real historian because I'm not a real historian I'm a pastor some real historian will say well I'm not so sure about that book because oh that's it's sort of like talking to a real scientist or a a real anything they've got deeper siloed knowledge and so if you talk about one book they'll give you five but I'm not an academic so I'm not going to read five books so I'm going to have to go with the one that I got flawed though it is so all right Christian Golden related to the estuary idea though a bit more narrowed I'm feeling pulled to build an in-person perhaps blended with virtual mediated facilitated arena where Christians of disparate religious and political views can one express their views to gain more awareness of the diversity of views among Christians three learn to cultivate a more loving way of interacting with Christians holding opposing views without necessarily compromising their own views ideally this would be public and open to participation of non-christians you just you're just describing the estuary oops I used the estuary sorry you're just describing estuary you should you should contact John Van Donk and get in his estuary support network I don't know how many of these groups John can handle he's retired and so John is like I got time on my hands Paul I said good you go do that do it for a year and then I'll visit your groups and I'll see what you've learned and they've learned a lot those groups are really cool so but but like many things and people might do it for a year sort of get the hang of it and drop out so I'm sure there are spaces available so you should definitely find John Van Donk and get in his estuary host support network and it's a terrible name but sometimes I'm sorry yes I don't think you have to read the rest of that question then because I wasn't sure I've been out of the discord for uh for quite a while now um and I just hopped back in and as when I kind of stepped away from the internet for a while I had just heard murmurings of the estuary stuff um I thought it was more broad than that but uh but I'll definitely reach out yeah what you're describing is definitely what they are doing and I'm just looking around because we talked about the discord a bit yesterday like I said I spent four hours with those guys yesterday and it was I I couldn't be happier with what those guys have built and I saw and I thought because I've been you know basically the first iteration of the Sacramento Jordan Peterson meetup resulted in a friend group and that was wonderful and so now I have new friends and it birthed this discord server and so now we have this but I've been trying to figure out what the next stage of evolution is for that group and what to do with branding and after I was in John's groups yesterday all of that got cleared up for me so now it's a matter of implementing it and then seeing what evolves from the locality here and I'm thinking that I'm just gonna I'm gonna write up something that has you know what I call this estuary protocol based on what I observed in John's groups yesterday and what John has been using to facilitate them and I think this will give some more structure to doing what you want to do I also talked yesterday in the groups realizing how in many ways I think estuaries are going to need the support of churches and that support isn't necessarily financial it might be giving space but it can't be an all church thing then it's just another bible study it needs to not be an all church thing it needs to be an estuary so more will be coming out on that I think this summer and some more structure and again if you want to start your own group contact Vendonk and hang out with those guys they meet twice a month over zoom and they've got a really good thing going so I was really very encouraged by what I've saw them do so. What's his username? You're probably gonna have to email me or contact me on the discord and I'll send you his email address he's an old guy he has email I could probably so that's the best way to contact him. I think you should give yourself some credit too Paul in the in the follow-up to kind of that iterations of the meetup group forming the discord etc and what comes next is we were I mean you are on the way to doing that and then COVID happened and literally interrupted the job trip and I think it's it's probably time a lot of people don't know that story so you might want to tell that story a little bit so people kind of know the history. Yeah so last March and it was literally last February and March Job of course flew into Southern California to participate in a conference that he go he went to fairly regularly for work and because he and Vendonk are both these Hollanders and they like to talk Dutch together and I can at least look like a Hollander the three of us started this crazy road trip and we first went down to Tucson Arizona I got to meet Cassidy in person and some of some other of you and we sort of had an a meetup at the village Rod Huguen my friend's church and then we had a couple more in Southern California and then as we were planning the northern route COVID hit Job's conference started to shut down we started getting nervous as to whether or not Job was going to be able to get back into the Netherlands you know I'm not sure if he was going to be able to get back into the you know at that point in March everything was just breaking loose in terms of COVID so we had meetings scheduled for Fresno for Sacramento for Alameda for Portland for Seattle and for Vancouver and for Salem Oregon and we cancelled that whole thing because of COVID and at the time we didn't know if that was a good decision or not but it was the right decision and and sort of what we were doing with that trip was using let's call it Estuary to call it Jordan Metersen the Jordan Metersen the Jordan Peterson meetup protocol which is what we had been practicing here at our local meetup but so then at that point you know because of COVID it became more and more difficult to run in-person meetings Van Dong says I'd really like to start a group that will focus on people learning how to support how to create their own estuary groups so when I started making videos about estuary Van Dong who had been planning some things with his local church scrapped all that and reformatted it in much more of an estuary fashion because when Van Dong heard some of my some heard some of my idea my estuary idea and language he said no this is much more of what I've been looking for and so but of course he couldn't implement any of that with his church because COVID just disrupted churches and so I said well John let's do this you and I will make a video about what you would like to do with these estuary leaders and how to train them and then we'll put out a plea in this video and people can contact you and sign up and so so Van Dong's an old dude he doesn't listen to my videos he just calls me up and asks me what I'm thinking about so he cuts right to the chase I can't do that with everyone but so so he made this job helped him make this little google doc by which people could sign up but Van Dong didn't know how to operate it so two or three days after we made I released the video poor Van Dong was downcast because nobody signed up and then a day later he calls me up and says no I didn't know how to do it job helped me we had 17 people sign up so bang that got off the ground and that's been running for about a year and I've I've been really curious about it but I know like with the discord sometimes when I step in I sort of disrupt the natural evolution so I kept it at arm's length I said Van Dong you run it for a year and after about a year I want to drop in and participate in your meetings and see what's developed and I think what they've developed and you know so hats off to Van Dong and everyone who's participated because just like with all of this this is collaborative participation I think they have a protocol for the groups I think it's sort of battle tested now at least with the very highly capable people who are the leadership types that have participated in that and I think now it's time to take this prototype and now that at least in the US we're getting a little beyond COVID we'll start opening it up to the public and see how it scales I think it's going to be better structured than the first prototype and I'm excited to see how it goes in the wild so as always it's all experimentation and I think once I put out the prototype I think I'll write it up on my sub stack and that way I can get it out there once I write it up and put it out there you know we might I'd recommend that maybe some of the leaders who have been working it start their new discord or their new estuary groups and we'll see where it goes part of the blessing of the Jordan Peterson first wave was that gave us sort of a critical mass to ride in and we had already been feeling in our local meetup that the upsides and downsides of of regular visitation by people who would only visit once or twice or once or twice every six months and so I think the second stage will be less focused on outreach and more focused on building the core and accepting slower growth and then more word of mouth growth instead of relying on publicity and those things so that's where this is going and I know when I first started talking estuary a lot of people were expecting a rollout then I didn't have it and with a lot of these things I mean the modern mass media has an expert who pronounces and the masses sort of like non-player characters implement that day is dying what we're going to do is have much more of a we develop this together and we develop it through trial and error and slow growth is okay you want slow and strong and that's actually how the early church grew and then let multiplication happen as the strength affords it I think that's a better way to run a revolution so even though I'm rather I'm kind of an anti-revolutionary so is Peugeot and in fact the Dutch Calvinist ancestors of my particular tradition actually called themselves anti-revolutionaries because they were pushing back on the French Revolution so these are long spirits that are working through us very very long very ancient so sounds scary prophet Zacharias again I was very pleased and interested to hear that Peterson told vervecky that he has recently read the mortality key as I have just recently finished that book myself on audible first half does come off as an almost bitter and typical critique of the church the founders of modernity have been duped and the war on drugs and the banishing of women from delivering the Eucharist was all a church plot for power however it gets very interesting and dare I say convincing in the second half when he spends some time in the Vatican vaults now I'm interested almost reminds me of the the Louis Marcos work at this point I'm not familiar with that that the that the god of Israel and the logos flow even through the pagan religions and the pagan poets I don't know if I'd use that language I I can use Lewis's language of good dreams which is I you know so I have a Lewis collection on logos my Bible study software which is very has very powerful search tools I could only find references to Jung twice in Lewis which I found quite interesting because I'd be really curious to know what you Lewis didn't have didn't think much of Freud at all and there's a really excellent book out there contrasting Lewis and Freud from a Harvard scholar and that is on audiobooks a great book so very interesting how to think about these spirits what are your thoughts on the Delphic mysteries and connections between the Dionysius and Jesus have you ever heard of the illusion mysteries and their connection to the early Eucharist nope I am blissfully unaware of much of this and I suspect my bliss is about to end as I will have to struggle through some things have you ever heard that women had a very prominent role in the early church yes and specific um and specifically the offering of the holy Eucharist I am part of the camp so right now in in Christianity you have at least in Protestantism you have complementarians who say you know women shouldn't be priests let's say even though Protestants don't usually have priests only those neither fish nor foul Anglicans that keep muddying the Protestant Catholic line and then you've got egalitarians it says oh it should all be open now NT Wright is one of these strange people like myself that makes an argument that says it seems in the New Testament women hosted what would become church services now so and my I have a I have a I have a write-up it's from a sermon in my old blog that's leading church.com not my sub stack in my old blog basically about Lydia said basically Lydia is to Paul as Cornelius was to Peter and Philippi my reading of the book of Acts is that Lydia was the leader of that church now this gets really murky fast and when I apply these contemporary categories to a first century gathering in Philippi led by Lydia was Lydia a pastor that's an anachronism what do we know Philippi which was a Roman city founded mostly by retired Roman army veterans because that's what the Romans did it's how they paid their soldiers for fighting here we're going to give you land and a city that you can settle and colonize that's what the Romans did we meet Lydia who was likely a former slave but likely a high status slave because she was a Christian high status slave because she dyed purple cloth and she was quite likely very wealthy but Paul's usual way of of his ministry was to go to a city and to start with the synagogue Philippi didn't have a synagogue because they didn't have 10 Jewish men who were circumcised in good standing to found a synagogue and actually ironically that was exactly the same status that we'd have in the Dominican Republic as to whether or not you could found a Christian-informed church in the Dominican Republic so check that off on your bingo card so what you had were these these either Hebrew women or what the book of acts calls God-fearing women who were meeting down at the river what were they doing they in a sense were sort of a synagogue but they couldn't be a synagogue because they didn't have enough men and so you had these women meeting down at the river Paul goes to Philippi you know I was looking around for a synagogue no synagogue here but we hear this group meets down by the river so Paul goes down by the river and Paul then begins to you know talk to Lydia about the resurrection of Jesus etc etc and then Lydia asks and this is right in the book of acts would you come to my home now to us that sounds like well what is that is that like at the end of the date was would you like to come up no that's not that you have to understand that within the Roman cultural context which was and in some ways the Jewish cultural context which Lydia was extending hospitality now as I get into an into my sermon tomorrow or Sunday part of the reason the apostle Paul never took financial support from the Corinthian church was he understood that the minute he would do so he would then be subject to the patronage tradition of some of those Corinthian leaders and he did not want to play that game he would take support from other people but not from the Corinthians even though he founded that church and the church at Corinth was offended by this and they kept offering him money and he wouldn't take it and this became part of the dispute between Paul and that church and he kept telling them I'm not going to take your money because I don't want your money I want you and part of the reason for this were that these other itinerant leaders were coming in and they wanted their money because Corinth was sort of like the Las Vegas only better suited of the ancient world of the ancient world the Romans had destroyed it and then rebuilt it because it was in too strategic of a location to not have a city and it so became a thoroughly Roman town and there were many wealthy people there and it was fast young money and people understood that money is useful for influence and Paul said I'm not going to be subject to your influence because you have significant parts of this whole Christianity thing wrong and in fact your Lord Supper practices are so abominable to me it'd be better if you just stopped I mean it's pretty rough but Paul was not someone who pulled his punches so Lydia says to Paul can I extend you hospitality and he accepted her hospitality I think Lydia was the leader of the church of Philippi now I think over time as the church grew more standard practices came into being where increasingly men and finally only men were leading churches now I was thinking about making a video which would have why not just continue the destruction of my life by my videos why not I was even though in the Christian from church I am well known within our circles as someone who is not against women in office in fact if you go back in the living stones preacher archive you can find women preaching at living stones and that's always complex because my own congregation has some people that are foreign some people that are against but we're a little church and we just barely do what we can to get by and that way we're like the church of Philippi but I think there might be reasons why you should have a bias of men for church leaders and in fact the bias of men as leaders and I think those reasons could be biological now what I don't like is the complete ban against women doing it because I think actually if you look at the history of the church women have been doing it we just haven't given them any titles and I think there's something unfair about that but I do not think that men and women are the same and there might be reasons why men should lead in various ways but I'm against the prohibition against women leading let the women lead and I think you can see this through the history of monarchies there have been some powerful and effective women monarchs female monarchs but they're the exception and I think actually if you look in the Bible that's tends to be what you see with certain kinds of leadership now in other spheres again I'm a Kiperian so I believe in sphere sovereignty and you'd have to get really wonky about Dutch Calvinism to figure out what I'm talking about there I think in other spheres women lead so sort of a monolithic universal headship looking at male headship I don't subscribe to but I would suggest that in different spheres the sexes are going to operate in different ways so now I don't have to make a video because I just made it here and nobody will find it and I won't get in trouble with my friends because I would have gotten in turn to trouble with both sides with what I just said but yes I think I suspect that in the early church women were leading some of those very early groups and they would have but see now we've got some anachronisms there were they serving the Eucharist that's an anachronism because again I think what we find in the book of Corinthians is that the liturgy of the Lord's Supper was continuing to emerge in the very early church and churches that Paul was founding now these traditions can very easily emerge within a human lifespan absolutely but the the way that these liturgies would emerge and then become standard would would take some time and I think it's it's sort of in that way that you can see some of the differences between let's say the Orthodox and the Roman Catholic the Roman Catholic Church that we that that any of us grew up in was a church that was modernized by the Council of Trent and you have to understand the Council of Trent in the church's reaction to it's it's forced modernization forced by the threat of Protestantism and I think that book um Reformation's writes it talks about that quite nicely and it's a subject I don't know a lot about but the book I think talks about that quite nicely because what happened in the Council of Trent and around that time is that the the Roman Catholic Church attempted to standardize and standardization is a big tell of modernity and and standardization is really good because we want standardized drugs we like standardized road and railway systems we like standardized internet protocols so that systems can span and work so that's one of the things about modernity we're going to want to keep but we're going to have to deal with the the loss of mass media and the resurgence of the spirits are going to get led out of the cage of modernity and it's going to be kind of crazy so yeah I think women used to lead churches and that stopped and I don't think it stopped I you know you find a lot of Protestants running around saying it stopped because of bigotry well I'm sure that was some of it but by looking at history I suspect there are reasons why most church groups are run by men and C.S. Lewis gets into some of this when he writes about women priestess so this is enormously nerdy but and in terms of the yeah so I haven't I don't know anything about the book I haven't looked at the book I very much heard it mentioned in the Peterson video I'm a little interested but like most established Christian leaders psychedelics are a bridge too far it's just it's just how I feel about it I I would rather and and I thought it was interesting when vervecky basically says it seems that via dia logos we can achieve some of the then fill in the fancy vervecky words we can achieve some of the communion I'll throw in a Christian word that you don't need drugs to induce and I would argue that this is in fact what the church has been doing for a very long time and other religious communities have been doing likewise because I again I think of drugs and there's a place for drugs and maybe at some point we'll have some figuring out about the place of the place of because again the psychedelics that are getting played with and experimented now are in some ways an anachronism when imagining that perhaps certain spores got into bread and certain substances got into wine and people had visions on account of those vision having is a normal part of human being some people have more some people have less but it's out there in the population Peterson clearly has him he doesn't talk much about him because of modernist shaming but Peterson clearly has them people are inducing them with psychedelics and so part of the whole psychedelic corner of this conversation is because the non-drug induced vision having and the regular religious experience producing has been shamed from our public discourse because of modernity and that's coming to an end so yeah it's gonna get wild people are increasingly gonna talk about their visions and other people are not gonna know what to do about it because we haven't figured out the etiquette so all right interesting fact toys martin luther king jr also wrote a paper on psychedelic origins of christianity and divinity school that is a very interesting factoid now you're luring me into the book oh my a long question it's 11 30 well mr vanderclay this may be a bit of a harsh question and i could totally end sounding out and i could totally end sounding out out of topic is there really a topic to these but i'll give it a try i call it the death of the symbolic world oh my radical on the radicals i'm 25 and i always had two existential fears that i thought i did defeated or solved maybe resolved and would like to know what is your perspective on these topics or am i just being a child for thinking such stuff i don't know 25 you're you're about done being a child bring it on fear a oh entropy my future death was something else but then realized everyone and even earth star in the universe and everything in the material plane of existence will face the same fate was something else and so leaving heaven without earth well till god makes another one no symbols anymore my solution was hey something isn't beautiful because at last it should be thankful it's just beauty i'm thankful that such beauty indeed existed like dr su says don't cry because it's over smile because it happened this is the stuff only a modernist would fear right this is this is sort of the standard answer to entropy now there's a stoic there's an episode from the stoia with i can't think of his name right now now there's a line of people out there that are skeptical about entropy so that's out there but this is sort of the cake that the good place has to deal with the fact that their imaginations are more limited than they thought and they insist that eternity would be boring and i'll say eternity is only boring to boring people um then i panicked god in heaven can god in heaven survive it i responded yes also god is immaterial so he isn't attached to the laws of thermodynamics right about 10 15 years ago by virtue of my reading and study i began trying to summarize what the new testament calls the present evil age and paul keeps talking about decay and the greeks paid a lot of attention to decay i kept talking about the age of decay and you can notice this that the idea of love or the form of love you can run this in platonism or christianity or some mixture of the two c.s lewis noted that all love in this world ends with death or betrayal but love itself does not decay and so right there we have a sense of part of us is decaying and part of us is not and god does not decay and so when jesus jesus body resurrected body is from creation 2.0 not subject to decay so and stupid idea comes even if god can't survive the if god can't survive the heat death of the universe well that was a question that was asked for jordan peterson because if god is merely a human intersubjective construct then someone asked him in one of the early biblical series basically if all human beings die or at the heat death of the universe does god go with it and peterson sort of sidestepped the question but that question itself asks whether god is simply a projection or a human concept that has been intersubjectively spiritualized by us or if god is as christianity says foundational and we are derivative if even if god can't survive the heat death of the universe then hey it is something to experience this is a bit because exactly where peterson is at right dying with our creator i laugh because i think god wouldn't be affected by it however i still think on that who knows god could create another universe things start to sound good again then fear b comes the good lie oh yeah it's a fact humans can find faces and patterns everywhere it's our biology to survive and create communities what if it's all wishful thinking right and so the symbolic world dies again and i realize yeah we aren't just walking towards entropy but the symbols are just necessary lies we tell we need to tell ourselves to keep things going forward this is exactly the modernist take on the the sympathetic modernist take on religion it's like yeah you know i don't believe it but we sort of need it but that then becomes unfulfilling because it's sort of like let's let's imagine i don't really believe my wife loves me but living together works better if i pretend that she does i'm not going to divorce the back of my mind that says my wife doesn't really love me it's it's always going to haunt me and i think that's why a lot of people who have sort of taken the peterson journey and gotten to this point and said yeah humans need religion so i'm going to not be an anti-theist i'm going to hang out with religious people because they've got some crazy idea that there's a god who tells them to love even atheists and and so religion is good for us and all of that but you'll finally find that unsatisfying you have to go through the door and re-enchant if you actually want to swim in the waters so i'll keep reading symbols are thus necessary lies we need to tell ourselves to keep going forwards but now i wake up pray thank you pray thanking christ and then think the universe will die and i could be living a lie but that's okay because at least i have the temporal sacred gift of a good short life yeah and then i think you take the step further let's see this is this is sort of what i do with you know when raf kelly called told called it my reverse pascals wager i had never thought of it in those terms but that i thought yeah he's right because okay if the materialists are right then it doesn't really matter what i think or do and if in fact living a christian life is more meaningful and more loving towards my neighbor and more satisfying for me i find no atheist argument against it but then i'm still left with where i think a lot of people are left that they really want it to be true but they don't believe it and i think that's much more a function of training the elephant i say that in a secular frame if i say it in a christian frame i would say run to jesus and ask for his spirit because when you get his spirit you can really believe him that's putting on my pastoral hat so and yes i talk out i talk both ways on my channel oh 1138 hey paul oh for grim gris i see you're relatively short on questions today so here's a minefield pick your favorite grim gris is so good he is he is he is i think maybe the only and he might not even consider himself an anarchist but when i think of anarchism i think of grim because uh he's a he's a bomb thrower that's what he is he throws these bombs are you a peterson apologist no i use jordan peterson i really do that doesn't mean i don't love him that doesn't mean i don't wish him well that doesn't mean i don't want him to thrive but jordan peterson jordan peterson is sort of like a litmus test he was a die in the culture and suddenly all kinds of things that were invisible now were visible jordan peterson is the unauthorized exorcist who has been exercising the spirit of modernity in people all over the place and once he sweeps their house for a lot of people jesus comes back in so i hope i'm a jordan peterson popularizer because i think the medicine he's giving is what the culture needs even while he still hasn't fully left the blue church so and i know i get a lot of comments about because i try to read as many comments as i can oh another video about peterson don't talk about peterson so much or you're a peterson shill or you're you're you're just a hanger on to peterson well there's maybe some truth in some of that but i saw when when i got interested in peterson because i saw what he was doing and i said that's a good thing that needs to happen and there's going to be a lot of people that he exercises that they need a new spirit in that in their house and i think they need i think they need the spirit of christ inhabiting the house that jordan peterson exercises so can you speak on the topic of information warfare in the context of the culture war yeah these are the you know fortunately at this point we're not fighting with bullets but we're fighting with information and in that way um jonathan peugeot we should imagine him i was going to use certain iconic symbols of other revolutions but to say that would in some ways have been blasphemy to the revolution that jonathan peugeot is waging because i think it's a good revolution and i want to see him wage it well so but yeah jonathan peugeot is jonathan peugeot is undertaking informational warfare and he is really good at it and it is happening so is peterson vervecky is doing that to a degree but he's an academic and so it's a little different did vvk or maybe you mean pvk and it's a typo saying your name and jordan peterson's channel add social pressure on the commentary no no my my pressure on the commentary is is what they're saying important enough for me to take my time to make it more accessible to the world and when i first listened to it i thought i don't know if this is worth my time because it was too frenetic now as i've i've heard from a number of you second third time in things are starting to gel and as i'm slowly going through it in the commentary i'm seeing a lot of value in it so that's the pressure um peterson i how can peterson not know who i am am it used to be that all the clip channels in the first wave all the clip channels were going through all of jordan peterson's stuff and making clips just clip clip clip and there's still some clip channels out there that are doing that with some of his recent stuff but for the most part a combination of youtube demonetizing all those clip channels and the fact that because jordan isn't walking into the blue church and throwing and destroying its icons he's not getting the same kind of blue church promotion that he ironically got in the first wave and so there's there's far less incentive to do a clip channel of jordan peterson now because you're not going to have the same kind of algorithmic ride that i stumbled into in november of 2017 i didn't know what i was doing i didn't know what youtube was i just made a video and it's like whoa what happened it's still true that videos about jordan peterson do well in terms of the the metrics on my channel but not like they used to so so how many people are really so so a lot of the a lot of the nominal jordan peterson fans are sort of out there but they're not making videos anymore more and i still am and so i look like an anachronism or i i look like manic or i look obsessive compulsive or i look insane by still talking about this dude i don't give a crap how i look in those things i'm sure i'm some of those things i do these things right from the start because of the reasons i saw the value in it and that's why i keep doing it it's like oh you're making big money yeah you want to know how much money a video makes ask rick he'll tell you youtube if you're living off youtube adsense you'd better have a big account and yeah i i believe that that that was a serious hit when youtube demonetized brett brett weinstein's channel i believe that but his channel is a lot bigger than mine financially no can i live on this no why do i do it because i think it's the right thing to do because it's interesting to me because i want to have a conversation about this and the only way i can is by doing this stuff and you all keep talking back to me and you're all still interested so you know it's the it's sort of like in john six when jesus had this mass following and jesus says you know unless you eat my flesh and drink my blood you can have no part of me and you know it sort of dispels the masses in gallilee who are following him because he's handing out bread and he's doing miracles and he looks to his disciples and says what about you well i you know the the the i think jordan would love jordan is doing a heat check on his his idea that youtube is unseating mass media it is but these things take a long time mass media still has a ton of power and jordan's channel is not growing like it did in 2018 and it won't jordan has sort of been pigeonholed in the zeitgeist by the blue church which still has tremendous power and so unless jordan decides to change course on wave number two and feels healthy enough and well enough to go back into the blue church and start over changing money changing tables overturning those uh his the pace of his growth is going to be quite slow his the pace of his growth is going to be quite slow because this book isn't going to do it his upcoming his upcoming book that he mentioned to vervecky that i'm much more interested in reading that than this so his video with vervecky his video with peugeot this is the area of his work that is the most important and i'm not surprised this video with peugeot got a million and a half views it's going to be very interesting to see how this video with vervecky goes because i think a lot of people are going to watch it for 20 minutes and say i can't understand this and simply walk away because most people there's a bar of entry that if you want it if you want in further you're going to have to go in further and commit yourself to it church has exactly the same thing 80 percent of the people in church give 20 percent of the money 20 percent of the people in church give 80 percent of the money when it comes to the jordan peterson following if you're still watching my videos you're in the 20 percent because we just have a sense that there's something going on here that is worth looking at we know lightning's going to strike again here and if you want to learn from the lightning you look where it doesn't just strike once but where it strikes with regularity and that's peterson so um and again the fact that to answer this question how could he not know that i'm doing this because probably every time he turns on his channel that darn youtube algorithm serves up one of my videos because there's just not that many other people working on it like there was in 2018 so yeah he knows my name does he watch my videos i don't think so because he's not going to spend two or three hours doing it does he read my sub stack i haven't checked the list yet i don't know that he subscribed to it he i think he started following me on twitter but he's going to have an even bigger problem if he decides he wants to talk to me of figuring out who the heck i am and i think that was a big part of the vervecki video he doesn't know who john vervecki is as well anymore because jordan peterson has been fighting for his life for the last five years he's been fighting for his academic life he's been fighting for his reputational life and he's been fighting for his biological life for the last five years so if he ever talks to me he's going to have he's going to have an extremely low resolution picture of me which will probably have more noise than signal and so if possible in a two-hour conversation if he could learn me better because how's he going to learn about me is he going to watch 100 hours of video i've got over 500 videos in my jordan peterson playlist he can't watch those he's not going to he shouldn't so i this has never been just about peterson this is about you i'm an evangelist this is what i do but i'm a weird kind of evangelist because i won't hate you if you don't love my jesus but i think that's actually at the core of loving jesus is you love your rivals and people who say mean things about you it's what jesus says in the sermon on the mount it's in public domain it's in the bible it's what christians should do it's hard to do but it shouldn't surprise anybody even though it always continually does because christians are so bad at it so people say logos in a lot of the corner of the internet and lately it's been struck the notion of integrity of logos struck yeah logos low the value of that word is diluting because when when when the gospel of john uses that word the author knew exactly what he was doing most of the time when we use words today we don't know what we're doing and i think that's quite true of that word do you remember jordan peterson saying he was going to do a proverbs as a biblical city a biblical series yep will it happen who knows you know the as i said in my commentary videos this conversation with vervecky raised questions in my mind again about jordan's health given what he's been through in the last two years of course there are going to be questions about his health i think he's getting stronger we've seen that i'm anxiously anticipating the next video to drop to see how he is in those conversations does he interrupt at the rate he always does now he's always interrupted a lot but it was excessive in this video with vervecky so i don't know how's your week going ask chad the alcoholic my week's going good i started the tom holland book dominion i find it interesting that many of the same human behaviors that seem to be plaguing the thoughts and actions of today's affluent societies and other um for example ideological battles battles over who's right about god and self mutilation castration and self-mutilation castration and self-mutilation castration and self-mutilation castration self-mutilation castration gender modification among many other things are just old repeating patterns amen thank you for reading history everybody's like oh this this this gender read about just listen to the rest is history listen to what nero did to his lover we're back in rome baby why do we think we're so novel and unique because we're amnesiacs and history is hard and history is also history books are a writing of us read primary sources but primary sources are hard to understand so you know tom holland's journey spiritual journey is completely understandable lewis himself said it an atheist can't be too careful about their reading also while listening to that while listening to this book it dawned on me um absurd that any of us should be wielding around ideas and beliefs about god like gnostic hammers interesting how bent on shaping the world why do we do this we're ambitious little sprites i also recognize the hypocrisy of my question i thought it was a good question thanks for asking you next question hey paul folks around here call me paula i really want to build my theological knowledge but what's the best way to go about this short um this short of going to seminary well youtube i think is a pretty good way uh perhaps most importantly i want to avoid tumbling too far down a sectarian rabbit hole which seems inevitable if i'm just following my own interests thanks in advance so c.s lewis has this image of mere christianity which is a hallway and lewis says you can't really live in the hallway you might spend a little time in the hallway but if you're sleeping in the hallway you're looking homeless what you really need to do is go into one of the rooms because in the rooms you have fireplaces and actually in the rooms you have the eucharist and you have people who have been living in those rooms if you want to know mere christianity you need to commit to a tradition it doesn't mean you'll necessarily have to be in that tradition your whole life but you can't live in the hallway and so not everyone should go to seminary by any means it's expensive it's seminaries are professional schools okay they're professional schools to train professional clergy that's what seminaries are they're not necessarily fundamentally theological schools you will learn some theology sort of like as a doctor you will learn some biology and some chemistry but a doctor is not a biologist or a chemist he's a doctor ministers are not theologians or historians or therapists we're pastors so you can learn a lot read books watch youtube videos get audio books but that will only be looking at the light if you want to look through the light find a good church develop a relationship with your pastor or priest or with a group of people within your church who want to improve their theological knowledge study the bible in a disciplined way not just most church bible studies are really haphazard and very shallow they're also embedded in a whole bunch of other things so but yeah so do so in the context of the church of a church because there's too many theological traditions to know them all so in a certain sense you have to first learn one theological tradition before you have perspectives on others so you have to do so both within the light and you have to do so looking at the light unfortunately most secular universities that still do have religious studies or theological departments are so simply corrupt they're of very little use and you'd have to be really careful about picking and choosing because it's sort of the contemporary religion of woke and and there's not much theology to study there because the applications are now being promoted by pepsi and apple and microsoft so that doesn't seem to be terribly worth your time all right hey paul thoughts on thoughts in general on the new southern baptist convention president i haven't paid any attention to it so i can't even name the person so i haven't i know i know they've got drama but i've i've my mind has been elsewhere so sorry hey paul the rest of history had an episode on england german relations i am just now about two-thirds of the way through that episode so i'm a little behind they describe the author george elliot who was writing in the 1816s and 70s having a crisis of faith because the germans were radically rewriting the basis of our belief in christianity i guess some of that comes across in her character in the in the pathetic mr mr kausserbaum in the book middle march whose life um uh whose life's work the key to all mythologies is overtaken by new thinking i think that's probably right just in general terms who are we talking about who would george elliot have been writing that knocked her for such a loop i i briefly caught that because i listened to these things as i'm doing other things and so because you listen to this i'd go back to it but i would expect that tom holland and dominic sandbrook are riffing on the general nature of modernist german theology i really like that episode and i want to listen to it again because if you listen to nt wright's lectures that he gave there on youtube not too long ago i think they were given at abirdine they're very prestigious lectures he did a little bit of discussing about german influence on english theology and this gets into the overall relationship between england and germany in that period which is why i was interested in this episode um at the end of the 19th century germany was in many ways the preeminent western superpower and it took two world wars to pull germany down germany may regain that status in the 21st century germany has been in some ways taking over europe but not in the ways it did in the 20th century and margaret thatcher figured that out and so that's a that's an excellent episode of the podcast but but the the spirit of german academia in late modernity and at the peak of modernity well this gets weird though because you've got the german you've got german modernism and then you've got german romanticism and that german romanticism and my guesses had an impact on jung and on steiner and on other german romantics so i'm not really well educated enough in any of this to to say anything of profit but there's a lot there and its impact on the church germany pretty much invented higher criticism which in some ways is christian modernism gone to seed because as the reason jonathan peugeot has very little patience for any kind of contemporary biblical scholarship is that german higher criticism continues to stalk it and even today to a degree anyone who wants to be read outside of evangelical enclaves conservative evangelical enclaves continues to have to look over their left shoulder at german higher criticism and some of the best english scholars have managed to do that like nt right ff bruce i howard marshall and so you can find modernist evangelical biblical english biblical studies that i think are worthwhile and nt right is really in that camp but he is always looking over his left shoulder at german higher criticism and then the other waves of higher criticism that followed in germany's wake and in many ways that movement left the bible unreadable which is why the canonical movement developed with guys like brevard childs and and at least in the jewish circles someone like robert alter who taught at berkeley so so robert alter is i don't know whether or not he's an observant jew i i'm skeptical that he is he is not writing conservative jewish scholarship he is certainly not doing rabbinic work but he is sort of doing late modernity a little bit of post-modernity scholarship on the old testament and his capacity to understand narrative so it's been interesting now going through an audio version his translation of the old testament because so i'm listening to that with my wife and of course i listen at a lot higher resolution than she does because i'm always working with these texts and so some of his decisions i think yeah that's a real improvement others of his decisions i think no you're you're spending too much time worrying about modernist higher criticism and and in some cases worrying about contemporary culture war stuff like gender inclusive language gender inclusive language is something that you have to deal with even if you're not bending your knee to the culture war if in fact you are trying to reach out to a group who has already had their english language changed sufficiently so that even a translation like the revised standard version from the 1950s is beyond their grasp but that leads you into the quagmire of all sorts of contemporary biblical translation so yeah i think oh gosh i can't get through these it's 11 11 what's your wish uh and of this week's questions actually no i know i can do this um maybe i'll sorry uh i'm going to end it right here where they sort of started today and of my two questions isn't it such exciting video watching me type into discord that just must be thrilling okay so the one question about eric weinstein and then we're done for the day and there's some more comments under there that we'll pick up and again i am looking at my calendar likely not going to have a question and answer next week which is the ninth but i should have one again on the 16th all right so hey big guy are you saying i'm fat um i just saw a tweet from eric weinstein posting a picture of the titus arch and expressing hatred of the roman empire for the destruction of jerusalem despite being almost 2 000 years now that and this is exactly my comment about why take down the queen statue now how many years has it been since people have felt uncomfortable and ended the practice of these basically western christian re-education camps run by a christendom government with a christian monarch it's been decades why take another statue now why complain about the destruction of jerusalem in 70 ad now does it have to do with what happened in 70 ad yes it says just as much about now and so even though i continue to recommend that we read history all history reflects the time it is written always it includes ancient history because we don't have perspective this made me think about how powerful the christian unique um how think of how powerful the christian unique power of forgiveness is to reshape the world the world would be a much bloodier place today without it after 2 000 years of victimizing each other absolutely the bible says when the time had fully come which meant that history was right for christ he wasn't coming sooner he wasn't coming later he came at exactly the right time so example just like 9 11 was picked for september 11 1683 i didn't know that the defeat of the otterman's i didn't know that that's interesting we could do that every day forever it has also made me think of the current culture look at look at now juneteenth becomes a national holiday why now and when a lot of those confederate statues were torn down people were making the point those confederate statues were put up right at the end of reconstruction at a time when those statues symbolized the spirit those statues were manifestations of spirit of various spirits were they manifestations of racist spirits probably i might say that they're taken down not necessarily i'm worried about erasure of history because we've grown in strength and when you read 1984 you know the dude that we're reading about works in this office where they're just always shredding history now the age of decay shreds history all the time and the kind of iconoclasm that jonathan peugeot is engaging in fortunately is not one where he's destroying artwork and documents uh jonathan peugeot is fighting spiritual warfare and if you think that's frank paretti this present darkness spiritual warfare sort of but jonathan peugeot is a warrior is a spiritual warfare warrior he's a he's an iconoclast he's a revolutionary and but this these revolutions happen all the time every time someone decides to build a church building or to decorate it or to redecorate it spirits are at work i just saw this morning peugeot had a tweet on fashion fashion is spiritual discernment a fairly low level one often but that's what it is those striped bell bottoms that i wore in the 70s they're a manifestation of spirit spirit it also made me think of the current culture war and how these woke warriors are trying to purify america with a religious zeal but without christianity and therefore there is no forgiveness where is a christian america whereas a christian america could forgive and accept robert bird as an ex-kkk leader now there is no further employment prospects for public display and shaming for 10 year for a 10 year old racist tweet that's right and the irony is that this is done in the name of excluding gay and lesbian people from employment it's horrible to exclude them from employment oh okay but you're going to exclude people from these other employments that's why we just have to watch you just have to watch the language whenever you hear a word like abuse i'm not saying it's not being i'm not saying it's not being mis the word is being misused i'm saying now to sort of point to civilla's channel about value i mean peugeot says pattern pattern pattern pattern civilla says value value value value value when you hear a value expressed there's a spirit beneath it beneath it always how do you think christianity how do you think christianity how do you think that christianity use that power forgiveness to bridge the gap in this current climate i was just thinking in fact with respect to the england germany podcast on the rest is history what an astounding thing the end of world war two was you know even at the end of the first world war the versailles treaty the western powers had a very punitive approach to germany and it didn't go well and i think the podcast was right that at the end of the second world war the western powers western powers were afraid of the soviet union and so there was talk about breaking up bismarck's unification of germany and you know bringing it back to the holy roman empire that day is gone now but they wanted a strong germany as a buffer against the iron curtain churchill's language so germany was put back together but what an interesting germany it is a couple of guys in the s jury host support networker from germany and there are a fair number of germans that listen to this which i find interesting so will germany be once again become a superpower i think it sort of is but it's a different kind of superpower and their conquest of europe through the eu in some ways is perhaps a lesson in how we conduct warfare differently and america america revolutionized that too because two of the two of the best allies the united states has are germany and and japan but they're not vassals japan to a degree because of their dependence on the u.s military umbrella against china but you know japan has been increasing their military too because again sort of like the u.s is worried about china so the u.s wants a strong japan and and there's less concern about you know rehearsing the second world war so but the united states forgave germany and japan nuked a couple cities and then was ready to forgive you know japan had to lay down the emperor germany had to promise to turn over a new leaf and join the league of nations sort of but that's what happened so yeah christian forgiveness was key to that and well here's the scary question so i've talked a lot about spirits in this podcast i haven't part of the weakness of that language is that it you individual human beings lose agency now peterson of course is a big promoter of of individual agency and identity we are not just spiritual repeaters we are also spiritual actors we are the image bearers of god on this in this world and if you listen to another german theologian but rod and his commentary on genesis that image is sort of like those statues of saddam hussein that got toppled when we went through in the second gulf war the image is sort of like the image of the queen in canada that got toppled over the furor over these religious reeducation schools that the christian government of canada used to support and again it's interesting that america is a secular nation full of people that say no we're a christian nation the word god does not appear in the american constitution not once it's in the declaration of independence but not in the constitution the british realms are christian nations now they're now one might look at them and say they're less christian than america and that gets into this question of what are human beings we're not only spiritual repeaters we're also spiritual agents and therefore accountable and also therefore participants and so what happens to a principality's capacity for forgiveness one of the men members of one of the estuary groups he came actually for the first time when i was there and to get a little drubbing for being a fan boy because you only show up when paul shows up but um he promised to keep coming um but he's a he works for a mega church in south africa and he was talking i've had some a few conversations with some about south south africans lately and you know the you know their reconciliation commitments how they at least initially got out of apartheid that's a huge thing well is the answer to the religious indoctrination schools that the christian empire of england ran burning churches and toppling statues is that the answer african americans face these questions in the early part of the 20th century and you can find the division of that between martin luther king jr and malcolm x malcolm x was a black nationalist sort of opposite the white nationalists and malcolm x wanted the united states to carve out an african american homeland in the deep south that's what malcolm x wanted read the history that was his vision that was his vision what's canada going to do with its indigenous population watch the language what does it do there so truth and reconciliation absolutely that's probably exactly what you need now there's a difference between what happened in south africa with their truth and reconciliation commission and what we're doing now because the deal of the truth and reconciliation commission was that if you were part of the oppressive apartheid government you could go forward and confess your sins and they would be pronounced forgiven and you would be given amnesty but you were confessing your own sins to say that contemporary people to to identify contemporary people as avatars of dead sinners based on skin color or gender or religion is a very dangerous game because well how much first nation's blood do you have in you then very quickly we're going back to centuries ago when it's the blood that matters christianity changed that because judaism did it earlier but christianity changed that because you didn't need to have jewish blood this is the apostle paul's work you didn't need to have jewish blood to become a christian you didn't need to first go through judaism to become a christian and this this has gotten into our our credo national countries like the united states as opposed to ethno-nationalism which said you are a member of this country by virtue of blood no you are a member of you are a citizen of the united states if you pledge allegiance to the flag and the republic and the constitution it's credo nationalism your blood is unimportant this movement back to blood is a very dangerous movement now it doesn't mean that blood goes away but every african american or probably every has within their blood the blood of slave owners and slaves mingled nearly every first nation's person in the u.s and canada and in mexico and in south america because this is not just an issue in canada or the united states mexico is not mexican is not mexican is not an ethnicity it's a nationalism mexico is a multi-ethnic country every first nation's person has the blood of colony of colonials and indigenous persons and in fact there's no such thing as an indigenous person in north america everyone immigrated at some point we're all africans so forgiveness is the only way forward this is what christianity teaches at some point forgiveness says i will no longer hold against you or your descendants the wrong done to me and my descendants we bury the hatchet we're not burying the hatchet we're going to keep burying it in each other's skulls and we shouldn't do it if you live by the sword you'll die by the sword that's a good way to wrap this thing up what do you say rick time to wrap up all right you can end transmission