https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=tvojBbbltso

 There you go. Well, I sensed you were getting into something deeper, so I wanted to, and again, often people say, oh, did you ever recording that? Because our memories are foggy and often you find something in a recording you didn't know. So go ahead. Sorry, I didn't try. Oh, no, no problem. Well, I do have to say real quick, like, I really appreciate what you're doing, like, between you and nodes and like, it's just really getting me into all of this really deeper stuff. And it's really, you know, in a way, materializing my relationship with with God, like, I'm understanding things and seeing things like I've never seen before. And it's just been, it's been really awesome. Such a cool community to be a part of, like, I love what I love what node is doing, you know, just taking a page of time at the massive meeting. Genius. I love it. Like, you know, I don't know, I can't say that I'm learning much, you know, but I'm like saturating myself in it. So I hope to maintain or to retain that information at some point, you know. But um, yeah, we did the road trip. We ended up at my dream job bungee, we got to go inside the video game developer. You know, it started me thinking about like, as we were driving back, you know, like, why why did we do this journey to begin with? You know, why why was a bungee like my main destination to get to? And some of it was like a pilgrimage, you know, and talk to other friends about this. And one of my friends was he told me a story about how he got divorced and he was like just really confused about life, you know, how how that situation could put you, you know, what put you into and he said he went out into the woods and he lasted like a week just with a knife. And like, yeah, and just, you know, survived and like, you know, tried to find himself, you know. It's so weird how we have this in us to to do, you know, like, do you have any thoughts on that? Well, it's, you know, it reminds me of makes me think of Dostoevsky's piano key illustration that if if someone had everything they ever wanted, they just blow it up. And obviously, stuff had blown up in his life. And so going out into the woods at some deep level obviously meant something to him. It'd be interesting to talk to him about, OK, what, why, what did that mean? Why did you do it? What did you learn? It's yeah, we're we're we're mysteries to ourselves in many, many ways. We really are. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, that's what my wife and I after the road trip, we kept on, you know, trying to ask ourselves, like, what what did this mean to us? You know, like, what what did we learn? And we certainly learned a lot about each other, you know, being stuck in the car with you know, just us for three weeks, you know, probably learn learn more about me than I'd like to admit. But it was I don't know. It was just it was really cool. And I don't know. When we what about that job? I mean, what makes it a dream job for you? I'm. For a few years now, I've really been trying to figure out what is. Like, what could I do as a living where I would be really happy doing, you know, and this actually came up in a notes video in the comments section, you know, like occupation versus vocation. And I've really been trying to figure that out. And I think I've pinpointed it. It's it's like a world building and storytelling and video games is just an amazing medium to be able to do that. Yeah. So. I mean, that's that's what I'm shooting for. It's it's. You know, video game. Creation is obviously a new thing. But you compare it to storytelling. You know, we've had fiction and writing and we've had visual art and it's you know, it's in some and we've had we've had, you know, film arts, movies. And you look at it and it's, you know, just kind of another extension of that. So so visual arts, you know, what's the difference between visual arts and movies? Well, time. So, you know, you have progression. You have interactions. Yeah. Then now you get into video games and you really have interaction. And then you get into obviously multiplayer. Then you have, you know, much now that the non-player, the NPC meme is going on, player character meme. But whenever you play like I'm not a big gamer, but, you know, if I play, say, Civilization, which is about the only game I play with my son, Jared, it's a it's a totally different game than if I'm just playing against the A.I. And very quickly, you learn the A.I.s, how the A.I. cheats, its limitations, how stupid it is. Yeah. Whereas if I'm playing with my son, it's totally different. It's totally different. There's there's ego layers involved and there's father son layers. And so and so that's interesting. I didn't think about that. Yeah. Yeah. And so then there's, you know, that's different from, say, playing maybe with friends via the Internet or strangers via the Internet. But then, you know, obviously the video games get into the idea of simulation and simulation is the wrong word. We don't really have the right word for it. But, you know, other worlds, you know, second worlds and so on and so forth and incarnating different things. I mean, it is it is it is an amazing cutting edge. Thing right now for us, because, you know, technology continues to dramatically improve, you know, the CPU horsepower, game card horsepower. So I could I could I can imagine it's a very exciting place to be creative in. Yeah, I'm I'm really excited about it. It's very intimidating. You know, I would say over like the past. Four years, I've really started taking this seriously and I'm really working on disciplining myself so that it is, you know, like my main focus to get good to get at that professional level. And part of that, ironically, was, you know, really maintaining my video game playing time because I was playing way too much. And I don't know. It's been it's been such a cool journey, like especially just over the past, like, two months of really disciplining myself. So I've really been trying to go to bed at the same time, wake up at the same time. You know, I'm I'm putting so much time into my homework and exercising. I'm packing my lunch before I go to work, which is huge for me. You know, yeah, yeah. And I just feel like I'm learning a lot about myself just through that. And it's it's exciting because, you know, I don't I'm definitely not alone with battling, you know, depression and anxiety and all of that stuff. And I've tried medication like I wouldn't say that I was really bad, but I definitely had my moments. And I don't know, the medication worked to an extent, but I just always thought like, well, I don't want to be relying on this. You know, like if I like how strong am I? Like how do you ever see a clockwork orange? No. Well, it's like how to boil it down. It's like, how do they fix sin? And they they make a pill for it. So they put like they instead of stopping them from sinning, it just makes a sick feeling in their stomach for when they sin. So they don't cure sin. You know what I mean? Yeah, yeah, yeah. So that's kind of what I was thinking. It's Sam Harris's greatest fear. And, you know, it's the guilt. It's the religious guilt. Because it's a feeling in your stomach. It's conscience. Yeah. Yeah, those debates are really, really interesting. Like I couldn't help but laugh every time. You know, Jordan Peterson would say something and it was like good or it sounded good or it sounded like, you know, a rebuttal. You get this big applause and and, you know, cheering. And then they would do it on, you know, on Sam Harris's side. I just couldn't help. I had to like stop and think like, what's going on here? Like, why are these people, you know, what are they really cheering for? Yeah. Yeah. You know, is it just they just want their side to be right? I think it's I think part of it's that, you know, it is a funny thing. And why? You know, when we hear something, we identify as truth, something in us wants to participate in it. Yeah. And that's basically what I'm doing right now. Well, that's and there's there's something healthy about that. It's it's it's similar to beauty in that it's the the the validation is built into it and and we're drawn to it. And it's you know, it's glory in terms of. Yeah, we you know, we also always get a sense with these words that we're circling it, you know, and so glory. OK, there's an aspect in beauty. There's an aspect in truth. There's an aspect in and and we're we're circling and we can see it from different sides. But then we come around, we see it. It's not unlike the Grand Canyon in that in that sense. The Grand Canyon is is is you go there. And first time I saw the Grand Canyon, I was with a college trip and we got there really early in the morning before the sun rose. And you'd get out there and it was completely black and it's kind of like you're standing in your cold and you're looking around and there's nothing. And the sun comes up a little bit and you just begin to see hints of things. And that would be amazing. And then it just continues to unfold. And the the amazing thing about the Grand Canyon, I was just at Bryce, Bryce Canyon, my the last vacation I took. Where is that? That's in Utah. That's in the Canyon lands of Utah and like similar to the Grand Canyon, it's a canyon. So you see it from the rim and you kind of see the thing and you start walking down into it. And now you're seeing I mean, it's it's again, this is kind of the connected with what the potential of a you know, of a computer game versus, let's say, a photograph where you're dependent upon the photographer for the perspective. And a photograph, but in a computer game, you get actually to descend into the canyon. Yes. And and and you know, you know, the canyon better because you. This gets into the question of the word no. I was having a conversation yesterday with in Spanish with Saber and Cono said, Saber is to kind of know a thing and Cono said is kind of to know a person. And and so you're you know, you make the journey from Saber and to Cono said and and you and you take that journey into the canyon. And that's really cool. Yeah. And you know, and. Words, words escape us words are. It's difficult to it's difficult to capture it to represent it with language and then to communicate it with language. Do you think do you think English is limiting in that aspect compared to other languages? Every language is limiting. I, you know, there's always there's always something in another language that you can't capture in the other language. For example, if you grow up in a Dutch subculture, you know, you pick up some of these words like but now and been out just means close confining. Uncomfortable and and what's interesting is how let's say I know almost no Dutch, but here's this word but now that I know because the Dutch immigrants leaving behind most Dutch. Just kind of this word they couldn't get rid of because they never found an English word that has it and you have that. You know, you have that with any every language conversion. So all languages are limited, but limited in different ways. And it's also the case that in many ways, limitations of language create other opportunities and possibilities because of the limitations. So it's, you know, the. Whoever designed this thing that we're living in is amazing. Oh, yeah, I know because. You know, and that's that's the sense of that's the sense of the glory. You know, I love what the what the what the angels cry in Isaiah six. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God Almighty, which means he's, you know, holy, holy, holy is far, far, far away. We're not going to comprehend them, but the whole earth is full of his glory. So it's it's the both end of heaven and earth. And what's what's the verse that says even like the rocks will speak my name? Oh, yeah, with Jesus, when the the the religious leaders are annoyed at the triumphal entry and and says, you know, because they're they're they're basically they're telling Jesus they're crying out things that should not be said of a human being, which is which is good orthodoxy to them. But Jesus, of course, claims he's more. And so then he says, well, the very the very stones would cry out. And and that has it's not only just the common rocks on the road, but later on when they're when they're leaving, Jesus says not one stone will be left on another with respect to the temple. So so one of the ways you can understand that verse is that, you know, if the people didn't cry out, the temple would cry his name. Well, why? Because he is the temple. And that's awesome. And, you know, we have we have inklings of this glory. We have we have moments when we when we catch a glimpse of it and it grabs our heart and we want more. Yeah. And that drives us. That drives us, you know, see us. Lewis's last battle further up and further in. So, yeah, going back to the Grand Canyon, when we when we went there on a road trip, we we were in some sort of argument. While we were driving through, like we drove through the entrance or driving through and we're kind of arguing. And then you get to the rim where you where you could see it from the road past the entrance and we both just stopped talking like immediately. Yeah. We're like, wow, like it, you know, and that's another thing about the pictures and what you're saying. You know, we took so many pictures. I think we had like over 500 pictures from our trip and we're all excited to, you know, come home and show everybody. I mean, the pictures sucked, really compared to everything else, you know, like you, especially the Grand Canyon. Like, I almost didn't even want to show them because I mean, you have to be there. Yeah. Never, never have I felt so small before. Yeah. And, you know, to be able to experience that right here on Earth is it's definitely worth doing. No, it's it's true. And I do that all the time. I go to I'm a national parks junkie and I'm becoming one. Yeah. Out West that they're amazing. They're just amazing. Yeah. And I love taking pictures. And so I have the same experience all the time. I take hundreds and hundreds of pictures. I can't tell you how many pictures of Yosemite and you look at them. And I love the pictures I take because they're a they're a taste, but not the same as driving into Yosemite Valley and seeing El Capitan just come into view and and have dome. And. Yeah, we're small and and and these and this glory. This this glory both reminds us of our of our size, but also whispers to us of another world. Mm hmm. And picture. Yeah, great photographers can capture more of it, but. Um. Yeah, but. I don't know. It's like we were saying, it's not the same of being there. I mean, because I mean, there's so much more to being there. Like for this road trip, you know, we had to plan, you know, so much of our lives around the road trip. We had to gather up all of our equipment. You know, we had to like time everything out. We had to actually physically drive there. So. You know, I guess that's that's what I'm seeing when I see the picture, but that's not nobody else is seeing. You know, like all the all the times that we had to sleep in our car. Which, like it is worth it for the experience, but yeah, yeah, you realize why you have a bed. Yeah. And like I'm a, I'm a small guy, but I still couldn't fit in the back of our car. So it's not that big of a car. Especially with all of our luggage. Well, and then you had that, that incident on your way to church here where the top, you know, that you lost your, your carrier. Yep. And that I remember telling you that same thing happened to my dad. And I remember it was the same container that he used when I was like, And I'm like, when we put it on top of our car before we left, I'm like, I can't let that happen. No, I can't be like dad, you know, I can't make the same mistakes he did. And it happened same container and everything. And of course, you know, my wife's running in the middle of the highway to save her shoes, which I was really upset about. Honey, your shoes are not worth your life. I mean, this may have been my exact words. And honestly, I couldn't even look because I saw the cars coming because of the way at that point of the highway, it's, it was like the top of the hill. Yep. And the flu off of like, you know, the bottom. So I saw the cars coming. I saw her in the middle of the highway. I just turned around. I couldn't even look. It's like, oh my gosh. I was like, I'm not going to be able to get out of this. I'm not going to be able to get out of this. I'm not going to be able to get out of this. Gosh. She made it. You know, thank God she has those shoes. Well, you will never forget your, your Odyssey with her and it will be, no, it's. Yeah. You, you had a conversation with another, another guy who was married and you asked him how long he was married and he was like six years. I'm like, oh, that's pretty good. Yeah. It's six years. It's kind of a long time. You know, I've been married for two and then you're like, oh yeah, you're just, you haven't even started yet. I'm like, oh man, that's a hundred percent right. Yeah. We still got a long way to go. So the more we do stuff like this, the more it's going to, you know, cultivate our marriage. Yeah. Yeah. Marriage itself is a journey that, you know what you begin to, well, there's marriage and then there's kids and. I can't wait. Yeah. It's. I'm trying. Kids though. It's, it is glorious. It's, it's trying because in a sense, what you do is you expand your marriage, but you add new dimensions and you're not really married to your kids because they do. They do leave, but you're never separated from them. There will. And in a weird way, your bond with your kids, you know, you, you, you have a sense that, well, you can divorce a spouse, but there's a bond you have with your kids that never, that never goes away either. So. Yeah. I have six nieces and nephews and I think the first one was born when I was like 14. So we've always been like, you know, kind of a big family. We've all been pretty close. So it's just always been in me. Like I can't wait to have kids. And. Yeah. I say this now because I don't have kids, but mainly for the challenging aspects of it, you know, like I just, I can't imagine how much the kids are going to teach me about the world and about myself. And. Like, yeah, it's going to be really, really hard. And, and, you know, I'm going to mess up a lot, probably, you know, hopefully not too much, but. Everyone does. I can't imagine like a better way of experiencing the world, you know, and, you know, like that glory that we're talking about, like. That maybe. I would say the closest way to get to it. Yeah. I feel for, I feel for those who have never had the privilege or the opportunity to have children and then those who, oh. The world is rich. The world is deeply rich and. You know, it's hard. To know. What it would be. Without the suffering. And that's one of the, you know, one of the things I struggle when I think about the age to come. And I think, you know, definitely down for the no more tears part, but I don't know how meaning comes in and how adventure comes in. I, but then again, as we're, you know, began talking about in terms of our smallness. The beauty is, it's not up to me to know. And it's the same with having kids. You don't, you have no idea what they will teach you. You just have no idea. Even though when you learn it from them, you'll see that you've had it all the time. You've always been, you just couldn't see it because the children have added another dimension through which to see yourself. Now you're seeing yourself as a father. Okay. And now you see yourself as kind of a shitty father. Well, crap. And then, then you see yourself as someone who had opportunities to do the right thing, but messed up. Okay. And then, and then you see yourself as actually having done some good things that blessed your children and you didn't even know you were doing them. And, and, and now suddenly you have views of your father that you now see through your children. Oh man, that's going to be wild. It is. Yeah. I've been known to be very critical of my parents in a good way. It's just, you know, like all of this, like research and theology, philosophy and like everything else. Going on in our culture now just been asking a lot of questions and challenging them, you know, like, I don't know. I want to, I guess in a way what I'm trying to do this, this could be bad is to get them to, to, you know, think about these things and be a little bit more objective so that I have people to engage with. In this, in this stuff and so that, you know, they can kind of put me in check when, when I'm not thinking clearly or have something wrong and, you know, and a lot of, I mean, sometimes it is my fault, but it doesn't always come out that way. And, you know, we'll get into some arguments. Like, do you have any, nothing real bad. Do you have any advice to how to, I don't know, introduce people to, to just thinking more objectively? Well, you know, I think, so I, you know, what, what has, what contribution has Jordan Peterson made to our culture? The, I think what he's done for a whole lot of people, not necessarily had us thinking more objectively, but more having, helping us think more and better about some really important things. You know, we had our meetup Sunday night and you know, we, it's the irony is that we don't talk about directly about Jordan Peterson that much in our meetups anymore. He just became the occasion by which we found each other and the occasion by which others can continue to find us. Every meeting, we had our 16th meeting and every, every meeting we have new people. Oh, wow. And so people are still finding us and some of the people will stick and some of the people won't, will stick. We've only had 17 meetings. But again, so as a pastor, you know, we have meetings, we have a set meeting every week. We have a set meeting every week. And so what that, what you learn in that is, you know, not unlike say what you and your wife discovered in your long road trip that being together creates other things between you. And so what Peterson has sort of done is more than I've seen in my lifetime, at least, created a, this should, this should gladden Sam Harris's heart actually created a non specifically religious context by which people can have important conversations about rationality and other things, you know. Yeah. That's what, that's what Peterson has done and at least perhaps more successfully than Sam Harris. So Sam should be thanked, Sam should be thanking Jordan and maybe taking a lesson from it. But yeah, I mean, you say non religious, I understand what you're saying there, like through his perspective, but for me personally, it's made me more confident in my beliefs. Oh yeah, yeah. I say that in the sense of it's not a Christian church. Right, right. Yeah. But he's definitely, you know, turning the religious switch on a whole lot of people. Which is Breadpilling. Yeah, breadpilling, which is of course what brought me into the conversation because it's like, oh, well, well, this is interesting. There's got to be something here. So Yeah. Just kidding. Just got three calls in a row from someone. I think she wants to talk to me. Well, I better let you go then. It's, it's, it could likely be something kind of important. So, yeah, but I will, I will send you a copy of this and you can decide what we want to do with it. And I'm happy to see your face and happy to see you got back well. Yeah, thank you. You still had a house to come back to and and your wife didn't leave you after the road trip. I spent three months with this man. I never want to see him again. No, we, we definitely are stronger and our house was four times as good than we've ever imagined when we got back. Our house was four times as good than we've ever imagined when we got back. All around a good deal. That's wonderful. Yeah, it was great talking to you, Paul. Thank you. It was great talking to you, Brandon. Take care. You too. Bye bye. Bye.