https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=BmVuXoEsurw

 This is Paul, this is one of my thief in the night live streams. I am going to drop into the Bridges of Meaning Discord server here and I will connect my camera. There we go. A little smudge or something on that camera. I will not be in this Friday. I will not be in this Friday so I thought I would do a live stream coming in. I haven't dropped a lot of... Here comes Mark. Mark made mention the other day that I hadn't done any of these and I should do another one so I figured he would drop in. There you are. Can I hear you say something so I know I can hear you? Hello? Oh good. I'm here. It works. That's good. Let me adjust this. How are you doing Mark? I'm doing okay. You actually announced it this time because the only reason I knew... I was on the Discord, I was up on the other channel and the only reason I knew is because my phone went flip flip and said Paul Danderclan live stream and I went, gotta go guys, gotta be on YouTube. Well, what is the name of your channel? Navigating Patterns. And you're pioneering conversations about the intimacy crisis. Yeah, that's been... Oh man. Paul, you gotta do something about your crazy Christians on the server, man. I was gonna have an aneurysm. I thought my head was just gonna explode. They're all materialists. You gotta do something about this, Paul. It's really hard for people to not be materialists these days. It's just very difficult. Yeah. They were all screaming. Where's the measure for intimacy? Where's the standard for intimacy? You know? Well, actually we weren't streaming when Andrea... So give me your three minute elevator pitch on intimacy crisis. Ooh, a three minute elevator pitch. Okay. The intimacy crisis is a crisis of the depth of connection between people and themselves, people and nature, people and other people, and for the crazy Christians, people and God. And when you're a materialist or you're stuck in the tyranny of quantity, which materialism will drag you into, you don't understand depth. So the thing we've been playing with lately, and this is something we've been playing with with Sally Jo, hopefully she's gonna do some art for us. There's an X axis of quantity. There's a corresponding but different X axis of quality, and there's a Y axis to quality. It has both. And so it's the Y axis part that we're missing because we can swap the X axis out and it's kind of close enough. The quantity is close enough along the X axis to quality on the X axis. So it looks like you can do the trick or jump the gap, maybe the gap, the is-ought gap or something like that. It looks like you can do that, but you're still missing the Y, which is the up and down. So that is basically the intimacy crisis in a nutshell, and it's wrapped up in the individualist, materialist, objectivist worldview. Okay. What's the symptomology of the intimacy crisis? Well, I think that it precedes the meaning crisis, right? So because you don't understand the depth of connection, right, the ability to have a deep connection, you also can't co-create meaning, right? You can't co-manifest meaning. And you also can't relate to things symbolically because symbolism is all about depth. It's not about this X axis of width. It's about this depth. So that wraps everything into meaning crisis, right? And then all the symptomology of the meaning crisis is also reflective of the symptomology of the intimacy crisis. Can you give me a phenomenological example of shallowness and depth? I can try. So I guess the easiest way to understand something like depth is something that people talk about in a relationship where the relationship has an affordance for transformation of the other person, right? So a deep relationship is one where there is a space for that transformation. It's been probably cultivated over time, right? But it's also along multiple trajectories, right? So you're understanding something along multiple trajectories. So there's a way in which you know somebody will say, so one of the things I was talking to Andrea about was dating sites. And when you get to know somebody from a profile, from a dating site, for example, what you're not getting to know is what their hopes and dreams are basically because they're generally not talking about that. They're saying, here's what I have and here's what I want. And that's not a deep interaction with a person, right? That's a transactional materialistic way of interfacing with somebody that doesn't have a depth. Because what you really want is that depth, right? You want to know, for example, you don't want to just talk to Andrea on this system and say, oh, well, she's just this good Christian woman who's raising her kids, right? You really want to know she has this awesome hobby where she goes looking for vintage things, vintage clothing in particular, and takes these wonderful photos, right? And oh, by the way, she has this awesome YouTube channel with an awesome talk on the intimacy crisis among many other great talks. Yeah, it's great. Right? Because she's got this studio and it was custom built to some extent for that purpose. That's depth. That's the depth of knowing something about Andrea and not just talking to her on here about Christianity, for example. There is a volume or a quantity about it. It is sort of an emergence of quantity into quality in some ways. It's very contextual and even tactile. There's a lot of texture with it. The two X's and they're close enough, right? But they're not the full. You can jump from the X of quantity to the X of quality and they're close enough. It seems right, but there's no Y in the quantity realm. So you get confused and you can't interface correctly with people. You can't have meaningful relationships, for example. OK, well, that was good. That was good. That was a good. I thought that was a good explanation. Got to say. No, he's just trying to get out of watching it. He's trying to get these little clips so he doesn't have to. I already gave him a little thumb up, Mark. So he's just looking to get. Yeah, he doesn't want to do the work. He's busy this week though, Andrea. We've got to give him a little for this week. We'll let him slide. But by the end of next week, Paul, I expect you to watch at least the intimacy crisis video. And hopefully you can get to my channel, Navigating Patterns, and watch at least one of my videos. Now we're handing out assignments, are we? I've got a 10 minute video, Paul. You can watch a 10 minute video from me. I can. All right. Well, I got to say hi to Julian, too. I haven't seen you for a while. How are you doing, Julian? Good. You can watch my latest on Randall's. No, don't watch the Randall's. This is what happens when you do the improv, too. Everybody's spamming him. Yeah, you don't have to watch my stuff, Paul. That's fine. Well, why don't you- Watch Mark's stuff instead. Thank you, Julian. Well, why don't you give me a little three minute summary of what your channel, what the conversation on the Randall's channel was about? Okay, that's tough. It's a good challenge, though. Let's see how this goes. Let's see. So I interviewed a guy called Brian Brock, who wrote a book called Wonders of the Wounded. He's a theologian. And the book is essentially about disability. And one way to think about what he does there is that he's basically giving an enchanted account of disability where instead of thinking of disability as something like, you know, just biological mishap, he wants to sort of see it as a communicative act of God, in a sense. And so part of the book is him talking about how medical institutions sort of make life difficult or impossible for disabled people. And then the rest of it is him kind of giving a theological account of disability. And that sounds like a very niche topic, disability, but I was fascinated to see how a lot of what he's talking about intersects with some of the stuff we're talking about in the corner of the internet. And for example, one of my favorite parts of the interview was when he was sort of giving of disenchantment, how we've lost the sense of an openness to wonder in the world and a sense of God speaking or us being able to hear God or something like this. And he actually uses Martin Luther to kind of re-enchant the world. And he sort of talks about how Luther has this sense of God's grace being present in sort of everyday occurrences of life. And he just wants to sort of recover that sense. Yeah, and then in the concluding chapter, not in the concluding chapter, but in the last few minutes of the discussion, we had a really interesting segment. And if you're going to watch something, at least watch that. He talks about how in the kind of Neoplatonic medieval model or ancient model, there was a sense of being at home in the world was a sense of being aligned with the cosmos, the polos, polos and yourself. Those three lines, things have to stack up. And then he describes how with Darwin and Copernicus, we lose the sense of being aligned with the cosmos, being aligned with the self, being aligned with... And so we're sort of in modernity, we are completely not at home in the world. And then he describes his project as he's given up on trying to put the world together. He's given up on trying to have the polos, the cosmos and the self kind of stack up, but instead he wants to talk about how we can be creatures who are at home in this world. And then he links that up with his sense, with Martin Luther's sense of being attentive to God's grace and God's word coming to us through ordinarily creaturely occurrences. And it's incredibly rich at the end of the day, but I find it fascinating that he's giving up on this project of natural theology, trying to build this system, but instead it's a kind of existentialist project or something. I don't know if that's a good summary or not. That's good. That's really helpful. And welcome, I don't know, Christoforos. I don't know that we've ever spoken. Welcome. Oh, thank you. Yeah, I guess I just watched the video, but I'm at home today. So, all right. I thought I'd jump on. Thanks. Thanks for coming in. And Sam, of course, Chad, Chad is here. He's got his mask on now. I just wanted to send all of my love your way, Paul. I feel like I haven't been giving you enough affection recently. I've been suffering from an intimacy crisis. No, Sam, you always have my love. Bethel messaged me on Twitter, your most recent video with her mother that you posted. Tell me a little bit about that. So, this was actually my second time talking to Esther O'Reilly, Bethel McGrew's mom, Lydia McGrew. They're just a fascinating family. And like, you know, before I knew who Esther was, it was like, where did this person come from? And then once you find out, it's like, oh, that makes sense. If you are raised by two philosophers, and one of whom is a loving stay at home mother that homeschools you, that's quite a homeschooling education to have a PhD in philosophy be your homeschool teacher. And so Lydia, a lot of her recent work is on using sort of philosophical probability theory to defend the historical reliability of the Gospels, which often can seem sort of like a modernist project, right? It often seems like she's still kind of fighting the modernist battles, right? With the, you know, Bart Ehrman and then sort of still be Bart Ehrman and liberalizing Christians. And especially with the Gospel of John, we talked specifically about the Gospel of John, that even surprisingly conservative scholars will downplay the historical reliability of the Gospel of John, even if they still have a high view of the inerrancy or whatever of the synoptic Gospels. And so she's sort of fighting that front to defend the historicity of the Gospel of John. I think she makes a lot of ingenious points, but kind of outside of the modernistic battle, the most surprising thing that she said to me was, so I asked her like, hey, you've been in John's head a lot. What do you think of the guy John who wrote this book? You know, when you absorb yourself in a person like that so thoroughly, they start to rub off on you, even if there's a 2000 year gap in between. And she's like, you know, I think that John is basically a mystic and that he had these just deep, profound spiritual experiences, but they were basically part of his everyday life. And that he just had, you know, she didn't use these as, she did use the word mystic and spiritual experiences. But I think basically what she was saying is, like, for John, the world was so enchanted that the things that John, that the things that Jesus did, the things that happened to him, the miracles they did, the sayings that he said and the interactions that they had with people were just super impregnated with spiritual, mystical meaning. And that the point of the Gospel of John is to try and get you to see the spiritual and mystical meaning in the real events of Jesus's life. And people will often accuse the Gospel of John of basically making up stories or making up dialogues that didn't actually happen to communicate theological information and sort of put it in a fictional Jesus character that's semi-related to the real history and also mostly related to John's theological purposes. And Lydia's point is that's just not the sort of thing John would do because of how he saw those things as connected together. Yes, he wants to communicate the spiritual and mythical information, but the whole point is that the word became flesh. The whole point is that it happened. The whole point is that these things are historical. And actually more so than the other Gospels, John was written by an eyewitness and is actually in many ways more historical and more related to the facts on the ground than the synoptics. So anyway, if you want more, that's my teaser, but you can watch my recent episode or buy her book, which is very good, very long, very exhaustive, very detailed, which is what you would expect of the Maghru family. But I think the Maghru's are misunderstood. I think in some ways they're still fighting the Marnus battles, but in some ways they're also very artsy and very right-brained, I guess you could say, in unexpected ways. I like the Maghru family and I've enjoyed my interactions with them. So I'll leave that there. Oh, good. Well, I think that's right. So I first, I met Bethel when I first started this whole business and at first it was really hard to know who I was talking to because she kept using that pseudonym and then finally, and then I got to know her a little bit. She's actually got a YouTube channel somewhere where she's got some singing that she does and some piano playing. So she's really, she's very young, but she's sort of a polymath. She's got a lot. Her father is like a chess, like a super chess player too. And so she sent me this picture once where she was just this little toddler and she's playing chess with her father. It really is an amazing family. I'm going to be in Grand Rapids, Michigan this summer now because yesterday we had our Synod. Yeah. So it could be a Chicago run in there somewhere. I won't ask you for the dates on the air, but you need to send me those dates and maybe we can work something out while you're in the mid-term. I want to know what the dates are. What's that? I want to know what the Synod is. The dates are going to be after the CRC Synod. Oh, well, when is that? So I'll be staying in Grand Rapids a little extra time to do some things. So that's pretty easy. Those are pretty easy dates to find. You need to tell us about the Synod. I'm probably speaking for everyone when I say I find nothing more fascinating than church politics. Who agrees with me? I am thinking about... So in previous years when I went to Synod, I would... After Synod is exhausting. You start at 8 in the morning and you go till 9 or 10 at night. So when I was done with Synod, I would sit down and I would write a blog summary of the previous day of things that happened at Synod and my perspectives on it. So I'll probably do that on my channel this time. So during Synod will be... Those of you who are uninterested in Christian Reformed news, probably nobody will want to watch those videos, but there'll be a lot of church insider stuff. I find those dynamics just absolutely fascinating. I mean, when it comes to church politics, it's just... The kind of level of analysis you can go there. The traditionalist progressive stuff, what is at stake, the continuity with the past. It's just... Layers and layers of fascinating for me. I don't think anyone else agrees with me, but I could talk about this stuff all day. Well, there'll be plenty that you'll like then, Julian. And you can watch the Christian Reformed Synod. It's live streamed on YouTube. So it'll be... We'll see what I do. It's a bit harder to... I mean, what makes it interesting if it's insider baseball. If someone's breaking it down for you. Yeah. I mean, you need to know who the players are, what this guy represents. We need Tara Lipinski giving us some commentary on the ice skating to understand what these Axle moves mean. Yeah. So I'll probably do some of that. Because I'm a delegate, I won't be able to do it. A couple of years ago, they established a social media policy from the floor of Synod, because people were tweeting from the floor and Facebook posts and things. So they put the kibosh on that, which was good. But after the day's deliberations, I'll be able to speak about what happened. Most of what happens in church meetings are, by design, open to the public, unless there are executive session type things, which are discipline or personnel issues. There was a How to Ride Church conference a month ago, and I was just obsessed with that thing. I was texting all of my pastor friends about what their take was and what the church elder speech was. This stuff is just a weird fascination, so can I say. Cool. So that's coming up. I'm talking to my wife about, because she's originally from Western Michigan, and so I've got a nephew who's graduating from high school. I've got a cousin's son who's graduating from high school. There'll be a whole bunch of things. If I get flown out there on the denominational dime, it's just convenient to stay longer and probably meet up with the, I'll have to talk to Bernie, who runs the estuary in Grand Rapids, and maybe hit a meeting with them. So there'll be a bunch of things. So that's coming up middle of June. I volunteer Hank's guest room for you while you're in Chicago. All right. I got a message from one of your group offering to fly me out and put me up. I definitely want to do some more visits. And now that COVID seems, my guess is COVID is receding and that some of this will be more possible. How about you, Chad? I haven't watched too much on your channel lately. You got anything you want to pitch here in terms of stuff you've put up? No, so I was going through my emails yesterday, I think it was, and I was like, how long have I, when did I first get in contact with Paul? So I got in contact with you. I sent you an email on March 1st of 2021. And so it's been like one year since you got in contact with me. So it's been, I'll have my one year celebration on Bridges of Meeting Hub, or Bridges of Meeting on the 4th, which is what, tomorrow or something like that. So yeah, that's pretty cool. But it's been interesting. I was thinking about it because there's been a lot of, it's been kind of a long journey as far as the changes that have taken place for me like personally with, as it relates to to my religious practice and stuff like that. And so it's been really interesting. And then, I mean, there's still a lot that hasn't changed, I still have some stuff that I hold on to as far as like, like I just put out a video of, Peterson was talking with Alexander Solzhenitsyn's son at some conference in, I think it was Pennsylvania, I think. And so there was a clip out of there that I pulled. And again, they tried asking him about his, his particular, how his faith works and stuff like this. And it's still weird to me that people are so insistent that they want to hear certain words and stuff like that. And I mean, it's just so strange. And I love the answer that he gave them because it's just a great answer. If you want to know what it is, you can go watch the clip I made. But anyways- You gotta say the name of the channel. Oh, it's the Bridges and Meeting Hub channel. And it's called A Subtle, the video is called A Subtle Temptation is what it is. So there's that. And then the other thing that was going on. So I just, this guy, Michael Satori, who had the channel, he did a lot of talking about this dude named Francis Schaeffer, which I like the stuff he brought up. So today I started a book that he, that he has called God is There. And man, the weird thing is, it's like the more that I try to pursue my understanding of Christ and of God through all these different avenues, like the more despair I fall into. Really? Yeah, because it's so, because I don't have any kind of spiritual foundation that I was raised with. And then I go into AA and they kind of give me something. To work with, which was more about pragmatic action. Yeah. I can see what I'm doing. And you know, faith without works is dead. And so it's a lot of that. And then I fall into this. And it's more about like, the more I learn about theology and people's ideas about this and that, it's like the more, the further away from God I feel. And then like the closer to hell I'm falling into. And then I'm back to one of the old age fears that I've had with God is the more I try to figure them out, the more I feel like I'm in hell. Because it's just, and it sucks man. I really like a lot of stuff that this Francis Schaeffer dude's talking about. But I don't know who to believe and who not to believe. And it's like, it's so maddening for me. Like I was nearly in tears today talking to somebody about this because it's like I haven't felt this spiritually vacant in a very long time. And it's like since I've, like I had this hot thing with Christ when he grabbed me and he put me on the other side of the glass. It was cool. And so I can understand what Peugeot is talking about and Bishop Barron are talking about the initial experience should be let go because it's not enough. I get that. But it's like, it's been so hard for me to continue to seek God once he reveals his name to me. And because it was almost easier and more important for me to before continually seek God when he didn't have a name. You know what I'm saying? So it's something, I guess it's a season that I'm in right now and it's affecting my attitude with people in my life. You know, not only like on here where I get a little snippy with people and shit like that, but like it affects my life in the real world, you know, and so it's just, that's my one year update for you. But I think it's good. Like I've done enough pragmatic work with seeking God to know that this is just a secret. It's a season, but it's just weird to me, you know. Well, it's not, it's something you should pay attention to and it bears repeating that Christianity is not, is not really about thinking and reading. Christianity is about living. And that's really important to keep in mind. And so if you, I mean a lot of the people who will follow my channel, for some of us just by virtue of our temperament, by virtue of a whole bunch of things, we can sort of really drill down into thinking and reading. But that is by no means, I mean you've been given a church which for most of the history of that church, was not about thinking and reading. It was about listening and engaging and living. So, you know, there are going to be lots of good books out there and especially in something, a corner like this, there's going to be people throwing books at you and that's fine, but don't get too distracted by some of these things. Keep your emphasis on your practice and your relationships. Because that's, that's the majority. This stuff that we're doing right now behind this glass, all this thinky talky stuff, it's not the main course. Yeah. It's alluring because it's fun, you know. And I like to hear the other points of view and stuff like that. And I can get so comfortable in just like coasting that it's almost like trying to avoid suffering and it's a great sin, I think. And you know, so. Mm-hmm. Other than that, I get to see Jordan Peterson next Thursday and I get to meet him. And I'll tell him that all you guys say hello. I'm trying to think of a really good question to ask him. You know, I think a cool question to ask Peterson would be something like, psychologically, how do you keep your faith strong? I wonder how you might do that. That's a good question for him. Because especially- Well, what if you ask- What if you asked him, why does God feel further away sometimes than others? Sort of like the question that you just brought up, Chad. You know, treat him the same. Ask him virtually the same point that you just asked Paul. That would be interesting to see what he does. Yeah, I don't want to play the games with him though, because you know, I don't want him to get the sense that I'm trying to trick him into saying some shit that he- You know, because he has a very specific reason why he's doing what he's doing. And people that want him to say that he's this or that, it's like, it would lose all- I think it would lose all of his usefulness. If you were to start putting it into a particular container that you want it to be in. And I just- yeah. That's a good point. I like your question. I like your- You'll get a chance, if you do the VIP thing, you'll get a chance to kind of shake his hand and have like 30 seconds to a minute with him. And then there'll be a VIP Q&A that you might be able to ask that question. It's a fun little- It's a fun little regime. I've done it a couple of times. Cool, man. Well, anyways, thanks for this last year, Paul, and everybody else. You really pulled through, man. Well, thank you. I mean, this community wouldn't be the same without you, Chad. So- We were actually joking about doing like one-year chips or something around here, like BOM, like attendance chips. What would those look like? But- So that's all I got, man. Yep. Someone asked, is this a- what question did he ask in the chat about? Is this some weird therapy cult or something? I can't seem to scroll up, but there we go. Yes. Yes, it is. Is this the cult recovery group meeting? That's funny. We all worship Paul's beard. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We all worship Paul's beard. I'd like to show you guys mine, but- Mine is just- I shouldn't own a beard because I don't dedicate enough attention to grooming it properly and maintaining it. It's just a way to not have to shave every day. Yeah. You need the beard, Paul. You need the wisdom. Without the beard, you can't grow a beard. You need the wisdom. You need the wisdom. You need the wisdom. You need the wisdom. Without the beard, you don't have the wisdom. You start talking. You're talking all crazy. You get the beard. You're making sense again. You're doing shorter videos. I don't know. There's something about it. Well, it's almost a two hour one tomorrow that's coming down the pike. Uh-oh. Yeah. But it's a commentary one. Those always get longer. I've been watching Mearsheimer's failed liberal hegemony video. And, you know, I've for a long time been trying to figure out how to expose and analyze the religion that Protestantism has evolved into in the West. And so this moment is actually a pretty good one because, you know, people who, I mean, this current moral crisis about Christian nationalism is so, it's so insane. And that isn't to say that I don't understand that there are churches out there that aren't over the edge in terms of how they mix their nationalism and their religion. I get that. I've been doing this all my life, but do not understand where this comes from and how deep this runs, even in people that write books like this. I mean, I absolutely feel myself an Anabaptist when I get into these modes. Putting a Ukraine flag in your Twitter handle name is Christian nationalism. It's true. You know, I mentioned in the video and I know I'm going to get a lot of crap for this. I mean, I voted for Ralph Nader because I looked at Al Gore and George W. Bush and thought, are they kind of the same? And then when Barack Obama was elected with all of my liberal friends, I said, Obama's got exactly, I mean, I was part of this listserv that was protesting the war in Iraq and I basically said to them, Obama has exactly the same foreign policy. Oh, they were upset by that. But it was like, it's the same thing. And so this video, he goes into basically why this worldview, if you have a unipolar foreign context, you're going to have a militaristic, liberal hegemony agenda. And that's just going to breed all of these wars that all of the very liberal progressive people want. Well, we've got to save the women of Afghanistan. We've got to save, you're just going around the world being a world saver. And it's like, it doesn't work for one. And you're just multiplying wars. So I know when I get on this, I sound like a pacifist, which I'm not, it's bad news. And so then when I hear Christian, so now this whole, I mean, we've just spent, you know, the last couple of years with Christians fighting over Christian nationalism and now they're not quite know what to say because guns good if we smuggle them into Ukraine. It's like, I don't know. I'm not, what is the, I mean, I don't quite get you why you're pushing back against the Christian nationalism thing. I mean, what's your, I'm not following your point. I mean, I think it's a quite big problem. It is, but the other side has the same problem. The people who are pointing it out are running the same game just with covert operations. This is just, this is Christian internationalism. This is Christian imperialism, but a certain kind, is it Christian? That's really the question, but it is imperialistic and it's the imperialism of liberalism and I don't mean political progressivism. I mean, modernist liberalism, which Protestantism evolved and shed, you know, secularism became this cloak through which the certain voice from Protestantism could now, you can be any religion you want, but you're all Protestant. I saw that tweet you wrote about the garments of skin. Yeah, and Nate from the UK is like, what, WFT, WTF, what do you mean by that? Watch Pajow. Oh, hey, I was just going to say, just to point out one thing, something I've noticed in the conversations on issues like this or issues like racial reconciliation and the rest, you know, in general, you know, the game seems to be, okay, I'm going to point at the other side and I'm going to vaguely call out political idolatry or Christian nationalism or whatever it is, right? But I'm never going to talk about where exactly the line is, right? And I think part of the reason why people do that is because they're crossing the same lines and the definition, whatever definition they use, could be used against them as well, right? And I think that's a real miss in the whole conversation is just like, hey, you know, we should be talking about where's the line, right? Where does political involvement cross the line into, you know, political idolatry, right? That's a good conversation for us to have, right? But nobody wants to touch it. Well, and we're at a point now where you know, I'm happy I live in a democracy. I'm deep in this myself, but all of this is also deeply wed to modernity. And that is going away. And that's part of the reason why, so there's this little lake on the other side, little lake, it's a big lake, on the other side of Yosemite National Park, and it's over Teoga Pass, and there's this lake out there named Mono Lake. There's all these, they call them Tufa formations. And basically what that is, is there was all this water that would come in and it submerged all that. It's very much a salt lake. And because Los Angeles and other water districts basically take water before they hit the lake, the lake level goes down and exposes all of these, all of these formations that basically minerals have created. And now that modernity is receding, we're starting to see, oh look, Constantinople. Oh look, Rome. Oh look, monarchy. So all these old structures that never really went away but just sort of got submerged are now coming visible again. But none of this, none of this I think really helps us figure out where do we go from here? Can you explain what you mean by modernity receding? Sorry, just for... I have a parallel take Paul, if I can quickly give it. Is that going to help Andrea's question? No, but it's going to connect to that. I'm slowing it down for us normies. We have addressed pluralism with modernity. What do I mean by that? So modernity arises because the Roman Catholics and the Protestants look across and say now we're killing each other over these confessional matters. We got to stop this. We're destroying Europe and we're both killing Anabaptists. And Unitarians. And Unitarians. We'll escape out the Unitarians and the Anabaptists in a way that René Girard would perfectly understand and then we'll make our peaceful modern society. That's right. And over time we stopped killing the Anabaptists and we stopped killing the Unitarians. We made our own country that was more powerful than all the other ones. So that's how the Unitarians got over that. What's interesting is how the martyrs feed into the founding myth of the Anabaptists society. Our society is founded in the blood of the martyrs and their society is founded in the blood of the martyrs in different ways. That's right. They all are. I don't mean to steal your train. No, no, no. That's fine. But those are good points. But modernity basically was a way of dealing with pluralism. And how it dealt with pluralism was having a whole bunch of sort of built-in assumptions that were still Christian in the system and lots of other stuff. Not just Christians. How do you pull this stuff apart? But basically put together a system that was functionally Christian but allowed pluralism within a limited degree. And what we've been seeing over the last, you know, really since the end of the Cold War is a question of, well, just how far are those boundaries? How much pluralism can we actually tolerate? And the difficulty is that even pluralisms have sort of a telos that they point to. And as long as you can sort of keep this on the other edge of the line of death, so you can imagine reincarnation, you can imagine heaven, you can imagine only Christian reform people go to heaven and the Baptists are burned for their reluctance to baptize their babies. I mean, you can play that game all you want but as long as you keep things on the other side of the line you can't really get you. But what we're seeing is that as we're seeing that a lot of these implicit agreements are now being challenged or are going away. And so then the question is what is also exposed is sort of the reactive element of Protestantism. And that's when Peugeot comes in and says, here's a cohesive system. And Roman Catholics come in and say, here's a cohesive system. Yeah, but yours is about a thousand years old and yours is about 1,500 years old and I don't know if they're actually going to scale because a lot of the adaptations you've integrated you've basically sort of stolen from the Protestants. So you've got a lot of Protestant code in your adaptive structures. And they're competing in a Protestant platform. Yes, yes. They're no longer in their own platform. They're kind of still themselves but they've had to force to migrate to a Protestant platform and deal in that environment. So they're not the meta structure. They're a sub player in a Protestant meta structure. Is that a feature, not a bug that the Catholic Church has has moved on and kind of synthesized elements of modernity Protestantism. And now it's it's much more of a viable option for a lot of people maybe because it has both of those things kind of built into structure. So the question is what is the telos of orthobrotum, right? Can it, if it were to get so successful that it had so many members would it have to reexert its own orthodox superstructure again or would it always be maintaining and propping up the Protestant pluralistic superstructure? I mean the orthobrotum it's interesting you know this anti-Vatican too which is essentially when you can see that as the Catholic Church coming to terms with modernity and Protestantism and so there's a real reason why the trads don't like Vatican too. It's because they want this older kind of model. Sorry. Well I just noticed like this kind of goes in that question that they asked Peterson like one thing they they mentioned they called him an invalid Christian and I was just like like to me that's what all this is kind of doing and saying well you're not really valid and then this other dude over here saying well you're not really valid and like to me that's all I understand why we're doing that I guess to a degree but like to me what seems to make sense about the modernity going away is for me the whole thing when it makes the most sense is that I recognize that that God in my relationship with God in life itself is a is a mystery that's the essence of it and then so when you start to try to package that into a box and eliminate the mystery of it and make it something that's like you know like it's like exactly like some material idea it totally blows that all apart like it makes it dead for me anyways yeah I think I think you can't let yourself be intimidated by people saying this guy is not in the box this guy is not in the box this is the real box you sort of just at the end of the day have to do what you think is right you have to maintain your own integrity and move forward in that way like you can't let yourself be sort of intimidated by what other people sort of other people's dismissals so part of what's happening is Peterson basically says something like well why doesn't the Roman Catholic Church step up and once again become the center of our civilization it's like hey wait a minute Roman Catholicism has continued to be the center of a number of civilizations that are currently available Latin America Italy, France there are significant areas that didn't have the Protestant Reformation there continue to be civilizations where orthodoxy is the center of it and of course Islam is in a sense the center of their civilization resurgent let's say Brahmanism the center of India China is trying to reinvigorate Confucianism to one degree or not so you're he's simply Peterson simply isn't understanding the deep Protestantism that includes Germany England the Scandinavian countries and the United States so it's not unified is that the problem because it's not a unified like one holy apostolic Catholic Church none of them are unified if you look at the relationship let's say between the Roman Catholic Church and Latin America well the answer to the Pope technically yeah but do they it looks like versus what it is but how much most Latin American countries won't persecute you if you decide to become Pentecostal if you live in if you live in Romania or you live in the Ukraine there's lots of Ukrainian evangelicals and Pentecostals who live in Sacramento they didn't flee Ukraine because of religious persecution religious liberty has become the norm in much of the world so it's it's by no means obvious to figure out how Christianity would function as a visible center for a culture in the world today it's been functioning as an implicit center so and oh there's Sevilla she probably saw her picture Grizz was giving me a hard time and said it was bait and switch because you had Sevilla's picture on the thumbnail and she's not really here well I saw that and I said oh they're on and I saw Andrea with the bangs and I saw you and Mark so I said I'm going to jump on oh good yeah it's great to see you so we've been we've been talking about this question of again religion and society and you know Peterson likes to say oh you know religion you're not going to have a stable long-term sustainable society without a religion at its center Protestant sort of Protestantism sort of created this invisible religious framework that others have seen but so Latin America the Orthodox nations to the east Islam Brahmanism in India I mean we've been talking about that so that's where that's where we're at so Protestantism how is it that it didn't that it wasn't at the center you mean you're talking like when Jonathan Peugeot says that the cathedral starts here and then the city comes out and then in America before the First World War and especially the Second World War the mainline Protestant churches had cathedrals in the city center you know you can see Riverside Church in New York City so the mainline Protestant Church was really until the 1950s and 60s in the counter culture sort of functioned in that way for States. Of course, Canada, Australia, England have the Queen. They try to have a church at the center. But the main line has basically gone away and there continues to be a sort of shadow Protestantism that continues to function but without the intentionality and the intentional moorings that it had before it sort of went covert. Now it's just sort of going all over the place and doesn't even quite know it's moorings. I'm talking about tomorrow's video where I respond to a video by John Mearsheimer who is now known because in 2015 he made a pretty significant speech about Ukraine basically saying we're setting Ukraine up for a disaster and now it's suddenly proven right so everybody's like oh so I've been listening to some of his other videos. So you're going to be going into the Ukraine problem? Yeah I'm going much more into the the hole in the middle of the culture where the church used to be and in America's case the main line Protestant church. Well it was funny I was just talking to someone who said it's so funny it's so basic but he was saying for some he had this this friend who's trying to do this Buddhist thing and she said oh well evil doesn't exist and he said yeah that got me thinking you know intellectually it really doesn't but why do I feel like it does? Funny that. And so I actually I also take a little clip from some evangelical some evangelical leaders and one of them basically says well this whole episode just reminds me that you know evil exists in the world because Putin is evil and that explains what's happening and it's like no it's not that simple at all you can't just Hitler Putin Mao Stalin evil and and you get back into Peterson's observation about Auschwitz when you go to Auschwitz if you say oh I can't believe those Germans were evil no. I was reading Simone Weiss' essay about the Iliad if you guys have you guys read it? No. But she talks about she says the central character of the Iliad is what she calls force and and and she kind of talks about how it's it's sort of this she defines force as that acts which turns another human being into a into a thing and then she describes how it's both the kind of conqueror and the conquered that are turned into things where you know it's obviously the conquered it becomes just the sort of object you have to remove it or do whatever force compels you to do but but at the same time the the sort of person who's doing the attacking is being propelled by something that that sort of makes him sort of give up his soul in a sense he sort of becomes less than human in in his kind of lust for domination and so you kind of see this Ukraine situation as you know what's horrifying is to see both both the attacker and the attacked kind of having their most fundamental humanity being violated by these acts of war where do you see these reports of the Russian soldiers texting home their mother and saying I didn't know the Ukrainians were going to resist as much like we thought we were liberating them you know so the sort of this kind of framing we want to give it doesn't quite always match the reality yeah yeah yeah look I mean if you if you want to think about evil you're in the realm of quality right that's the why so if you're if you're stuck in this quantity mode of course evil doesn't exist in quantity right this is good but good also doesn't exist in quantity that's off the edge of that x-axis and so you know again you can cast the x-axis of quality which is different from the x-axis of quantity but there's still no y-axis so you're not finding good and evil there so I I get the move but and and people do this I had was talking to a consequentialist on Clubhouse said the same thing evil doesn't exist and I I almost fell over standing up with my little I had an iPad for Clubhouse standing up like I almost fell over I was like what you've gotta be kidding me like that what's the argument there like what's what is the argument you must have an awfully wonderful life if you can't don't believe in evil yeah and consequentialist I'm like I know consequentialist of all people it's not possible it's just crazy talk yeah well have you have you run any of your because whenever you Andrea and and Mark when you guys talk about your intimacy crisis and you keep talking about quality and quantity I ours it's our intimacy crisis well I mean that's your that's been what you've talking about I always I always think it's a villain when you talk about that because you know that you're using the same language yeah have you talked to have you talked to Savilla about that or if you have you center some of that sweet patreon money that um that you're both raking in that's a grizz has the patreon where does the language intersect you've talked about the intimacy crisis I wasn't aware the thief of the night is it called thief of the night yes thief in the night it's a it's a it's a Bible reference well we were talking last time about that a little bit right yeah I know what was it men and women and stuff like that yeah yeah we were talking about men and women that time yeah yeah yeah but the the question of boy I hate to have this get too esoteric but you know the question of the ontology of quality it's super hard for people who are have just been that it just emerged from a bath of materialism to think about the ontology of quality even though they experience it hopefully they they they act as if quality is real yet they again this gets into so much of the verveky stuff we don't have a location in our worldview for quality and I mean that's that's at that in many ways that's at the center of what we've been doing in this little corner of the internet and they're objectivists so they're standing in objective material reality pretending that experience doesn't matter that subjectivity isn't a thing and so they're not subjecting things to their worldview and also being subject to them right because it's both ways and that's where that's where intimacy comes from that's where the it's in the bidirectional subject relationship and they're object because they're they're objectivists they're objecting and it doesn't matter which side objects at that point you're losing some intimacy if not all intimate so so mark and Andrea made a made a video on Andrea's channel about the intimacy crisis and that's yeah that's where and and it's got at least a million views already doesn't it Andrea I think it's like around like not nearly a million but it'll be there like probably by next week that's good for those of us in the for those of us in this corner most of us really pretty good that was the example we were using the other day to explain intimacy and quality was this little corner of the internet right it's not really a corner right but it is a quality of a bunch of conversations that a bunch of different people are having and it's that so when you do that you're tying the quality to the materialism by saying corner and it's right it's right but it's not right because because who's part of that corner well Andrea is certainly I probably right I'm not quite with my channel for Vicky is Peterson how are you not he's trying he's being humble I don't yeah I'm not I'm steering away from your crazy religious I think you're on YouTube more than I am I mean I'm really remiss so I think you're you may even be more of the corner I have quality fans but I don't have quantity fans that's the whatever what's popular is not true and what's true is not popular I just was popular okay well mark I don't remember where you're going with what you're saying about a corner but I'm just gonna I'm just gonna I'm just gonna go my own way so I the thing that I I found the most helpful from that chat was because I remember about three quarters of the way through I started going into a pit of despair because I was like I don't I I'm more confused and I just I'm but then by the end it was like oh no it's not because I'm like nothing's being solved as if ever anything is solved in my talks but like but by the end I was like oh I understand what the problem is now that's what it was oh okay an hour and half in I get what the problem is now that's the main thing but the main so so for me the the thing that I what came away from understanding is oh in the sort of in the materialistic world you so you're the quantity it's the consuming what can I consume what can I get out of this it's basically we're all little marketers and little marketing like well how are we gonna sell this are they gonna want to consume that and yeah yeah so yeah so that that's what I got the most from the talk it's like oh it's it's how what do I get materially how do I consume you know what which is why intimacy you don't consume intimacy it's it's above it's a connection it's a connection it's not a consumption right you know you know you have intimacy right to use the vacu's you know he bars from from it's not it's a it's a having versus being mode confusion right intimacy happens yeah well and I I'd like to I mean when when Andrea described as she just did right now when she described the talk to me and her framing of it I very much connect it with CS Lewis's an experiment in criticism which is another little book that of Lewis's that almost nobody's read but Lewis basically begins with noting that in a lot of ways criticism of literature is sort of bankrupt and a better way into it is to look at the reader and then he compares work that readers consume and and readers go into much more of a a participant a participatory mode with the literature and live into it and that really maps nicely on this on on intimacy and in some ways it's it's it's Eros which is you know consumption and versus sort of Filet-O-Fish which is always side-by-side and agape which is self donation and you know I think I don't think you can have intimacy without self donation you you have to lose yourself in the other in order to to actually be get that reciprocal motion that intimacy consists of so just want to recognize James James and I have a video that we made how long ago January 3rd or 4th we've recorded and your your stuff has been edited okay it's it's in the queue and it will premiere in I want to say May timeframe I sent it I got it we confirmed that you sent me you sent me an email and the name of your channel is meaning forge meaning for he's got this framework which is kind of cool that he does with that was totally new when I was on his channel so so it's a great time so what have you been thinking about James uh well I'm still on my mission I just got done reading the Iliad my mission is kind of like the journey of Homer's heroes into Plato because Plato rebuffs Homer and then on top of that it is looking at how the Bible in Christ as his own hero interplays with those elements so I'm still on that journey I'm still on my writing journey where there's hey you're possessed by images and you have to get to tell a story around it so that's a somewhat painful process and then yeah for me it's it's also kind of reflecting right now as I expand on Buzzsprout so short marketing plug there on the audio versions I'm going back and listening to my previous interviews as I publish them on audio only okay and they'll on Apple and all that other fun stuff and I'm reflecting trying to take notes and see like like is there some underlying isms here is there something that's important and there's lots of different things that are kind of important right now but with a sample size of only 20 people or so I'm not quite I don't think I'm quite there yet they kind of start putting that to like a meta analysis per se okay okay good good overall overall great journey so far and good plus you know it's it's good I saw Jordan Peterson in Norfolk that was a great time with a friend what did he talk about rule number two okay of his new book yep yep and then I'll be seeing him tomorrow again and Durham pretty excited I saw last Tuesday oh really did you get the VIP and shake his hand no no I didn't I mean he's not he doesn't have the energy he used to have so I don't know if he's even doing that anymore it wasn't oh he's doing it you said you saw him last Tuesday oh yeah so I was Monday I was Monday in Norfolk oh yeah he's doing the VIP stuff and just a heads up everybody if you're gonna sign up for VIP sign it up for it because what he'll do is he will shake everyone's hand he has the same energy throughout I don't know how the man does it oh then afterwards and then afterwards he'll have a sit-down conversation with the VIPs yeah for 30 40 minutes or so and it's it's it's awesome lots of good questions lots of different variety of who's opening for him Michaela is okay yeah so super great time and I got to saw my I get to see saw my buddy who also has a podcast channel and stuff like that and him and I went together with his wife and so it was it was a great it was a great experience how did you get where do you get the VIP I didn't even see that I didn't think he was doing it oh he's doing it it's just sold out within a few moments of it being published pretty significant see him again at some point yeah might be all how do you actually access the VIP it should be in your ticket like when you buy the tickets or for it it'll be a VIP meet-and-greet option or VIP merchandise option and then like general seating typically it's if you're looking at it by seat location it's going to be in the orchestra levels like closer to the stage and that's normal the VIP so you really have to jump on right away to get yeah yeah you do yeah I was a little misleading I thought I thought he was just too tired to do it yeah it's good though it's good and I highly recommend he's of course he talked about his new book coming out a little bit that that that think published in September and they also have some poetry stuff he's writing so that's cool too and he said it's dark so heads up well his music yeah a little taste of his music on his channel so yeah his music and his poetry are gonna be dark and stuff like that it's gonna be some it's gonna be interesting yeah I got I'm gonna see him when he's out in April so we'll see we'll see what happens with that I've been to a number of the VIP things over the years and I wondered it's amazing how these things how quickly these things sell out so when I made the arrangements in April to see him you know some of the other people in the meetup wanted to you know oh let's just make an event of it but all the tickets are sold out already so it's it's a lot fast yeah yeah how much weight I've gained that was not fun good so you have to jump right so the moment you know about it you have to jump right on it and get an orchestra seat and that's your only chance of getting the VIP pretty much on the website they'll have different tiers of tickets and then they'll have the VIP package and so you can just get those if you go to his website that has all of the stuff Master Master breaks it out to buy by location and by the initial one like when you get your ticket it would be like VIP meet and greet VIP merchandise they're different one is meet and greet one is not and then then it's like general and then you can find your seat hopefully really looking forward to to tomorrow and I'm hoping that deep down inside that it's I think it's rule eight or so is the the make a room beautiful because when I was reading his book he also talked about poetry and it's kind of resounding with me and resonating with me as I'm writing other things so we'll see how long have you been following Peterson's work James about 2017 give or take and I'm just surprised you've been able to maintain that level level of interest like for me I think I dropped off about a year and pretty much when he started doing the world tours I just didn't find almost anything he was saying interesting anymore so what keep you into it I guess one one critique that I had was when I got done with Beyond order I was like okay I'm seeing the same stories here I'm seeing the same things like all right I get it I get it so we'll see what what else comes up but he's also I think what's really reviving Peterson in some regards is has to so I'm a pretty quality based fan that will watch his podcast on a regular basis his recent one with Kurt was great and the Ukraine was good too with Kurt Joe Jamongul is what's this oh yeah that was good one that was that was great and even though it's like getting a little old but yeah and then the Ukraine one I watched the other day yesterday and I was like okay cool and the best part about that was like I know everything that you're talking about just because I was stationed in Europe in 2014 and so I was working to kind of understand this potential space will be operating in if we were to ever go to war with Russia so I was like I know what this guy's talking about let's pray that does not happen let's pray that doesn't happen to what did you say Savilla what did you hear today Glenn Greenwald did a did a analysis of it today he I mean I think the point to the point was it was very interesting it's really worth watching he said nowadays it's very different because you are rooting for teams based you know that's this this interactive Twitter thing really problematic when it comes to world affairs because you you're interacting with the world with these Twitter you know this virtual stuff as if it's reality and then you get all this popular opinion based on this Twitter interaction and that could actually influence policy in terms of what we're worried about that's that's pretty problematic because you get this idea you know especially with all the censorship that Ukraine is just you know these pure innocent victims and Russia is like like you know a hundred percent evil here a hundred percent good here and that's how Twitter divides it up and then if something like that is affecting policy then we're that's very problematic it's also now it's like so so what and what was the Kagan was talking about in a lot of ways he's he was talking about the hybrid warfare as different names and I want to call it multi-domain battlefields and multi-domain strategies right and so what that means is land say land sea air cyber information right and the information is a fight now that's why we have Psyop in the army in other branches and special operations command and it's more a fight now than it ever has been and a matter of fact it's that combined with some of the other things that are really like so like Twitter is a form of intelligence in some regards we can be used as a form of intelligence and so much so that if you're on your phone in a combat zone this is where it gets scary and it's happened so you're on the phone and comments on people can pick up on that on that signal and what Russia does and Russia does very well right is they'll take that signal a drone will pick that up that's flying overhead and within 15 minutes you have you have one five five or it's like one it's one five two millimeter cannons raining high explosive HE on you in mass versus what we've been doing for the last decade and some change precision guided munitions which is pinpoint firing almost within things and it's like there is things here in this multi-domain battlefield that is very different and that the the military is you want to have a hard time catching up I've been thinking about scary the you know Ukraine has been fighting the war on social media basically winning that war I mean Zelensky with his selfies and little videos that's you know that that's been it's yeah yeah oh yeah it's it's it's scary and as I said I don't wish for war at some point though you have to stand up for your principles and you can't be as you cannot be scared from a principled fight yeah the binary thinking is is killing us them good them bad you know Ukraine's a country you talked to the Ukrainians even the ones who are you know rob are you Ukraine and they fully admit there's three different cultures in that space yeah and I know a bunch of people who told me they were Russian oh yeah it's a Russian name absolutely and now all of a sudden they're telling me they're Ukrainian and I'm like what that's a weird switch like you were proud of Ukraine before or I don't know how to you know I don't know parse that right so when we crunch it down to Ukraine versus Russia we're losing all the resolution of what's really going on on the ground you know because people are like well why didn't they bulk up when Crimea got captured right it's like these are valid questions and concerns about it because it doesn't allow us to understand the world because it's just quantity right it's just Russia's I really like Ukraine's another quantity I really like what Kagan said and he and it's a loot it's very spot-on who did not prepare his people for this one no or did not prepare them as well for the on the information side because we see it in the riots or in the responses yeah like you did not do that you have no no he couldn't afford to tell them what they were gonna do I mean he said he sent he sent his troops over the line on a lie telling them they were just doing a regular maneuver and then said oh by the way you're in Ukraine you you know you're fighting your Ukrainians and and the troops were like wait what happened what we thought we were on a training exercise and he did that deliberately because it was very much Ukraine never thought that Russia would invade and the Russians never thought they'd be invading Ukraine as a population that's absolutely and that's pretty much everywhere I got a guy met on Clubhouse a while ago Vlad Vexler very interesting he's got a YouTube channel and he did it he knows me he was all happy to see me on Clubhouse I was like you even remember me that's fantastic thank you Vlad he's a very smart guy very smart guy yeah it will be interesting to see how things play out over the next few few weeks as people get geared up and all other fun stuff and it's it's definitely an interesting time just on the identity thing I just remember being Iranian during various things you know I had family who just started saying we're Italian because yeah and wagon Jacob the Italian I know a lot of Italians Jacob well my last name a lot of people think it sounds Italian Italians are Jewish man I've got a head out thank you so much it's great thank you bye bye yeah when we when we resort to quality I mean to quantity over quality right we start to do this materialism thing and we shrink identity down to one thing it's like now you can't and now and now the problem is now you've got your identity somebody else has their identity and maybe it maybe it you know moves up to to a single identity of a nation or whatever and now you have a war because there's no intimacy there there's no intimacy in in in the single identity by yourself right and so it very much causes these these battles it's it's a it's that low resolution I think we can also say low resolution thinking at some level too and there's no complexity and that nuance that and making sure I'm I understand what you're saying I think I do right you from that you don't have that give and take you don't have that that nuance being built in like you would a typical relationship or something that effect right no quality right the quality is lost in this single identity aspect just like we lost a villa we lost the quality as I come in great well welcome I know the Marylander I had my conversation with him not too long ago but Eric I don't know if I've spoken with you not with camera no no no I've been listening for a long long time but I just never quite bucked up the guts to step in so well good on you yeah yeah I was thinking about this I was thinking about this problem with the identity and how Ukraine has just jumped into we're all Ukrainians now and it made me think about how for so long America had its identity in opposition to Russia and how it's much easier to define yourself against something than to try and identify with something freestanding yeah right so I mean I have a friend who's in the military who's deals with Intel in China and very interesting because this has a lot of analogies or analogs that you could find with Taiwan and Taiwan has been dealing with China in a lot of ways the same way that Russia has been dealing with the West in that China has been manipulating the the discourse in Taiwan a lot of shadow stuff to try and confuse the Taiwan identity and it really is a problem I think we need to figure out a different way of defining ourselves because it especially in America it's only you're either left or right or Christian or secular it's in opposition I don't know if that contributes anything but no I we're awash in these identity issues and part of the challenge is that there are so many do I do I look at my skin color do I look at my ethnic background and and even my ethnic background might not be genetic it might be you know Italian Jacob I mean there are all these we used to be you know we used to be embedded in a whole series of things and we embraced choice and choice of course afforded us transformations and new identities and that afforded us new things now we're at the stage where we have just a combinatorial explosive element of choice where people are are using all sorts of aspects of themselves as the as the substrata for their identity and but but identities also function within an agent arena relationship at home I'm a father at home I'm a spouse in this building I'm a pastor I have my skin color I have my age I have my height I have all of these things on YouTube I have an identity as a youtuber as a path I mean what as we have multiplied arenas we have had to multiply identities to interact with them well I think part of the problem is that online people don't actually keep their identity if that's one of the reasons I've started using my name on everything is it's you know the anonymous culture it's it's a culture that allows psychopaths to get away with all kinds of things and identity is is what lets you weed out the bad actors and we don't do that not intimate and anonymity is not intimate doesn't allow for quality connections I'm always reminded of the line from the crucible when John Proctor is faced with the prospect of death or renouncing his own name he simply says it is my name and he is killed yeah I can tell I guess the the type of thinking I'm going to encounter when I deal with adjectives before someone's name or before how they the long laundry list almost and it's frustrating and one of those things here you know that that it's it's dealing with intimacy and I think maybe embedded somewhere in that it's some idea of courage right and and let's make no mistake right you're not going to say certain things to someone's face that you will say on the internet and go ahead I think what's also important is just titles provide hierarchy that allows people who deserve to be thought leaders to actually be thought leaders right so when it's father Eric and it's pastor Paul and people who have PhDs go with doctor and you'll notice online people some some people will not use doctor Lex Friedman doesn't use doctor a lot of people are encouraged not to use doctor I have two friends who are PhDs keep on telling them use doctor and they've been trained not to right and yes Paul I still expect you to put on that collar but it's important to it's important to actually signal hierarchy capacity and without that we don't know who to listen to if anybody any random idiots idea of Christianity is just as valid as Paul's then we we can't then we get people like Sam Harris not picking and you know straw manning so I guess what I would ask in in response to that because I think I agree with you to some point and I think it's to a point right because what the internet and other in these other society has given us to is I can go off now and I can study and I can do all this other things I could be you know an auto-diadetic I have conversations I can develop myself in a certain way I have no authority because I don't have a doctor or I don't have X Y & Z but maybe is can that authority be revealed other ways like like it's not a crapshoot idea because I agree with you like there are people who just are way left field have no understanding of anything and I sit there and tell them to go shut up in color I'll tell you one of the biggest problems has actually been spell spell checking because now any idiot can spell without actually have you know it used to be on the internet you used to be able to tell who like types always in caps who gets their grammar wrong now everything spell checked and grammar checked and people don't even have to type anymore now they can voice like talk into their phone and type so people who are functionally illiterate suddenly have become literate and that changes everything so I'm not not to mention the compression on like Twitter and stuff like that too like that hasn't other has other effects yeah but there's two there's two there's two things here James I want to I want I do want to highlight if if there is no hierarchy then the people who aren't in the hierarchy anyway don't have a way to move up either like like if there isn't a doctor somebody of something that I can have a discussion with to prove my worth I can't prove my worth right so really important that we have these things like if I can't if I can't talk to pastor Paul or father Eric about religion in a new in a way that is novel to them that other people see that the fact that I've done it doesn't mean anything it doesn't like if it's just random person off the street it doesn't mean anything so this this gets back to Eric Weinstein's whole thing with the gated institutional narrative and how people are not willing to actually look at for example his supposed theory of everything right and none of the none of the actual physicists who should be able to look at it and say this is garbage or not have been willing to look at it and say this is garbage or not what right well I mean I think a few a few of them have he doesn't like no they really haven't they really have not but but I want to make my second point to when my second point is it's really dangerous in this time to talk about the technologies as though they are causing this problem the technology is there and we're using it and and that's part of the like first that's the first pass like you don't have to use Twitter you don't have to be constrained in that way you don't have to be anonymous on the internet like I'm not right you don't have to do that and the people that don't do that seem to have fine lives and no meaning crisis by the oh hold on it's really cute to say you don't have to use Twitter but the fact is Twitter does intrude on your life even if you are not on Twitter and the people who use Twitter effectively are gaining power in our lives that way how how have the crazy CRT people actually become powerful enough to actually affect our lives through using first of all through using these things but also by driving reasonable people away from these things if you get if you take all the reasonable people off Twitter guess who's gonna be left and Twitter is incredibly important look at Ukraine I don't think it is well so so I mean there's there's a lot of different things kind of going on here and so I think if I may I agree structures and hierarchy is required like we have to have some kind of structure we have to have some kind of hierarchy because as we're all saying you have to be able to climb up the ladder even if you're starting at the very bottom and challenge those things even if you don't have a PhD and challenges things but there also has to be a way where the top and the bottom meet and not only that but the the bottom is heard like and that's a that's a that's an interesting concept too because in business that's where a lot of places struggle and there's a lot of good ideas if you just listen to the mechanics on the floor if you listen to the guy in the production line if you listen across your formation or across your organization if you have a class or like a course that your your your company is sponsoring pay attention to the common theme in every discussion board and every comment and if there is one that is a project it's good it's true I mean you have to you have to listen to the bottom and and it's funny because we imagine that we imagine it like a pyramid and and in a sense that's true that there are very few people at the top and there's lots of people on the bottom but when you're listening to common themes across the bottom you are getting a lot of wisdom but every one of those people at the bottom are also in other hierarchies and in their own pyramids and part of for me why I you know why I like doing what we do here is all of you have wisdom for me and if I can listen and glean from you now again you you know I know you're frustrated that I don't just you know listen to I meant I meant some of us don't have anything for you some people say stupid things including me and and wisdom is about sifting through the stupid but I in the eye you know I I do the Freddie and Paul show and I go out once a month or once every two months with Freddie and I'm friends with Freddie and Nancy and sometimes people might look at them like clowns but there are times when Freddie will say something and I'll think wow he he just saw something and articulated something that's true and Nancy too and I I find it with I find it with insane people and I mean people who are unmedicated schizophrenics people who are struggling with bipolar people have terrible substance abuse issues you know that in my in my last video I quoted Larry the guy who slept under the pomegranate tree the alcoholic you know he puts that can on he puts that can of beer on my table and he says my life is in that can and I thought yeah you're right now he wasn't able to do anything about it and it meant his death but I'll I'll have to release my I'll have to post the conversation I did with Grizz because that was a good conversation too he's posted it on his channel already but excellent and and that's why you know that's why I that's why I love dropping in here even though I can't do it as much as I can yeah Jacob you're absolutely right there's a lot of there's a lot there's a lot of stuff to sift through but there's there's gold in those siftings and it's good that good it's good to be having access to signal and noise is is the main reason I think we're here yeah the problem is we're there's a lot of noise out there there's a lot of people who are not sifting at all and that's part of the reason why you know I'm constantly harping on yes we need to call stupid ideas stupid because without that sifting it's just impossible it really is and and hierarchies bind and blind I mean if you're way up high on a very a very a stack of hierarchies you know there's there's some people that are I mean Putin is in some ways in a really horrible box right now and and so is the President of the United States so our major presence of major corporations I mean Elon Musk is one of the most interesting people because there's a guy that sort of defies certain boxes now is that gonna serve him I don't know yeah yes and no because I was really surprised he had not heard of the tic-tac if you would think anybody who had heard about the tic-tac video it would be Elon Musk and he was on Joe Rogan and he had not heard of it huh and I have to plug my email project which isn't going anywhere but I do have that email project where I'm trying to help crowd source sifting information because that's what needs to happen yeah you're right you're right well try calling stupid like okay every time I do it I get scurried at by absolutely everybody I mean you better be principled right in that regard and one thing to consider here is as we talk about hierarchies right into those structures those structures and hierarchies are designed for a certain purpose so like that's where we have multiple purposes and all other fun stuff and then on top of that and this is and I think I have something here to a degree we do have inverted hierarchies they do exist in some regard right and what I mean by that is it's an inverted pyramid right so yeah you start down here at the bottom where everybody else is but then you climb up to a certain degree and then you when we use I'm gonna use a business as an example right and so you have business as this example you climb up this hierarchy and then you go into consulting that is a different hierarchy and it's almost inverted because now you're you're servicing the number of CS like CEOs out there right so like one CEO can have ten consultants and so that right there is a is an inverted hierarchy in some regards and I think maybe that might be useful when we talk about crowdsourcing and how we maybe sift through good and bad ideas a lot of consultants are idiots I'm sure what you know it's so funny so I was I worked I didn't work I was on the board I was on a denominational board and I so then what when it thinks you have to do on a denominational board is you have to sift through all this paperwork and people are generating reports and I mean it's the closest thing to a business world that I've really had and I was just a gassed at the jargon and the double speak and it's like these words are the hot words we use right now it's just page after page after page of all the same words and what I noticed that when it came right down to it there was this other shadow culture of just passing around these words and and very little actually happened and it was like okay I I get it now I'm not gonna spend a lot of time here because I know you're all just sort of showing each other you can use the words that are in fashion today it's just so today somebody sent me a clip of a baby being taught the Heidelberg catechism and what it sounded to me was wow I finally got it you Protestants do not have a liturgy that's the problem you don't have a liturgy and you need a liturgy you need words to repeat to show I'm part of the club and and that's what it is other things become the liturgies yeah that's a good point that's a good point see see I just sifted there's a good thing from Jacob that's why I listen to Jacob he throws me good things I gotta go yeah I gotta leave I gotta leave in three minutes too so if if there are last if there are last-minute things people want to get in before I shut down the old live stream oh there's come someone video on Andrew with the bangs channel and watch all of the videos on navigating patterns so it's just saying Andre I'm just about ready to sign off I don't know if you had something you wanted to say or tell me I can't hear you you're muted I can hear him oh hang on okay go ahead yesterday one my good friends his father died and my friend is only about 26 and I just wanted to say that I want to go out to him and I just wanted to let that's not a tough thing it's not an easy thing to deal with at that age yeah if your father dies when you less than 10 you barely remember it or if your single-parent family and if they died like a weed age it's like not 80 or 90 but like 60 to 70 you can still deal with it because you've lived through life so life happens and I think one of the reasons why the meaning crisis is important to tackle is that our meaning just goes out the window sometimes your dad dies and um you haven't even hit 30 yet makes you really question life so I wanted to say that at the last moment well I think I think you're right that there are events sometimes that sort of suck meaning that they seem so random so chaotic that it puts it puts it just it's it's hard to to recalibrate and resituate oneself in a meaningful universe yeah especially whilst this Ukraine stuff is going on one of the good things I didn't just find out this information he posted a Facebook star saying thank you to everybody who's been giving me comments of my wishes and I pay and condolences and he had hundreds and hundreds of comments and so even though this terrible then has happened in his life it's had an outpouring of love and support and I find that sort of the balancing nature of this world and this reality all the time we have bad things happen and then they eventually will be equated by the good and we hope for more good than bad it just seems to be a lot of bad recently so let's cross our fingers and be good to each other yep yep sounds good wanted to say something to Anselman who of course is lives in the comments that he didn't like what Jacob had to say I'd say some Protestants don't have some Protestants don't have practiced liturgies we all have implicit liturgies and and it's interesting Andre I've noticed that at times of grief how liturgical people get and and often I've told the story before two people in a in a hospital room when one of theirs estranged husband ex husband was dying in a pretty pretty difficult way to watch watching the people grab at liturgies that had been in their lives and so it's it's right now a lot of social media for people I remember when my father died when my sister died I was more active on Facebook then it was it was quite a bit of comfort to get messages from people and so yeah it really is the the way it works so well sorry to have to bug out on y'all thanks for popping in and joining me here and I'm gonna turn off the live stream and I'm gonna ski daddle so take care of it lovely evening run run