https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=2fr_oFKnAQM

 you you you Let's see, and he's still setting everything up with Rick no matter how early we start. Rick I always get some new toys to show me and we are live. So I am going to Rick, Rick, talk to a, um, someone who does. Consulting and looked at our feed and, uh, said it lacks branding. I don't know what's going on here while that makes all of us. So this is Paul VanderKlay and this is the bridges of meaning question and answer that we do on Friday morning, 10 AM Pacific where Randall's ask questions or just prompt me to ramble on something. And we do this in a voice chat channel and the bridges of meeting discord server. We also stream it live to YouTube, but I don't usually read the, uh, YouTube chats. Although Rick is working on how to import them, et cetera, et cetera. So we got lots going on here. Let's see a lot of random questions. Maybe I should take the toilet paper up or over, over. Definitely. Anyone who does under should be exiled from the kingdom thrown into outer darkness where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Let's get some of the easy questions out of the way. What is your favorite pizza and why? I think I asked that last time. My favorite pizza is the pizza that is in my mouth. Um, other than that, I do like Papa Murphy's chicken and bacon stuff. Now, whether that is a legitimate pizza, I don't know. I grew up in New Jersey with thin slice and I do like greasy, thin slice. That's sort of, you have to watch it on the plate or it'll roll right off. So, but generally speaking, my favorite pizza is the pizza that is in my mouth. I see people have been, uh, voting pineapple. I don't have a problem with pineapple on pizza. Uh, mushroom. I do enjoy mushrooms on pizza. I've never had a pizza with elephant. I've never had elephant pizza. So, all right, let's, uh, let's dry. Let's jump into where we were before. Last week we did the atheist question and answer, and I want to say again, you don't have to be a Christian to ask a question here, so atheist can ask questions too. And the reason I do this in the voice chat on the discord server is so we can have at least a degree of conversation back and forth, which we often do. So I'm going to talk to screw tape Doug's question because actually unlike what I do most times, I actually studied for this one. Paul, you've referenced Lewis's distinction looking at versus looking along a few times. I reread, uh, meditation in a tool shed essay and got in the doc. And so yes, there was homework this morning and suddenly realized that's where it came from. Would you riff on it a bit at relative to verveky and pageau? I don't like Lewis's language there so much looking at versus looking along. It's, I think he's talking more about the difference between the inside and outside perspective. Examples of the one example that he gave was the person who was in love versus the people who are watching two people be in love and parents, friends, children have this experience often where you see two people that fall in love and everyone around them is watching and they say, it won't last. He's too good for her. She's too good for him. She's too good for him. What do they see in each other? This is terrible, but there's a sort of an inside vision that the two people in love share that the outsider doesn't share. And so the outsider looks at it and, but they're, they're seeing two very different things on a recent video. I found a book that Lewis wrote the forward to, which I haven't had time to really dig into, and if you think I mess up your reading lists, you have no idea what is done to mine through the course of this channel. It's a book entitled, it's a book by Douglas Harding, the hierarchy of heaven and earth. Now I was going to tell you Rick that, because Rick can actually see my, see my screen here, and if you want to grab my screen, you could do so Rick, if you want to. Oh, there you go. He did it. Rick's really good at this stuff. But if you look at the, if you look at the table of contents of this book, there's a preface by CS Lewis and then the view out and the view inside, and this whole book actually goes into this dynamic of how strange the world is from this inside outside perspective. And how elastic the self is. And I've only, I skimmed a couple of chapters of the book and I saw right away. This has a lot to do with cognitive science, although this book isn't a scientific book, it has a lot to do with a Peugeotian perspective on the world where Jonathan basically reasserts the, the, the perspectival. There's a little difference between the perspectival and the parabolic. He reasserts the phenomenological perspective of the world. Is the world flat? Yes. Does Santa Claus exist? Yes. One way to understand the reality and the power of that realism is by understanding the, the inside versus outside perspective of things. So here's a little drawing that I have up on the screen of a man obviously looking through a, a mirror that he's holding in his hand and the mirror is. Right in front of the view of his face. Now you can have this, you can do this via a photograph. You can do this via, basically once you see it, you understand in your mind what is going on, but we're, we're always dealing with this inside versus outside perspective. Now this week I did a video on the, the video that I posted yesterday morning on this sort of mythological belief or unbelief, which we're seeing develop in, in Jordan Peterson. Um, uh, I just got a text from one of my deacons. So it's good I didn't silence my phone, but now I'm going to silence my phone. So I don't get distracted by this anymore. So this, this, so I actually, this morning I was listening, I'm making my way through Tom Holland's the rest is history podcast, and they did a really terrific episode on China. And then the episode after that was the future, you know, basically viewing the future in history. One of the things that they noted was. Now, you know, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the. The, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the. Now looking back on other periods of history, if you look in the 1970s and eighties, there was a lot of anxiety about thermonuclear war. There was a very popular movie that showed on TV the day after Jordan about nuclear war. The view of the future from the 70s and 80s from the inside of the 70s and 80s looked like thermonuclear war. Lately, if you look at the view of the future, it's environmental catastrophism. It's pandemics. In other words, the kind of the point of the podcast was the view of the future in some ways. They didn't actually say this, but this was my interpretation of it. The view of the future is often a projection of our anxieties and our hopes. Actually, as Tom Holland made the point in the podcast, if you look at the book of Revelation, there's a lot of catastrophism in the book of Revelation, and then it culminates in a tiny little slice of sort of a beatific vision. The difficulty we have as human beings, Chesterton brings this out in our problem with we all we focus on evil. We have a great deal of difficulty defining and creating an art, the good. A little bit of streets made of gold. There is no sea. The sun is the light of the city. But the horrors of the future capture us. You see this if you look back through history again and again and again and again. Now, when we're talking about, let's say, the anxieties about thermonuclear war in the 70s and 80s, which are very real to someone like me or Jordan Peterson, who grew up and were formed by that age, we're looking at this idea from the outside. But if you're young Jordan Peterson living way up north near American Cold War listening stations ready to get a first view of whether or not there are actually Soviet ICBMs coming over the top of the world in order to destroy New York out of where I live, well, young Jordan Peterson is gripped by the anxieties of a nuclear exchange. And in fact, if you look at at least the 2017 version of his Maps of Meaning program, which is on YouTube, he begins the story by visiting a nuclear silo and talking about that. So that, in effect, what he does in that story is bring us a little bit into the mind, the inside view of young Jordan Peterson and his anxiety, which led him to the question, why would these two civilizations or competing edges of a civilization put the entire world at risk over something as immaterial as ideas? And in some ways, that then launches the question about meaning and Maps of Meaning and where this goes on. Now, when I look at my children, my children tend to be much more gripped. Now, I don't find them hidden in the corner of their room sucking their thumbs. My children are more gripped by questions of nuclear catastrophe or AI or on and on and on and on with this kind of thing. So this view of inside versus outside is a very helpful perspective to try to keep in mind. You know, I've repeatedly said consciousness is monofocal. We deal with the monofocal aspect by consciousness of dualisms. And so we can sort of in our monofocal consciousness, we can sort of engage with dualisms by very rapid task switching because there's only two, one perspective, the other perspective, one perspective, the other perspective. You know, threes are powerful numbers because we can just three is just to the horizon of our capacity in terms of consciousness. I had a conversation with Greg Enriquez yesterday, which will probably appear on my channel Monday or Tuesday, where he followed Jordan Peterson, befriended John Vervecky. John Vervecky pointed him to me. We had a conversation about some of these things, but you get to this question of, you know, moreness and suchness and you get to this question of a lot of different things get into here and it's all connected to the Vervecky-Pageot stuff. Part of when you look at the bigger philosophical question and the end of modernity, modernity has its strength by leveraging the monofocality. This is getting really esoteric. Leveraging the monofocality of consciousness and doing that in an imaginative way of eliminating, I always have it with covering one eye, my Sam Harris patch thing, covering one eye and seeing merely the scientific image. And so you take out time, you take out agency, you, via science, dissect things into tiny little cause and effect connections. You try to daisy chain those things up and put them into matrices and groups so that you can get larger and larger and more powerful mechanisms and more powerful views of the world. That's extremely powerful and we've benefited greatly by it via our technology. The problem that we have with it is that strictly the view from outside. And I think that is part of, wrapping all the way back around to the video I posted yesterday, that is part of the inability of someone, let's say, like Tom Holland and Jordan Peterson to believe, see now that word's pretty fraught, but the ability to inhabit an enchanted world where things like the resurrection of Jesus and Jesus' miracles and all of this stuff that comes to us via Christianity, that's all a part of that vision where that stuff inhabits. And so what we see, sort of I think with Peterson and Tom Holland, is that they are addressing the meaning crisis by leaning into and trying to re-enchant their worlds. And if you look at the clip I play of Tom Holland's interview on UnHerd, in that video, he basically says to the interviewer, it makes me happier to live in that enchant, he doesn't say enchanted world, but it makes me happier to live in that world because I'm enchanted in that world, but it makes me happier to live in that world. Basically what he's saying is, I want to see from the inside. It's not a lot of fun watching lovers and saying, oh, they're just, they're just subject to and machined by their hormones and their chemicals and the horrible parents had and an infatuation with a particularly ugly school teacher, which they are now projecting onto this young romantic partner, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. You can sit looking outside, or as C.S. Lewis says, looking at the world, but it's not much fun. The only way you sort of manage it is by taking on the inside view smugness of a smart 13 year old and saying, ah, look, those two people are in love because she has daddy issues and his mommy didn't love him enough. Or those two people are in love because via evolutionary biology, they are programmed to reproduce. And so what they're doing is basically looking at a nature program on PBS. Those two people are in love. It's like, okay, you can sit there as a smart 14 year old and the view from the inside, she has daddy issues. Someone's, Mike is open. You can look at, you can look at it from, you're looking at it from the outside, but where are you getting sort of the inside. In Spanish, we would say we would call it, we call it animal, the inside motivation, the inside horsepower to sustain yourself. You would probably do it by gathering around you a whole other cadre of people acting like smart 13 year olds and ha ha ha aren't those people in love dupes. But again, you've got the outside and the inside working in that situation where the, we, we really only care from the inside. The view from the outside lacks personalism, lacks Animo lacks enthusiasm, lacks all of the richness from the dyslexics or the right and brain thing from the unmapped territory part of our mind that motivates us and moves us. And now I'm talking from the outside, but once you see this outside inside perspective, you see again how in some ways this also via Ian McGill Chris sort of maps onto the unmapped territory part of the brain and the map territory part of the brain. Again, I just switched to the looking at view instead of looking along view our outside view versus inside view. And so you have this whole cadre of smart 13 year olds laughing at their classmate who has just fallen in love and well, what are they doing? They're all, you can look at that room too, which is what we're doing from the outside and saying, oh, they're just all a bunch of smart 13 year olds who are potential incels who can't actually manage the really tricky, the really tricky navigation of falling in love and at least even beginning to maintain a romantic relationship, even trickier with a member of the opposite sex, because it's in some ways easier to fall in love with a member of your own sex because you know that sex is a point made by Seinfeld in the 80s. If you're a man, a man is mapped territory. If you're a woman, a woman is mapped territory, at least to a degree. But if you're a man, a woman is unmapped territory and you have all of this potential. And so the one smart 13 year old that at one point was mocking the member of their class who fell in love and everyone in the group is a little bit hurt because they've sort of, they're not playing Dungeons and Dragons with the group. Maybe I'm, you know, maybe I'm channeling my own 13 year old self playing Dungeons and Dragons with my buddies instead of dating girls in high school. But then the one, then the one kid from the group actually manages to pull it off and they go off and they're in love and the rest of the group is looking at them, ah, you know, he's projecting, he's projecting his mommy issues and she's projecting her daddy issues and it's the hormones and it's just like the mammalian, it's just like the elks and the bears and the birds and the bees. But they're also sitting there watching and thinking, well, I'd sort of like to fall in love. I'd sort of like to light out for the territory with Huck Finn. I'd sort of like to be Bilbo and have Gandalf knock on my door and lure me out into an adventure because that entire adventure is from the inside because, you know, I've just defaulted to a Tolkien reference. So Bilbo Baggins has every good reason to live in his cozy hobbit hole where he can just look at the world from the outside, but each of us is longing to one degree or another to leave our hobbit holes and step out on the road where we don't know where it takes us. And again, you can look at it from the outside as, as Vervecky does by, you know, okay, well, this is map territory, unmapped territory, this is the horizon, this is suchness and moreness. You can go through all those things, but part of, I think, what, what John Vervecky is doing is, is saying at the same time, you've, you, you really want to see it from the inside. And in fact, in his awakening from the meaning crisis series, when he talks about religion, when he goes into, I think it's this episode on Buddhism, when he goes into there, he makes the, he gets at this directly when he says, look, you can look at these religions from the outside and you can say all these things about them, but you don't actually really know them in another level unless you're there from the inside. And this is reflected in language and in history all over the place. In fact, even in the Spanish language, saber is to know something from the outside, conocer is to know something from the inside. So, and you see it in the King James Bible, Adam knew his wife. We're not saying Adam looked around and said, oh, there's Eve. No, that's not the kind of knowing because saying, oh, there's Eve doesn't make her pregnant. So Adam knew his wife and she gave birth to Seth. So this is a very, this is a very big deal for us right now. And it has everything to do with this moment in history and philosophy and the end of modernity, where during modernity, we as a culture esteemed knowing things from the outside, because it's enormously powerful. And we've sort of reached the end of it like the group of 13-year-old nerds who play Dungeons and Dragons instead of dating girls. And again, someone outside of that group would say, well, they're just mocking their friend who actually managed to pull off a date with a girl because they can't do it. Ah, now you're being known from the outside. And I think in some ways, the entire meaning crisis is, you know, the entire meaning crisis is we just keep going through levels of knowing from the outside until we no longer exist. And so in some ways, Peugeot and orthodoxy and that whole thing is an invitation like Gandalf knocking at Bilbo's door saying, why don't you step into the cathedral? Why don't you focus yourself in the symbols, in the ritual? Because, you know, Sunday, I, you know, before church, Rick and I often look at other church streams because Rick is in this perpetual quest to make this channel better. And so you can see the little box that I'm in this week. And I mean, Rick's always playing with his stuff. So I was watching an orthodox service via a YouTube stream and, you know, doesn't jazz me, doesn't move me. But then I get to church and Rick's watching this one black preacher that Rick and I sometimes watch after the service on Sunday. And Rick's like, no, this is just a lot more interesting. It's like, oh, why? And because in almost every case to colonize someone, to colonize a free individual, to colonize an autonomous individual, almost the definition of Christian concern of conversion is to take that step from the outside to the inside. So this is part of the reason I think that when we watch Jordan or watch Tom Holland and say, I think they're going to join the Christian tribe, it's because they're sort of like that group of 13 year olds who are looking at it saying, oh, I can't believe yada, yada, yada, yada, yada. But then you can tell that, well, that group of smart 13 year olds playing Dungeons and Dragons. So then a girl comes into their Dungeons and Dragons club and says, can I play? Ah, now you're on the border of chaos because of course, well, she might not be the cheerleader. She might not be, you know, the hot girl in the class, but she likes what we like and she's a girl. And so then you go to, um, dumb and dumber. So you say there's a chance. And once you sort of get on the borderline of outside versus inside, oh, you know, Bilbo wakes up the next morning and, you know, oh, glad I made the sensible decision not to go with those darn dwarves. And then another part of him, you know, Tolkien calls it the took, the took inside of him says, and he does it because he's not a master of himself. There's the master in the emissary and the emissary is the, is the left brain, the mapped territory, the rational, the logical Bilbo has every rational reason within a certain frame to not join Gandalf and the dwarves, but yet he does. And that's why I say converting into a religion to go into the inside view is more like falling in love than buying a sensible car. So yes, I've done it again. I've spent 20 minutes on the first question and you will probably notice that I refer back to this question first question again and again and again during this, because it has sort of colonized me and I'm seeing it from the inside and the inside is way more fun than just dismissing it from the outside. So, all right, voice chat have at it. Surely someone wants to say something after that long riff. I wanted to ask a question. It's a bit of topic, but it's about Pazoa specifically and his terminology and how it's been taken, has been taken up and in regards to principalities in particular and powers in Ephesians specifically. If we want to know the correct usage of the term in relation to the ancient context of the epistle, should we look at it as something that's not derivative from human existence, but related to it rather than something that we assume is derivative from human existence? That's a hard question. So again, part of the inside outside perspective, part of what Pazoa is doing and why he's so powerful now is he is inviting people into the inside and the symbolic world that Pazoa is reestablishing via his channel and connecting people into the liturgical sacramental symbolic world. The symbolism really has its strength from the inside, not the outside. Now the biblical interpretation in the modernist world rejected a lot of that and tried to see the text from the outside and so wanted to look at the grammatical historical context. Now this inside outside, there's a slippery slope between these two because if you're asking the question, well when we read in Ephesians about principalities and powers, what did they mean? And in many ways once you invoke that word, what did they mean, you are asking an insider question. You are asking the question, what did those words look like and feel like from the inside to Paul's, assuming Pauline authorship, Paul's original audience? That's really hard. That's really hard to know and quite possibly impossible. Because, and this is where the cognitive science comes in, so much of our inside perspective is constructed from our embodied experiences in this world and it gets mapped onto language. You'll notice when I was answering the previous question, I defaulted into Spanish for some things. Why? Because in my seven years, so those of you playing BVK Bingo can check off Dominican Republic here, so in my seven years of living and working in the Dominican Republic, doing much of that in Spanish, the Spanish language colonized me and I had experiences in that world and experiences with that language that I can't quite duplicate in English even though I am far more formed by English than by Spanish. So when it comes to these questions, I mean you ask a really hard question, but it's a really good question. Can we actually, to what degree can we know? And now we're using know along a spectrum between saber and conocer. To what degree can we know? Know in terms of the I know where my water bottle is or I know how to drive a car. See now I've just had a time and space relation thing versus a procedural knowledge type of thing. So these are really hard questions and the way we navigate these language questions when we try to interpret the Bible, we're trying to do it parabolically because we're trying to do it parabolically because we're trying to map something that we're reading from Paul that he is experiencing from the inside, that he communicates via language to us through Koine Greek into the long New Testament tradition, through all of the philosophy and experience and everything that that word is actually shaping through history all the way up to and including us. Wow, that's a long trip that that thing has taken and to what, how can I be guaranteed that when I read it and I try to take that word into the inside and view it from the inside that I am in some ways reliably mapping what Paul is trying to, the apostle Paul is trying to communicate to me and people rightly have a great deal of skepticism about that. Yet, and this is where sort of in the Peugeotian frame, yet symbolism because symbolism really mostly lives on the inside, not the outside, symbolism seems to hold a lot of promise there. Now is it an over promise sometimes? Absolutely and a little bit later a question here in this stream bears that out because symbolism is from the inside and it doesn't afford the kinds of precision that the modernistic, monarchical vision can sometimes afford. So I'm afraid I just rambled a bunch and didn't really answer your question so go ahead and redirect me if you want to. I just wanted to add and I wouldn't say that that is at all a lack of an answer but I want to add that the context, so it's an approximate judgment what we're doing in secular frame if you look at the text and try to assert something about its original meaning but in that context it has a lot to do with the Greek Magical Papyri and Gnosticism and has to do with Magical Practices in Ephesus at that time. So that's one argument that I've seen and I just want to add that they're in favor of the idea that we're talking about ontologically different sort of entities that aren't derivative from human beings. Yes and but when you say ontologically different this is where ontology gets really tricky because if you look at let's say Artemis and if you're dealing with Ephesus at Paul's time you're dealing with the great cult of Artemis and that temple and of course in Acts there's this story about the conflict between the Christians and the cult of Artemis and this is where sort of the archetypal symbolic move that Peterson and Peugeot make. Now of course Peterson and Peugeot are in some ways what we're talking about is sort of the relationship between Peugeot and Peterson because Peugeot and Peterson come at these things and sort of meet in a very interesting way and Jung of course also in the mix here because it was Jung that sort of smuggled a lot of this stuff into science and forced in some ways begrudgingly on a continual basis science has to yield and acknowledge the power of the inside view because I think it's you know it's taken me a couple of years to understand what all happened with Peterson and even what happened within me and listening to Peterson and what excited me about Peterson but what Peterson sort of does is give an outside view justification to the life of the inside that is one way to look at what Jordan Peterson does and so you know when he talks about sacrifice when he talks about how basically the inside view via voluntary willful human breeding and multiplication you know mate selection Peterson all over the place sees how the inside view is colonizing the outside view and in some ways this entire debate is a race between the outside view versus the inside view and it's sort of if you go back to mad magazine in the 70s it's sort of spy versus spy where you had basically a little spy dude who's wearing all white and a little spy dude who's wearing all black and they're always competing against each other it's you know yin and yang it's chaos and order it's all of these dualities competing and so on one hand we can look at Artemis of Ephesus and say oh well a modern reader who's looking at principalities and powers reading this in Detroit Michigan in the 1990s has perhaps and without a theological education or historical education or anything like that is is completely missing the relationship between these words and the experience of the Christians in Ephesus with respect to principalities and powers but from the inside and via Jordan Peterson might not we map patterns and similarities between the between what was going around around going of it on around the cart of the cult of Artemis and Ephesus and let's say Detroit Michigan in the 1970s and 80s the loss of the principalities and powers of the auto Detroit automobile industry in that era and you might say where on earth are you going to find the any kind of commonality between the decline of the auto industry in Detroit in the 70s and 80s with the cult of Artemis in the first century in Ephesus in Asia Minor and wow point taken yet there might be and this is what's so sneaky about Peugeot because when he talks about patterns it's about the most demythologized basic words you can find to look at patterns we have a better word for it and so to say I can sort of map a a story about Artemis of Ephesus onto a dynamic I find in Detroit Michigan in the 70s and 80s in terms of principalities and powers and someone looking from the outside might scoff and say oh give me a break and this is what Sam Harris does you can map anything onto anything I can read a cookbook and and offer spiritual advice from it oh quite right good point powerful point yet and this is where Peterson sort of comes back around there are in fact a priori structures as he talks about in that first that first debate with Sam Harris there are in fact commonality that commonalities that you can look at from the outside Peterson would say evolutionarily okay there's a big outside tool evolutionarily the creatures experiencing what was happening in Ephesus in the first century are very very very very similar to the creatures in Detroit Michigan in the 70s and 80s watching the decline of the auto industry so and you can leverage all of that commonality and it's really hard to say that based on the physicality the biomechanisms the psychology that there are no relationships between the struggle with Artemis of Ephesus and General Motors in Detroit you're going to find patterns and now again that circles around from the outside to Sam Harris's point yeah but we don't just find patterns we also project patterns well fair enough but we also generally project patterns on things that there actually are patterns and then we sort of back then into Verveckis relevance realization because what we're really asking about well what is the relevant pattern okay but relevant pattern for what for what end for what tell us and round and round we go but and I just gave you an inside view into my head when I read the book of Ephesus and I wrestle with Artemis of Ephesus and all of that there and what does he mean by principalities and powers because as a preacher this is my job I have a room full of people from a tradition full of people that actually pay me to stand up in front of them on Sunday morning and say principalities and powers how does that relate to your life from the inside and so so so yeah you can have another rebuttal if you want because I know I keep riffing I mean you're you're giving me fun stuff to riff off I don't know if what I'm saying is that all helpful to you but that's the way it looks like from my side from my chair I'll take a shot at that um so the Sam Harris with the cookbook thing when you're looking at that and when he says you can pull pull meaning out of that what he's actually doing is he's projecting meaning of stories that he's already heard and already like designed onto that how long would it take one of these cargo cult tribes you know a tribe in the middle of nowhere to turn a cookbook into a religious book and would they actually be doing something new would they actually be creating a new religion or are they just using it as a form yeah and and that's that's a really great question that's a great and that's where you get the inside outside thing too because the the group of the group of Dungeons and Dragons players who's one of them goes out and actually manages to get a girlfriend and they're probably right she's projecting her daddy issues he's projecting his mommy issues their hormones are at play they are projecting massively on each other but what they have also done is started out on a journey that will lead them to who knows where and that in some ways is what it means to be a human being and and it's all of this it's all of this projection that we're constantly doing well we're not projecting from nothing either and so you're exactly right it's all of these stories that he's projecting onto the cookbook so so the um you know one of the so then i was uh you know in that episode of the rest of history they started to talk about the oracle at delphi and one of the things that they noted about the oracle at delphi was delphi like nostradamus like the horoscopes you'd read in the newspaper on the internet give these very vague descriptions and what you then do is project onto them and yeah but part of the trick and this is what vervecky talked about in his early lectures on shamanism part of the reason this works and it does work to a degree part of the reason this works is because all you're doing normally is projecting and once you add some dissonance into the projection you um you've actually disrupted your pattern sufficient that you might actually be open to other patterns that might actually help you to see the world now if you look at this from sam harris's point of view you could say yeah well you see the bible is bullshit because i can do it with a cookbook and you can come back around with shamanic reasoning and say well um okay but this has actually disrupted you and you can come at it from a petersonian darwinian cultural darwinian perspective where he says yeah but this particular text has reliably disrupted masses of people in a productive way for centuries so actually even if they're projecting onto the bible which i see as a pastor all the time i i i highly lead a small group bible study and i put a text in front of people and i just sit back with my arms folded thinking what on earth are they going to see in this bible story and if i know the people well enough i can usually say okay they're doing a whole bunch of projecting onto the bible story which i am too except be by virtue of my training i've had a degree of training into not projecting myself onto it which is why you have the historical grammatical foil of interpretation in order to try to limit projection yet what what happens in this is something new happens and so then what happens in history when you have 2000 years of everybody projecting on the same text and trying to get around their projections and the product of all of that projecting and trying to get around their projection then goes back into the culture and it just keeps getting recycled and the the big trick that sam harris pulls is basically the trick of the modernistic monarchical vision when he looks at the bible and says aha any god who would write a book would certainly be able to get all of these other things right and i would say you have this whole story about god writing the book that you are actually projecting onto the christian history of interpretation and to sam's point a lot of christians have made exactly that same move in modernity well so sam quite rightly gets from the christians and sam could say i'm i'm just taking what christians have said and i'd say yeah you're exactly right you are taking what christians have said and those christians are wrong and i can actually show you from older projections onto the text and older projections in christian theology that christians for a long time have seen that that is not the way that we read the text and that is not what the text is so again i mean you've just got an inside look into everything that goes through my mind when i sit down and write a sermon and that's ironically why a christian minister is wrestling around with all these ideas because the more i read and the more i learned about psychology and projection and all of this i had to say well what does it mean if god speaks to me and on one hand from the inside it might look like falling in love from the outside oh there's a there's all of their psychology and physics and history and culture and all of that that's built into it yeah but it's still like falling in love and those other things are there too and so we're just trying to wrestle with the insides and the outsides that was really helpful really helpful thank you anybody else on this because this is a big issue all right i will continue let's see christian golden throughout biblical scripture it appears that god lays emphasis primarily on doing what is right what i mean is before he speaks of the shall not he speaks of the shall this potentially articulated with jesus this is potently articulated with jesus reply when asked about the greatest commandment there is no mention of do not even in this interaction with emphasizes if you do what is right but if you do not do what is right he doesn't say if you do what is wrong but if you do not do what is wrong this is a good point though not from jesus lips exactly james states something to the effect of if you know the right thing to do but don't do it that sin is too um that is sin to you to me this seems to indicate an approach to christian living that summed up to the extent that you focus on doing what is right you are preventing sin from entering the door yes again referring back to god and cain it also seems like i should focus almost not at all on avoiding doing or ceasing to do what is wrong even repentance could should perhaps first and foremost the turning of what is right as opposed to primarily the turning away from what is not right i'm surprised joey didn't take this question down but first and foremost focus on doing what is right you see joey is not a tyrant joey did not take this question down all the way to the end we have a question um does this interpretation raise any red flags no i think you are seeing something very old and very right and my friend warren mills who wrote this book uh how good is the golden rule uh which probably none of you will read but he's a he basically was a um well warren's been on my channel a couple of times he's he participates in our living stones bible study um warren wrote this book because he retired he worked in the auto industry and then he retired and what am i gonna do in retirement i'll write books and it's not too often people who work in the auto industry kind of mid-level management decide they're gonna write christian books and actually manage to get this one published and it's also got another book on uh big daddy don garletts but what you pointed out in the book on your question here is exactly what's in this book and it's exactly in the puritan the puritan slogan idle hands is the devil's workshop that if you fill your life with good things you will sin less just by virtue of the math that you will if you and and this is why and lewis makes this point too where lewis says in modernity the the most obvious sin that modernity sees you know via tom holland through this long line of christianity is selfishness and lewis stops is selfishness and lewis stops and says look what we've done we've taken what should be a positive which is love your neighbor and turned it into don't be selfish and we've taken what is a positive thing and turned it into a negative thing so this is um and life is full of this kind of dynamic if you tell yourself i shouldn't beat my wife that's true you shouldn't beat your wife you know one way to avoid beating your wife loving your wife but what do you mean by that i mean doing good things for your wife uh praising her um caring for her laying down laying down sacrificing for her well-being if you are doing all of that positive good stuff towards your wife guess what odds are you're probably not going to be smacking her around or spending all your time getting drunk with your friends all of those things that we would call sin and that's why what is the christian life love the lord your god with all your heart soul mind and strength and love your neighbor as yourself in in this sums up all the law this is what fulfilling the law looks like and again you can you can mention the law the law is helpful those shall nots are helpful you shall not beat your wife but just by avoiding beating your wife you haven't necessarily fulfilled the law of love which is exactly what you're pointing to in this question so no you're exactly right so if you want to avoid sin do good but the point isn't avoiding sin that whole perspective leads to a sort of neutrality which is lifeless and boring what you should do is love your neighbor as yourself and love god you know love god and then your neighbor preaching on this this sunday so it's it's fresh in my mind so yeah yeah it's a great question and it's very practical advice and warren mills point in that and that whole book is due to others what you would have them do to you again it's a positive command if you fill your life with that positive you will probably avoid the negative but the negatives are helpful sometimes because no i'm loving my wife by correcting her with my fist uh no probably not you're probably beating on your wife because of stuff in you and it's not a really helpful way to love your wife though try loving your wife without your fists please and you will probably have a better time overcoming it and you know it's the same with with addictions um if you okay i shouldn't drink i shouldn't drink or i shouldn't smoke i shouldn't smoke fill your life with something positive and you won't be as tempted to drink and smoke it's all and you know anybody who's dealt with their own personal addictions learns this stuff if you focus on the negative you actually give the negative power what you should do is focus on the positive fill your day with good things and that's how you get rid of the negative and and you can find this theme throughout christian history again and again and again and again so it's a good question i already answered the pizza question um future zeus wow i recently listened to the randos conversation where anti-natalism was discussed matthew 2419 woe to those who are pregnant in those times um we are in those times again the church venerates saints who retreat from the tradition um from traditional family life the bible suggests that the suffering of our children in these times is not worth bearing for even the anti-natalists are colonized by christ what do you make of the anti-natalist sentiments in christianity that's that's a really interesting question because it's intention sort of with the question i just answered because on one hand do you want to avoid sin fill your life with good things and good gifts from god like a marriage a marriage is a good thing and a good gift from god let's say in roman catholic tradition where priests are celibate now here's the thing celibacy is supposed to be primary and not non-marriage okay and so if you fail the celibacy part maybe you better just get married i mean that's essentially paul's argument in first corinthians if you can't do the celibacy celibacy part well then fill your life with a better thing which is marriage with a good thing a better thing than just um in chastity let's say so but then there's this tradition where okay priests aren't going to marry well what's that about why aren't they going to marry and again if you read paul in first corinthians paul says well it's better not to marry well why so you can devote yourself fully to the work of the lord because anyone who is married has to not only spend all of their time working for the lord maybe as a workaholic but they also have to somehow keep their wife happy and maintain things for their children they are divided that's a good point that's a powerful point and so as a protest and clergy member who is married who has a wife and children um if i weren't married but it's a really hard if because the celibacy the celibacy thing is a is a tough is a tough challenge for many men and and women as well but there is power in okay so let me structure it this way if you decide to marry and embrace monogamy and especially not just serial monogamy which is sort of the cultural norm in america today but but lifelong monogamy you have sort of sidestepped let's say celibacy which is a difficult thing and embraced another difficult thing because well now at least you get to have sex and if you're a protestant you get to have use birth control but you've still got to limit it to one woman till death do you part well well maybe it's not quite as challenging as celibacy but it's still got its challenges which you know ravi zacharias and many other christian leaders have demonstrated so there are lots of challenges here and as with as we've is commonly known in this corner of the internet once you have a value you're going to have a hierarchy celibacy is tougher than monogamy monogamy is tougher than promiscuity now at that point you might just say now wait a minute there are multiple value hierarchies here because promiscuity actually is very difficult well how is it difficult well it's um it's easy in terms of your sexual urges and instincts but it's harder in terms of making the rest of your life work you know i was i was i watched there's a documentary floating around out there that a bunch of people have been pointing me to from the bbc i can't get them or you out of my mind something that it's it's it's it's a very interesting documentary one of the interesting things that happens in this documentary is everyone is looking to resist the man resist the system resist the structure this is very big in the 60s and 70s and has sort of re-emerged now in the woke movement and what's interesting is that okay let's take a very low resolution view of authority and say all of these elites or all of these government officials or even had you know richard nixon talking about you know the evil of the establishment what's so astounding is that uh richard nixon you are the establishment and so you know it was a very sort of a donald trumpian moment there too where donald trumpian rails against the government as president of the united states and it's like um you sit in the most powerful chair in the government yet you're railing against it and that sort of makes sense because you are not the government but you also seem to be forgetting the chair you're sitting in so anyway so everybody's railing against the system and they want to fix the world by destroying the system so you got all these revolutionaries in the 60s and 70s playing that game well one of the most tyrannical systems out there has to do with sexual limiting sexual behavior so you have all these revolutionaries who are just all excited about tearing down the system and bombings and destroying and all of these things and another one of the things they want to take down is well monogamy and so they're all you know sleeping with each other and well anybody who's paid much attention to human beings and sexuality and jealousy and envy and hierarchies what comes is highly predictable because the group cohesion they can't they can't form and maintain cohesive productive groups because the other hierarchies are all disrupting each other and so you've got someone who's leading the group and so now he here's a guy with high status and then you've got women in the orbit and the women are part of the group and well you've got the most attractive woman and the guy with high status then well you know what happens begins to happen and so the high status guy sleeps with the most desirable woman on whatever hierarchy and some of the other twos and threes and fours and the groups begin to look at and think i'd like to sleep with that woman i had and of course the woman maybe wants the guy at the top of the hierarchy but liked the personality of a two or a three or a four and so she's conflicted and you know these these these dynamics in the group then destroys the entire group and they can't maintain cohesion and they can't operate and in fact part of this documentary gets into chairman Mao and his second wife and you know it's it's just really insane i didn't know any of that story but it's quite something so back to antinatalism celibacy if you're trying to maintain a extremely productive and focused hierarchy is a very effective way of taking the very chaotic dynamics of the sexual marketplace out of the system so when you have someone like cardinal mccarrick and the roman catholic priest gay sex sandal stuff well why are people upset gay sex is is is sterile and is sterile no babies are created well that's a little bit better than say before the protestant reformation when you know the pope and the priests were they weren't marrying but they were having children and everybody knew they were having children and children are a pretty good sign of of sexual activity of heterosexual sexual activity virgin birth notwithstanding so one of the one of the strategies that you do is you say okay celibacy let's let's eliminate to the degree that we can the disruption in our organization caused by the sexual marketplace and that's a very rational thing to do even though you have all of these all of these rationality atheists out there screaming about how irrational it is for the for the priest to be celibate it's it's a very very rational move and to know that just take a step into protestant hierarchies and watch what goes on with pastors and pastor's wives and sleeping with the organist and on and on and on and on and on the the the chaos of the sexual marketplace is in competition with the struggles to create other sorts of organizations and hierarchies that are productive towards other goals beyond human reproduction so when the apostle paul talks about hey it's better not to be married in some ways he's saying if if you're not married you can spend all of your time working for the lord within this hierarchy within this organization within this productive organization you know if the apostle paul were married honey i'm gonna go on my third missionary journey really again you left me for months at a time to travel all around the roman world how do i know who you're meeting in those churches you know you could just you can just picture it so paul says i don't have a wife i travel where i want to i spend all my time where i want to but there are sacrifices on the other end to quote the sage john vendonk most of life is exchanging one set of problems for another and so what you do with celibacy is you say all right i'm cordoning off the entire sexual chaotic marketplace so i can devote myself to the work of the lord now a monk does this and devotes themselves to prayer and to their community and part of the reason these are usually you know you've got a man over here and you've got women over there because generally speaking you know you're gonna just in terms of the odds you're gonna cut off a whole lot of sexual drama you know i've been watching the the bachelor with my wife and daughters and i just i i feel so bad for people who go on that show because it's like okay we take we take these enormously good-looking people and we put them in this thing and i also chuckle because gay bachelor or bachelorette would never ever work because all of the contestants would be falling in love with each other and the entire premise of the show builds on the gender binary and all enormously predictable marketplace forces within human sexuality so now the fact that this looks anti-natalist that's just because it's sterile but these forces within christian history go back and forth so on one hand one way to encourage people towards the productive hierarchy of a celibate priesthood is to give it enormous status and so these men who have foregone sexual pleasure hopefully in order to pursue the work of the lord are given great esteem because they have made a very considerable sacrifice in order to pursue the ends of that organization which is why all of this drama about non-celibate priests is a huge problem for the catholic church protestant churches you know ala martin luther and the protestant reformation basically said we're sort of gonna cut some make some compromises on this score and so we're gonna downshift and it's better to create kind of the little church in the family but when they did that they set up whole other challenges and and hierarchies and difficulties so you know all this stuff is very rational and reasonable it's just challenging let's see if future zeus is in the chat room um he isn't so any any any pushback or comments on on on that crazy answer everybody wants to hear about sex but nobody wants to talk about it post from fjodor beza bezikoff from youtube chat this is probably from last week don't have the discord but i'll try here what are your thoughts on lectio divina and similar forms of scriptural meditation earlier i talked about how and and you can kind of get this from the from the vervekian shamanic lectures lectio divina well let me back up a little bit so again my job is to communicate and interpret the bible for my congregation and now via youtube for a bunch of you who who care to overhear when i go to the bible and i open the bible when i go to the bible and i open the bible i am projecting onto that book and anyone who knows me well enough and listens to my sermons will say yeah there's a whole bunch of paul in those sermons and you know earl marlin just passed away recently he was a former pastor of this church and became a good friend of mine and someone i dearly loved but you know for the years he was here this is very common among preachers he got tired of listening to me why because there's so much there's so much pvk and pvk sermons um one one old one old description of preaching is you know the bible poured through personality and so if you listen to my sermons it's all poured through my personality i'm doing a whole lot of projection when i'm interpreting these passages it's just there so how do i disrupt the projection well so i'm trained in greek and hebrew so i try as best i can to look at the greek and the hebrew and i you know anybody who's i'm probably only one who would notice this lately i've been preaching through the gospels again and instead of taking sort of one pericope which is one section i'm taking two of them and this sunday i'm preaching on the the the parable of the good samaritan but i'm including in luke the section on jesus sending out the 72 and the reason i'm doing that is because i've looked at the parable of the good samaritan so many times it's mapped territory for me okay what does that mean part of mapped territory for me means that that whole story is projection i have come to a conclusion about what that story is about and part of the reason i never repeat sermons is that i get bored preaching the same sermon twice so what i'm doing is i'm adding the the jesus sending out the 72 and i'm including that in terms of the interpretive framework of the good samaritan and what i'm doing then is disrupting the mapped territory of the parable of the good samaritan in my mind with the luke didn't put these back to back incidentally and there's even a little translation question in terms of the transition between them and i think the niv got it wrong and the esv and some other translations got it right because there are editing committees behind these translations which is why it's helpful to know greek and hebrew so you can actually even if you're not expert in greek and hebrew you can actually do some evaluating and i have this wall of dead experts behind me who have also read the text and so all of that is is an attempt to disrupt the projection that i'm bringing to the bible and to hopefully offer to the congregation something that will disrupt their projections and maybe see something in the world a little bit more clear a little bit more clearly lectio divina and scriptural meditation does exactly the same thing now it does it more from a view from the inside rather than the outside okay so in that sense it's over sort of in the peugeotian view from the inside rather than grammatical historical context is a view from the outside there's a question and answer in which jonathan perzost says some rather ungenerous things about commentaries like these and i certainly understood exactly what he was saying because so i get out of seminary and you you basically learn enough in seminary to get started on this and in your in your vocation as you continue to work through the bible and preach it every week and do all of this you know you start using these commentaries you begin to realize these commentaries are all so much from the outside and you're talking to people in the pew who they don't care about this stuff they want to know how is jesus going to visit my life now that is so much from the inside and so when peugeot says this kind of stuff doesn't help you at all he's got a point but this kind of stuff disrupts you sort of like lectio divina and scriptural meditation disrupts you and part of the reason that they are helpful is because with that disruption maybe now you can read the scripture with fresh eyes and you can actually have more of an experience directly with the scripture so you know and and the same thing so i was talking to jeff yesterday and jeff jeff pace from from the discord here who's on his exodus 90 thing and one of the things that jeff does and when he was before the exodus 90 thing i would often find him in the open studio where he is sitting there and he is copying the bible in three in uh spiral bound notebooks and someone might look at that from the outside and say boy that's a sure a waste of time what do you mean you're copying the bible don't you know haven't you heard of the printing press haven't you seen a photocopying machine no he's copying the bible to disrupt his normal patterns of reading and if you ask him what's the benefit of copying the bible i actually now we're talking from the inside again i am actually encountering god and the bible with fresh eyes because well because why because now i have to pay attention to every word that's very similar to lectio divina scriptural meditation here's a word or a phrase that i'm going to repeat sort of as a mantra i'm going to repeat it i'm going to repeat it i'm going to discipline the mind i'm going to focus on this and god is going to speak to me that's why you do it and there are actually many many different ways of doing this and they are fruitful and they are powerful and uh scriptural memorization is another one the the and there's two goals there's two good things that come out of it one of is is you've now colonized your brain with scripture to a degree that if you're just holding it in a book if it's in your head it'll come up in different ways and you'll gain insights from it another way is in the process of memorization you learn the book in a different way than you did before and again this gets back into that book that i mentioned that c.s lewis had the preface of it's the difference between the inside and the outside didn't i tell you the first question see if you really want to colonize the questions and answers be the first question but you never know who the first question is going to be or i might even just pick a new first question but there that's does that does that answer your question he's not even here they've been on discord any comments to that answer in the discord okay i'll continue joey what do you think jesus advice would be to someone who is greatly wronged and finds even the willingness to forgive undesirable even the willingness to forgive is undesirable because what you do when you forgive is you but let's say let's say i'm sitting in my office and there's a traffic accident on florida namhurst which there is often and actually i grew up in a house where it was another it was another it was another it was another busy intersection there were always traffic accidents on the corner of seventh street and jefferson and so we'd be sitting in our house having dinner here screech crash and then we all get up from dinner and we go outside along with the rest of the half of the neighborhood and we're all there to gawk at the accident to see if anybody needs help yada yada yada let's imagine there's a traffic accident on on um let's imagine that somebody's car careens into the the brickwork on the outside of the landscaping of church and destroys a church sign or our church property or something now normally what we do is you know okay well in california you're supposed to have liability insurance so that your insurance will pay for the damage you do with your car that um you might not have the cash to and let's say like many drivers in california this person does not have insurance and so now suddenly they have crashed into the church and they have destroyed our property and they have no money to pay for it maybe they're poor and they've never bought car insurance they've been driving without insurance and okay well now they're in trouble with the law but the truth of it is they don't have any money to pay and the church is out the cost of repairing the damage that the church has done nothing for and forgiveness is basically not only paying for the damage but releasing the other party from this psychological internal thing that we do which is all right i'm going to have to pay for the damage you shouldn't have been driving without insurance you shouldn't have been speeding you shouldn't have been drinking all of that was your fault and i have to pay for it so i have to pay for it but what we do psychologically then is also say well since i even though i can't get you to pay for it i'm going to make you pay for it by holding it against you that's the phrase that we use or i'm going to make you pay for it by i'm going to put up a sign on the church lot which says the spanish word for any john or john doe plowed drunkenly plowed into this corner destroying our property forcing an already struggling church to lay out ten thousand dollars to make up for his mistake so i put a sign up basically defaming john doe and hurting his reputation and letting the whole community know that this guy doesn't do the right thing that's what i want to do in my heart forgiveness says john doe go in peace i will pay for you and if you come back to me i will welcome you as a friend this is undesirable because we want justice and we want john doe to pay what he should pay and everyone around would say he deserves to pay and forgiveness says no what christianity one thing one way to understand what christianity is is an entire narrative and drama by which we have all these little incidences in our lives where other people hurt us and hold it against us sometimes in our lives let's say i'm john doe i am poor can't hold a job because i'm an alcoholic and i ain't going to go to any of your stinking 12-step meetings screw you and my marriage is a mess and i can't hold a job but i'm trying to maintain a car because i want to find a job and i um but i i you know but i'm still drinking and i'm driving and i'm not paying for insurance and i just had a fight with my neighbor or uh the politician or i wanted to win didn't win and so i'm angry so i got drunk and i sped down florin road and i crashed into living stones now john doe maybe john doe grew up in a church maybe john doe now every time he drives by living stones and every time he sees the repaired stonework is going to look at that stonework and say i am such a shit not only can't i stay sober not only can't i manage a family not only can't i even avoid drunk driving but that poor little church that can basically barely keep the lights on had to pay to fix what i did christianity basically says in terms of when you look at the cross the crucifixion and how jesus paid for our sins christianity basically says each of us is john doe we can't stay sober we can't maintain a relationship we can't even keep our side of the street clean and christ by his grace came not only swept our side of the street for us but then came and put his arms around us and something in me no longer sees myself as the noble good citizen righteous character but sees myself as a sinner for which someone who is actually perfect paid for me and once i reposition myself parabolically perfectly perspectively by virtue of the story of jesus giving himself for me i can now look at another drunk who plows his car into my property and does me damage and i can say well yeah it's not it's not much fun paying for his damage but i will do it and when he comes to my house drunk i'm going to put my arm around him and say you know what harry let's sit down and have a cup of coffee together and this is you find this story all at all you know again and again and again in literature look at jean valjean and the candlesticks you know jean valjean after getting out of prison the monsignor puts him up overnight jean valjean wakes up in the middle of the night remembers he used silverware takes the spoons runs out and he's going to sell the spoons you know to get money and and the cops find him and bring him back to the monsignor and the monsignor this is in the movie says i'm terribly angry with you john valjean and john valjean is just sitting there waiting to hear about yeah john you're a you're an asshole you you i took you in and you stole from me how ungrateful can you be and the monsignor says i'm terribly angry with you you forgot the candlesticks what and of course in the movie the monsignor leans into him and says john with these candlesticks i have bought your life and it's the same thing and save it priming thing and save it priming ryan you know the tom hanks guy has to battle all the way across d-day to find private ryan and to save him and then gives up his life for private ryan and his dying words looking at private ryan and his earn it and of course the movie begins with private ryan over tom hanks grave wondering have i earned it have i earned it and so this is the christian story and you know this is why this is why the religion of woke is a brutal religion and even atheists like james lindsey notes it there's no redemption there's no redemption in that story and in christianity the way people change is not you shall not do bad things no you're going to do bad things trust me and even sometimes you're going to try to do good things and in the process you're going to hurt somebody and and we're in that kind of mess and christianity affords a story that if we lean into it and if we live inside of it can create in us the kind of person that not only pays for the pays for the damage that the drunk driver did but also when we see the drunk driver on the street says hey john come over here let me let me buy you lunch you say well wait a minute you just paid for all his damage and now you're going to buy him lunch yeah oh i get what you're doing if you buy him lunch maybe he'll stop drinking well that would be a good thing but that's not why i'm buying him lunch i am buying him lunch because the monsignor gave me the candlesticks and actually if you think about this if the whole world lives like this you change the world and so the way you make forgiveness desirable in a human community is you establish a community you know remember we think as groups of people you establish a community in where in which you actually gain status by giving the thief the candlesticks and you might say yeah but i you know lots of non-christian people watch that movie Les Miserables not the musical the one with i forget his name Qui-Gon Jinn well lots of movies lots of people watch this and are moved by it and think yeah that's true yeah that's true and that's Tom Holland's point Christianity has been colonizing you for a very long time and a roman might look at that and say that monsignor is an idiot you want to know it would be better it'd be better to take Jean Valjean and put him back into into the labor camp or or maybe slay him alive right there just out of retribution and Christianity says no give him the candlesticks and now Jesus doesn't always give the candlesticks but that's the point of the story oh we got a windy open mic somewhere okay all right deep dark seas John Richard Foster says lays out six streams of Christian tradition that have emerged through church history the contemplative the prayer-filled life holiness the virtuous life charismatic the spirit-filled life social justice the compassionate life evangelical the word-centered life and incarnate the sacramental life which stream do you most identify with and why why i i i love Richard Foster's book uh streams of living water and it's a great book and i also love what Tim Keller learned from one of his seminary profs that revival happens when all of the streams come together it's sort of like when all of the elements of refracted light all of the colors come together and it's white it's it's pure light so i think the goal is that they all in fact do come together in terms of but but it's really hard for us we we usually again we usually sort of sort of tasks which between them and and i would probably have to be in in i'm probably more in the evangelical camp and that's evangelical broadly speaking maybe small e evangelical um but i you know i've i've grown at different periods of my life i've probably exemplified other camps just in terms of my own development in my own history but at this point in what i'm doing a lot of what i'm doing is trying to help people engage with the bible and use the bible to disrupt their projections so which stream have you most developed in to through this discord your conversations and your overall project probably again i'm i'm centering mostly on the evangelical because and this is a point that i've made quite often there are this media youtube discord it's very logos centered by virtue every every medium every medium distorts so the medium is the message okay every medium distorts this is a powerful medium in terms of word it's not very powerful it's not very powerful in terms of incarnational because we're looking at these two-dimensional screens it's not very powerful in terms of holiness because it's too easy to bullshit everybody on screens and through social media it's not very powerful in terms of the contemplative the contemplative thank you jamie russell for a five dollar super chat rick just came in to remind me it's it's the contemplative is the view from the inside the prayer field life and why do you pray all the time because prayer is a very inside thing you're you're communing with god so in terms of youtube and the discord it's very logo centric so it's very um evangelical i think part of the the problem with social justice on screens is again this question of a medium because justice just like holiness it's just too easy to present facades that don't look at the whole picture and the the imbalance you know it's interesting because if you listen to scott skip who's the guy who has a union channel you know his big complaint about peterson is peterson is peterson is two logo centers and not enough eros centered and that could go different ways but part of part of that has to do with the fact that these screens are very given to words either spoken word written word or projected images so okay anthony neary the decline of religious aesthetics is a crisis leading to cultural incoherence destructive artistic individualism and small interest in the church from creatures well jordan peterson's openness entice them well you know this is why you know why jonathan peugeot if you listen to jonathan peugeot's story so my first conversation with him i got into that which is usually what i do with the first conversation but you listen to jonathan peugeot talk about this this is his journey look at sally here in the discord community this is her journey uh there are a number of other artists this is their journey and you know when sally sits down and levels at protestantism her charge about not knowing what to do with the visual arts yeah touche and this has been a real struggle in protestantism because it's evangelical it's very logo centric so well you know jordan peterson is changing the world and you know he did through one wave um and he spawned this channel and he certainly raised the view of peugeot and brought vervecky into the midst and so who knows where this thing goes so and who knows what and how if there if jordan will make another splash with his second book so we'll see we'll see quest for a name what do you think of secular parables and icons we will not avoid the parabolic or the iconic uh secular is the secret second sister of the church so there's a lot going on right there following from that is there a need for the moral example of jesus when you have an exemplar of his opposite to avoid the form of hitler i think it's very interesting how tom holland keeps mentioning how in some ways nazism replaced sin and hitler replaced the devil in the rest of history podcast there's a very interesting episode on fascism which i highly recommend because you know for example when trump got into office i heard a lot of my friends on the left fascist fascist fascist he's a hitler and i thought he's not a hitler come on we've known donald trump for a long time he's not a hitler um not at all is was there some authoritarian aspect to him yeah uh and did that come out in sort of the symbolism you know you wanted a big military a big military parade in washington dc yeah that's pretty straight down the line authoritarian but authoritarian there's the the subset of authoritarians is a lot bigger than nazis or fascism and so they're just sort of a parabolic iconic uh floppiness with labeling all these you know ben shapiro is a is a nazi that's like you know if you're even if you're paying just a tiny bit of attention as ben shapiro says nobody's nobody's more dewy than ben shapiro yeah he's got the yamaka on he goes to he's i'm servant chew you know to call ben shapiro a nazi it just makes no sense but that's the level of public discourse that we have today and part of the usefulness of of sloppy symbolism and iconography is it's very quick so if you want to if you want to destroy a rival or an or an adversary get a clever meme just take a picture and some text and bang memes can destroy someone to the degree that you know eric weinstein asked ross douthat if jesus were alive today would you know he'd just be destroyed by memes doubt that of course good roman catholic says no and i agree with doubt that because if you actually read the gospels carefully alongside with a lot of the subsequent history that followed especially the history before christianity prevailed with constantine christianity has been attacked by memes all along the way and continues to do so today and it isn't destroyed lots of things aren't destroyed because they're attacked by memes but yeah it's on right now it is on right now um so okay roaring monkey what would you say to those who critique the lack of substantive practices in church the lack of doing which leads people to feel that this religion doesn't get them anywhere or do anything yeah and i think that's that tends to be a besetting sin oh not really so this is really hard stuff because to get back somewhat into the dynamics of my question about the evangelical so if a church does if a church does a lot of promoting promoting of what it's doing the church betrays something that jesus told them to do which is don't practice your righteousness and public for men to see and women and so churches by that command actually have an obligation to not promote their doing or not promote their doing too much now that's one aspect of doing and you know this again sort of brings me back to warren mills book what's so good about the golden rule if christians are doing uh they should be doing quietly where they should be doing quietly quietly where other people aren't going to see and in fact um probably could be that one of the best churches in town has a reputation for not doing anything because they're just absolutely so good at actually doing their things quietly that might not help them in terms of promotion and publicity but what usually that does is just like when jesus does a miracle and heals someone and says now don't tell anybody a word about him spreads that's the best kind of that's the best kind of advertising you can get don't tell anybody but this church did this for me and i've seen that a lot there are periods of time when this church was helping people pay their rent and pay their light bills and we just would get swamped for requests from rent and light bills it's like why do i get these phone calls all the time that's because when you help somebody people are grateful and they tell their neighbors and it just kind of explodes so yeah and but now when we're talking about practices in church i i just posted to to twitter a james k smith wrote an article about practice and i posted to twitter basically that all of the stuff that i see chattered about in the sort of awakening from the meaning crisis segment of this corner of the internet where we're doing meditation and we're doing yoga and we're doing martial arts and we're doing practices practices practices this is actually a really hot segment of post emergent evangelicalism right now where 20 years ago when we planted a church in sacramento they had you know the guitarist and skinny jeans and the skit before the sermon and maybe even a wednesday night service where you'd have communion instead of communion on sunday and all this seeker methodology that was really the sort of the evangelistic hotness that sort of became the non-denominational big box church that you can find in any major american city or in many other cities around the world and that's kind of your smoke mesquite skinny jean evangelical love song to jesus type church your sort of hillsong thing that was big and at least in places like california it's still practiced but mostly in the suburbs not so much in city centers jesus culture you know beth o'retting is kind of maintaining it and it still has a lot of potency but if you look at a lot of the church plants and again i tell anglicans in australia and the uk and canada that they're the new hotness and that that new hotness will probably come to them and they say i'm not feeling it now but it's you know it's the quiet meditative service with a strict um liturgy and maybe chanting and weekly eucharist they call it eucharist not lord's supper and you know a water a bowl of water right next to the communion elements and of course my anti-catholic ancestors would look at that say oh and no no no and so they've all this translating in the reform church we're remembering our baptism oh okay so we have a theological justification for something that the church had sort of done either instinctively or symbolically before and so all of this stuff is the practices and so in one of our church plants over in davis i mean this is the people's republic of davis this is this is a deep blue place in a blue state okay where and and what they're doing in church is all of these practices and you know right down the street from a yoga studio that is doing practices so this is very much a cultural wave and i think this has everything to do with the end of modernity the sort of backing away from this disembodied monarchical vision taking the um taking the manifest image away so we can see through the scientific image and now all of this other stuff is being incorporated back into traditional christian liturgy but as i also say when i see the church plants do it they it's really hard to do it not in a post-modern way because part of what choice means is that now you have to choose this instead of just being raised in it so this is one of the big this is one of the big themes of the church plant and so we're going to see how this is going to work out for the next couple of weeks okay um let's see if roaring monkey's in the room he isn't so any any questions from the any questions from the chat room okay so axolot cosmonaut thanks for asking answering my question he refers to a question of mixed signals which i'm not going to go back and read because these things get long i was provoked to ask the question because many people seem to see the bible in propositional terms yes that's what modernity did to bible reading and in fact i get 10 times you know i have 10 times you know i have 10 times the videos i want to make that i have time to make and what you all can tolerate in your good sense and one of those is read from more from marston's book fundamentalism in american culture because he's got this really great place in his book where it shows really illustrates the height of turning the bible into a list of propositions and now again seeing from a distance looking at this why did dispensational fundamentalist christians do that because they're competing with this highly propositional modernity that was on the rise in the in the 19th century and that is still with us these things change very slowly they get into traditions especially religious traditions and they get perpetuated because that's what religious traditions do they perpetuate and they preserve and what religious traditions do is sort of slow down change because you know at a hot moment in the 70s bell bottoms with a lot of stripes was a really great idea hasn't been a great idea since then maybe it wasn't a great idea at all but what sort of a the the what religious communities do is sort of slow down the pace of change and give people a chance to look at it and say do i really want to wear those bell bottoms do i really want to wear those striped coteroy's with that leisure suit really so hot so you know i see people the bible in propositional terms and and get past the spiritual and result i don't know in result why why they see um why they value the bible and what it gives them it gives them certainty it's the same thing that sam harris gets from what he sees as science it's the same thing that looking at gives you when i know why our friend betrayed the group by falling our friend betrayed the group by falling in love and spending all of his time with that girl it's because mammalian reproductive systems it's because psychology it's because hormones it's because and and there's a certain inside look satisfaction of being the smart guy that can explain everything okay but now i've just done to you what you've done to him so what's so great about being the smart guy that can explain everything well maybe if you can explain everything maybe if you know the way the world works then and here comes the egoic then i can shape the world to how i want it to be so there's there's a lot to that now that i can see exactly i know the truth via my little magic book now i can rule the world well if you read the little magic book and say that the world already has a ruler and that that ruler died specifically for the people who were killing him that might move you off of your tyrannical vision of using the bible to be a pain in the neck to people who don't believe you but i guess this is too newsy this is this is too newsy question on my part and too complex on top of that i also wonder more about how the wisdom producing mechanism works in terms of integrating propositional opposites can you read the scripture better or worse in those terms how i guess this would be more precise variant variation of my question wish you well the so i was doing so i was in my men's group in my wednesday night men's group i was doing a i was doing we were doing we're taking a look at ruth the book of ruth and people who wanted to boil the bible down into a bunch of propositions loved certain sections of the bible intended to avoid other sections of the bible and what they tended to avoid were narrative and poetry which most of the bible is made up of and so what i what i know what i noted to the group was that if you understand the book of ruth in the old testament here you have a moabitess basically saving israel by becoming an ancestor of david the savior of israel that story has to be read in conjunction with numbers 25 where the moabite hotties were leading the young israelite men astray and phineas puts a spear through a young israelite lad copulating with a moabite hottie in the middle of a tent and phineas becomes the archetypal hero of zealotry so on one hand in israel's story you have now i'm going to deconstruct it on one hand an israelite story you have a warning against intermarriage with the surrounding cousins because moab is a cousin of israel because of course moab comes from one of lot's daughters who gets him drunk after the destruction of sodom what these stories do is give a very rich contextual layer to navigate the enormous complexities of life in this world and narrative does that very very well so what we have in ruth then is a story about how the faithfulness the the gracious faithfulness ruth did not have to lay down her life for her bitter mother-in-law naomi but she says to naomi where you go i'll go and your people will be my people and your god will be my god and the the whole story is ruth's sacrificial giving to an unworthy mother-in-law who is just plain wanting to be bitter and saving her mother-in-law and in fact saving the people of god from the catastrophe that was happening all around them so moabite women can be temptresses that lead young israelite lads astray and moabite women can be agents of god to save his people from their sin now what i've done there is taken this narrative and retold it in a form that all of you can understand given our current cultural context but that meaning is there within the narrative and it is there within a narrative that a sort of propositional approach doesn't really do well at so moabite women are tempting hotties that lead young israelite lads astray moabite women are saviors of god's people you look at those two propositions and you say they can't both be true well if you look at it through narrative they are so so yeah narrative has that power poetry has that power propositional well why then all the excitement about the propositional well it's sort of like my striped bell bottoms from the 70s and my leisure suit yeah you know there's a time when we thought turning everything into propositions was a good idea and then we kind of figured out it wasn't there's a lot of that in human history and well we've had our propositional phase it's time to move on did we get some things from that propositional phase yeah we learned some things and what'll probably happen is we'll forget the propositional phase and then we'll have to relearn those hard lessons sometimes because that's what we do all the time so oh 1153 reading tom holland's dominion right now thinking about how the book of kings relates to the revolutions throughout history yes indeed interested to hear any thoughts keep reading both uh they have a lot to do with each other i think i answered some of this um jockey lules the politics of god and the politics of man um yeah it's you're seeing stuff i don't particularly have anything off the top of my head gandalf in black we have gandalf the gray gandalf the white now gandalf in black hi paul hi gandalf i'm having lots of less than pleasant conversations with people in bridge of meaning lately uh oh then the pastor of the the pastor of the discord is is out in the wilderness being a cold shower um you know bible reading internet avoiding guy jove we miss you jove come back jove will come back i don't want to hear why my catholic traditions are or are not biblical okay turn off the computer they don't have to be i'm continuously learn leaving the server feeling bad or angry okay i'm falling short of loving my neighbor i don't want to convert anyone by arguing with them i just don't like people trying to deconstruct my reconstructed faith any tips for me you don't have to read this question if you think it's drama but it would be nice if you could say something you do have to govern what you can take and if you're being in this discord server is becoming a challenge to your discipleship and your growth in christ by all means leave you that's one answer another answer is find a way to number one not be so reactive because your act reactivity is coming from sort of a place of insecurity and so it might be that you should spend less time on the discord and more time growing in strength and knowledge because actually all the challenges that you are being faced with are also opportunities for you to grow and not only in your position but perfecting your position and making them stronger you know there there are lots of videos on youtube that i don't like sometimes i have to watch them but i can't watch them all the time and you know a little bit later there's a question about you know the the uh john mcwarter stuff i i there are times like with the woke stuff there i i get very upset with that woke stuff you know someone might say well that's my white fragility maybe that could be it could also be that i've lived most of my life in communities of color and i see a whole lot of stuff talked about that don't make any material difference to these people of color that i love and i look at this purported solution and i i think it's all a distraction that's actually going to make life for these people of color that i love worse as a result of it and so i i am a you know i am a real sucker for you know reading a lot of james lindsey on twitter and watching a lot of anti woke youtube but i can see only so much of it and i see it changing me into an ideologue and then i have to ask myself how can i love my woke brothers and sisters in christ how can i will love my woke fellow citizens that i share this country with how can i love them too and how can i talk to them how can i have influence with them because the truth is if i want them to stop i'm going to need to figure out we we don't usually stop because of our adversaries we usually stop because we see something in us that we don't want to see so answer one would be if if the discord server is becoming a stumbling block to your fragile faith get off of it um i'm sorry that it is but and that might say something about some of the other people on the discord server and it probably says something about you you know the discord server is in some ways an estuary and an estuary is a place where you know there be river monsters and sea monsters and there are times when we should stick to the walled garden and there's a reason why we have walled gardens and as jordan peterson says well serpents that whisper temptation come in over the wall sometimes but there's a reason we have walled gardens and so you have to probably in consultation with your priest or good friends who know you you might say i'm gonna do an exodus 90 and i'm gonna turn off discord for 90 days and i'm not gonna go there for 90 days and maybe after 90 days i come back and and see how it goes then so yeah it's an estuary it's not a walled garden and um you know the the symbolic world discord server is is is out there too and i noticed the way they set up their discord server it's a little bit more of a walled garden and i think that's fine i think we need both and youtube is sort of the ocean open ocean but if you sort of navigate it like from a boat pluck in and pull up the ones you want um so i'd say yeah but and i'm really i'm really glad that you asked the question because part of this probably some of the people you're talking to on the discord server they're working out their stuff too and some of their aggressiveness is also reflects some of their own secure insecurities possibly that your presence of trying to negotiate what you're really negotiating here is this very complex interchange between in low resolution we might call sola scriptura of the protestant reformation versus sort of the embodied apostolic structure of a roman catholic church that's a difficult thing and i can make arguments for either side and my view of it well you'll you'll hear my views of it and i talked about that with my conversation with the two roman catholics this week which if you haven't listened to that video you know maybe i should put stars on my videos that are like must must watch and um maybe i should just write that because youtubers like you know protestant and two roman catholics must watch but um i'm glad you said something and i hope i'm sure those that you are debating know who you're talking about i don't but they probably do and you know the fact that there's a little hug emoji or icon below with 14 clicks on it says that yeah here in the estuary we're going to do some debating about sola scriptura and apostolic succession we're going to do that okay that's part of what goes on here and if for one reason or another that's not good for your christian faith right now avoid it that's totally legitimate none of us can take on everything in all of our traditions at once you know a couple of weeks ago i i sidestepped a conversation about original sin or actually rather original guilt and you know anselman who is a regular in the comment section you know oh you shouldn't have sidestepped that question well okay but we all make decisions about when why how where and that's very legitimate so um yeah i do want this i i want this place to be it's an estuary it's a semi-safe space and we have moderators that sort of watch things and moderate things and ask people to get on board and if someone doesn't behave in a certain productive way you can get kicked off the server that happens uh but it's there's not a lot of that here and the assumption is that um when you swim out into the estuary there's going to be river monsters and there's going to be sea monsters and so you're going to have to you're going to have to manage swimming those waters and maybe it's a time to you know put a towel on the beach and do a little sunbathing you know all the exodus 90 guys are and talking to them offline um you know they're they're finding it challenging but they're also finding it good in some ways so yeah there's there's an answer to that this was the it was matthew um matthew's comments about you know hi paul have you seen the boyfriend girlfriend meme that took over twitter last few days in the ever winding valentine's day period i hadn't you know warm hand boyfriend cold hand girlfriend stock market boyfriend astrology girlfriend republican boyfriend we don't get to talk about politics girlfriend you know and this is this is sort of the fuzziness of the of symbolic way of thinking from the inside and the the fuzziness is its power and the fuzziness is its liability so i think this will be the last question i well are you still in contact with people you served as a missionary not a lot um and it's not because of any animosity or anything like that but it's more just there's there aren't any that live by me and um you know are you in contact with people you worked with 25 years ago some of them not a lot some friends seem to kind of go through time with others kind of pop in episodically so how you met mrs pvk at college single person shoes how would you go about spouse hunting yeah maybe that's a good play that maybe maybe i'll mark that question for next time so any i know we're going a bit long as if two hours isn't long enough and any questions in the comment section that someone came here and just died i have to ask paul this question this is your chance oh jamie russell in the super chat asks how does jordan peterson and the rest help or hinder the idea of perspecuity of scripture that is not a question for me to take on two hours into this thing i sound like jordan peterson and saying that but and that gets into gandalf and black's question so sola scriptura was in some ways a a tool used to hopefully scrape off the barnacles that had accumulated on the the the ship of the church that's what sola scriptura was designed to do the paring down of all sorts of things was an attempt to reform the church back to an original vision now that is an enormously complex but also repeated move made again and again you see it in a political frame because in time you either as you're recalibrating you either come back to true or you get farther enough from it now if you're relativist there's no true but if you're a christian there is a true and so you're trying to navigate to true north and so sola scriptura was a tool by which the the reformers tried to say the church has added some things that it was sort of a libertarian move because the church has added some things that perhaps are not essential let's say you can do those things but it's not essential obviously a christian minister should be able to be celibate but it's not essential but world is really complex perspicuity of scripture comes into that and and says well if scripture is going to be our guide and we're going to prioritize scripture over tradition then we need a way in which scripture has to be able to speak to us now again if you get into george marston's book on fundamentalism george marston's book on fundamentalism the the the perspicuity of scripture and the propositional distilling of scripture that propositional distilling of scripture happened too and and what that meant was an attempt to alleviate us of the complexity of scripture so when jesus says to his adversaries if you read moses aright you would recognize me jesus is implicitly saying you can read moses aright moses should be sufficiently intelligible to recognize me now whether we will or won't is another question so i would say the way that jordan peterson and perspicuity intersect would sort of be peterson recognizes the peterson recognizes the complexity involved but at the same time and this is interesting again this comes through in the first the first vancouver talk with sam harris peterson on one hand says to sam harris you're not fully appreciating the complexity involved in this operation sam harris comes along and says i can read a cookbook and get read a cookbook and get stuff out of it in other words jordan peterson sounds like he's anti perspicuity by saying hey this is complex sam harris comes around and says perspicuity is fictitious because i can do the same it's a parlor trick i can do with um i can do with with a cookbook peterson in a sense comes back and says yeah point taken but if we look at the bible again through this sort of darwinistic perspective not in terms of how a modernist would think about that darwinistic but in terms of the bible seems to endure through time that is an argument for perspicuity that it doesn't perspicuity doesn't mean that every reader will get everything right all the time perspicuity gives a hope that we will be able to get and see things from it that turning to scripture will not be unproductive now i would argue that in the midst of the heat between the protestants and the reformers protestants might want to say to to roman catholics you don't believe in the scripture and pretty much all of my conversations with roman catholics that i have contemporarily they would argue no we get plenty from scripture it's just it's difficult and protestants should be able to say yeah it's difficult and roman catholics would say we'd like the church to help us and protestants might say my church helps me every week when the pastor gives a 30 or 45 minute homily helping me to understand scripture and a roman catholic might say aha see you don't believe that scripture is perspic that the perspicuity of scripture because you need a pastor to explain it to you and and the protestant might say ah but you say you need a church to explain it to you and the roman cat and then path the protestant will say yeah and you say the church always gets it right and the roman catholic says no i say well and then i'd let a roman catholic answer that our own question on that score but you can see back and forth and back and forth and back and forth and i don't see roman catholics as saying it's hopeless to read scripture catholics certainly don't act that way and protestants don't act like oh scripture is just so obvious they say that a lot and i can point to you point pro point protestants to you that say the scripture is so obvious and then i might with my trollish hat on say well then why do you drag your sorry butt to church and ask and pay a pastor to interpret it for you isn't your church interpreting scripture and now i can go back and forth on that yeah but the christian reform church doesn't listen to doesn't list all of paul vanderclay sermons and say right there and neither is the catholic church i mean there's all of these systems back and forth and back and forth and back and forth so peterson sort of both shines a light on yes this is a complex thing to understand even any text but peterson also says we shouldn't imagine that texts are impossible to understand because as he says to sam harris the diversity of data we get from the world is difficult to understand and the problem that you have the text and the problem that you have the with the world is actually analogous and so scripture actually helps in that so i'd say jordan peterson gives and takes away okay that's i think good enough for now um we're at two hours and 15 minutes and that's probably longer than anyone should have to listen but thank you all for being here um any thank you all for being here both in the in the bridges of meaning chat room and on the live stream on youtube and this is great fun sorry i haven't gotten to all your questions and rick is now going to look at say you've gotten behind again the questions are starting to stack up and uh yeah they probably are and maybe joey will go through and rick will go through and kick out and edit so so generally speaking if you can keep your questions a little bit more brief it's just a little bit helpful and also i know it's hard to know if i'm going to be answering your question on a given week because they do stack up but um if you're live in the chat i usually give people live in the chat a chance to at least correct me in terms of their question or to answer and ask another question so thank you all for joining and um i will see you next time so rick you can end transmission you