https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=wJCwDI3o_Y0

 Hi, this is Paul. You know, this video is gonna be about what all my other videos are about. It's just whatever gets stuck in my head and now I'm leaving tomorrow on my vacation and Will I do videos like this on my vacation? It's hard to say. I'll be thinking about these things on my vacation. I'll be listening to content like this on my vacation. I'll be doing lots of other things on my vacation, but I'll be thinking about these things because I'm always thinking about these things and so today's video, which will I'll probably put out Tuesday morning, is about everything it is. Now, some of the things that got stuck lately is this question about medieval stories and why the medieval period and this little tidbit of the conversation between Jonathan Pigeot and Richard Rowland just really stuck in my mind. But my main deal is kind of looking at medieval stories. Two things. One is looking at medieval stories and seeing meaning there. And then the other one is sort of I have a... Seeing meaning there in medieval stories and it seems to be we've got a lot of that going on as I'm going to talk about in this video, not just medieval stories, but what about medieval stories and why medieval stories? What nature, what character does do medieval stories have that we are reaching back and continuing to work on? One of the videos I'm going to reference is the only video of mine that I know Jordan Peterson at least took any notice of, which was my video about why we are so obsessive about Jordan Peterson. Maybe it's just why I'm so obsessive about Jordan Peterson. Analogous to why at a certain point when my children were adolescents, they would keep watching The Office. Well, The Office is funny. Well, The Office has all of these archetypes and all of the different characters in The Office. And in a lot of ways what The Office really is about, really, I've got my own two order, my own two level theory here, what The Office really is about is how to get along with and deal with the various cultural archetypal players around us. Okay, but what on earth does that have to do about the medieval world? I have now developed a kind of sideline in reminding other academics that the Middle Ages was a Christian period. Which you would think people would know this, but you would think people would know this. But what exactly is our purchase on the Middle Ages? Because well, of course, now even when he says it, he means the Middle Ages in Europe and the former Roman Empire until of course the rise of Islam, on and on and on and on. What part of the world? What people? Who are the people we're talking about? I mean, I once had a conversation with a fairly well-known medievalist about the Holy Grail. And I was talking to this person and, you know, making an argument for kind of a liturgical reading of Chrétien's Grail story, which one of these days we're gonna do a video on. Mm-hmm. And you know, he said to me something like, well, you know, aren't you reading a lot into that? I said, well, I mean, there is a host in it. And he looked at me, no lie, looked at me and said, what's a host? So, Jonathan laughed so hard his mic has to readjust. So my basic sideline, and I'm kind of in connection with this, I was going through a recent translation of the Pearl Poem, which I write about in A Midweeping There Is Joy, which is a book that we had that just came out. We'll talk about that later. But I was reading a recent translation of the Pearl Poem and the scholar, who again is a very well-known medievalist, she translated the word mass as feast, just sort of like generically feast. Now this is where you get into the question of relevance realization. Well, what is the, what is the aspect of the mass? Now given, this is a very interesting history, of course, because you can go all the way back to 1st Corinthians 11 with respect to, well, what was that celebratory meal that became a highly ceremonial meal, and what are the transitions, of course, 1st Peter, or 1st Corinthians 11, where the Apostle Paul chastises the Corinthian church about their feast. But the mass, the host, all of that is, well, it's, anybody paying any attention should, it's sort of like, I haven't really treated the Restless History as text episode or read the book yet that they talked about in there. It's sort of like talking about, it's sort of like not understanding that the Aztec human sacrifice, which is what they're known for, Aztec human sacrifice was not a religious festival, that there was no religious aspect to it. Well, what do we mean by religious? Well, that, that in some ways is the question that I'm continuing to deal with in all of my videos. So yeah, the mass, a medievalist doesn't understand anything surrounding that meal, and then of course at the end of the Middle Ages, the enormous fight that broke out regarding that meal that, that Luther and the Swiss reformers Luther and Zwingli couldn't agree on. No, no big deal. So like, completely took the mass out of the poem. Amazing. Which, which the poem is all about the mass. So, things like that. So it's like, well the Aztecs just, they had a taste for, they had a taste for warm, freshly slaughtered human heart because it was there, you know, it was sort of like silence of the lamb. It's like, ah, no, not, if you, if you just think it's about what they taste, you're missing the point. And in fact, you're missing a lot of what it means to be a human being. So basically my, my, my new thing is just reminding people of the Middle Ages was a, was a, was a Christian period and that there was a sort of a narrative and original context for all of that and that that should actually affect the way we read these stories. Exactly. And I think that what we want to do now is part of helping people understand, you know, one of the things that I, the Middle Ages act as a kind of mythological substructure to the modern world. Pause right there. The Middle Ages act as a mythological substructure to the modern world. Well, that's obviously, it's obvious if you think about history and you think about the Protestant Reformation, the rise of modernity, the Enlightenment, that whole story that I walked through again and again and again in my, it's a mythological substructure. It is the thing against which the modern world is pushing back on. Now if you want to hear an example of this all the way at the end of this video, I'm going to play a little bit of Lex Fridman's conversation with Sam Harris because Sam Harris basically says the same thing as Jonathan Pigeot, just obviously from a very different perspective. Why on earth is the Middle Age so salient to us and continues to be? Helping people understand, you know, one of the things that I, the Middle Ages act as a kind of mythological substructure to the modern world whether people want to or not. You know, there is, even though people are trying to kind of move away from it, so much of our, so much of our dark, like even the idea that it's kind of went into the dark place where we have these dark stories and these fairy tales and these strange misunderstood stories, you know, because the fairy tale even if it's not medieval has a, it's medieval in its structure and it's medieval in its illusions, let's say. Right. So all of that shows us that the Middle Ages are acting. The fairy tales are embedded in that world. They're embedded in, with all the relationality and all of the conversations in that world. Okay. The fairy tale even if it's not medieval has a, it's medieval in its structure and it's medieval in its illusions, let's say. Right. So all of- And when you think about, well, let's say Pinocchio, the Disney movies that during the 1930s, you know, the Great Depression, that's where really where Disney gets going in 30s and 40s, Sleeping Beauty, Pinocchio, all of those movies are all, they take those stories, Disney has a way of robbing public domain and at the same time trying to keep the mouse out of public domain. And that has changed US law for the last number of decades because they keep pushing back. They keep pushing, keep trying to think, keep things out of public domain. But Disney, who used these mythological stories and represented them and of course, Peterson, Peterson made good use of this in his classrooms. All of that, all in the Okay, just like the Greeks for Athens and the Trojan War, that was their mythological substrate. These were the assumptions beneath the society that allowed people to have conversations that could bring them together and work productively with one another. And this is exactly why cultural conflicts are the basis for human conflicts and why this particular video that I already did full commentary on, a universal history is so important because it allows people to live in the same world. Now, what do I mean by that? Again, if we would ask Sam Harris live in the same world, he would think about the physical world. That's not what we're talking about. We're talking about the world of meaning. We're talking about what it means that, I mean, what all of the different things in this world, including all the physical things mean, what do we mean by meaning? It's how they knit together, how they work deep inside of us. It's all of this stuff. This myth of Athens, the ages are acting as this kind of, just like for the Greeks of the times of Athens, you know, the Trojan War and the Odyssey were like this mythological backdrop to who they were. The Middle Ages are the mythological backdrop to who we are. The mythological or the middle ages are the mythological backdrop to who we are. They're 500 years ago. Yeah, but they still are. Why? Does human culture really move that slowly? The Middle Ages are the mythological backdrop to who we are. So we need to dive back into it and have a clear vision of what it can tell us and how it can more consciously structure our reality. Now, having a clear vision so it can tell us. Now, implicit in there is a sense of authority. Because of course for these two individuals, the Middle Ages has an authoritative character. What's interesting about these two is that, now I had this, I did this video about natural law and I got into it with Bionic Mosquito about that and after I did the video I thought, what is the, what is the term I grew up with instead of natural law? Oh yeah, the Dutch reform people always use created order. Which is better, natural law or created order? Well, a lot depends on with whom you grew up and how those words were used. And Bionic Mosquito kind of said, well, you know, rummaging around in the basement, why are you talking to these orthodox people? Why not just go right back to Aquinas? Oh, well, the game is afoot, isn't it? We're continuing to work through the questions of the Protestant Reformation 500 years and we're not done with it. We, Western civilization, I suppose, who is involved and included in Western civilization, who can be included. That's the whole question behind this video about universal history. But this we is very broad. What we need to, diving back into it and having a clear vision of what it can tell us and how it can structure our, more consciously structure our reality, can be one of the solutions to the disenchantment that we're facing. One of the solutions to the disenchantment that we're facing. Oh, in other words, well, we're we're masters of the physical world like we've never been before, but we've got an enchantment crisis, a meaning crisis. We've got this, we, we're, you know, it's the Howard Hughes crisis in some ways, you know, master of all he surveys except himself. Reality of what it can tell us and how it can structure our, more consciously structure our reality, can be one of the solutions to the disenchantment that we're facing. It's funny because somebody asked a question and I, this might have been on an episode, I think this is on an episode of the Amundsson podcast. Somebody, somebody wrote in with a question of basically like, well, why is all fantasy or like the vast majority of fantasy, why is it set in a medieval setting? That's the question that's stuck in my craw. Fantasy podcast. Somebody, somebody wrote in with a question of basically like, well, why is all fantasy or like the vast majority of fantasy, why is it set in a medieval setting? And it's, it's for exactly the reason you just described, and this is what I was trying to explain. It's that that's where we look back to, right? That's where our meaning comes from. Even See, is look back or look down, That's the substructure. That's the substrata. That's, that's the world we look back to. That's the world. Well, that's the, that's the floor we look down on before we take our steps. Even that's where our monsters come from, that we're dealing with right now. Like it's all, it's all sort of contained in there. Because the, you know, there's this big medieval synthesis where basically It's the only time in human history when we've, we've really had everything sort of come together and mesh together and fit together. Is that true? It's the only time in human history where we, well, I think we is, is as operative a word in that it's the only time in human history because Well, there's a lot of other people who lived besides those of us in the west, but you know, we are we and we can't help but be we, but who are we including in we? So, I don't know if I would, I don't know if I would take that statement as it is or say, well, maybe it works for we if we are, you know, patriarchal whiteness, something like that. Because of course the woke is pushing all of these questions pretty hard at us. So let's listen to that again. You know, there's this big medieval synthesis where basically It's okay big medieval synthesis. Well, what was synthesized? Well, you know the discarded image, the age, the pagan world, there's all of this was brought together. The only thing that we're dealing with right now, like it's all it's all sort of contained in there because the you know, there's this big medieval synthesis where basically it's the only time in human history when we we've really had everything sort of come together and mesh together and fit together. That's amazing because you say that and everybody so many people are listening will think what the dark ages had a synthesis where everything came together? That's a really quite that's a big question now, of course it was it was that civilization that conquered the world in a way that the Romans thought they did but didn't conquer the world in what way that civilization continues to conquer the world. Well, how does it conquer the world? We don't have I mean who are the parts of that civilization? I forget which I forget which video it was in which conversation it was but oh gosh someone will remind me in the comment section because the comment section is way smarter than I am because there's all of you in it contributing but it was it was the might have been on the rest of history and China. Yeah, that was it. It was the rest of history China episode when they had an expert on Chinese history and they talked about the the strange thing about the west the western Christian civilization that conquered the world was that it was not monolithic in the sense that let's say the Roman Empire was monolithic. It was fractionated into various kingdoms and competing empires that in that sense carved up the world. It's different from China the Han dynasty. That's right. That was from the rest of history in the China episode and so the the question is okay what that synthesis was a powerful synthesis and that powerful synthesis continues to haunt us but but what did that powerful synthesis really try to do? And it just shows how ignorant we are of what the middle age is at. Well and that's really you know, you know, we're going to be talking about universal history today. That's really what universal history is about. It's about it's about showing how the the Christianity of the middle ages. Chesterton in now again, you know thinking I've got you know bionic mosquito on my shoulder and these two guys who decided to go you know in the middle ages the middle ages the end of the middle ages the protestant reformers did what many were doing. Well, we have to go back to the source and so they went back to the New Testament the apostle Paul and they read him as they read him and of course NT Wright has a lot of conversation between did the apostle Paul get did the did the reformation period get the apostle Paul right and the current a lot of the current Pauline scholarship revolves around that question at least the Pauline scholarship that is continued to be deeply embedded within the church not sort of the Pauline scholarship that has gone off into into woke land. So In his poem the battle of the white horse, he said it's only Christian men who was it it's only Christian men who protect even pagan things. In other words, you know only Christianity, you know has has the let's say the catholicity the universality right to to actually take in the entire pagan world and integrate it find a place for everything. Now again, you know to have bionic mosquito in his natural law Question on my shoulder here you have two individuals who went all the way back to orthodoxy They didn't go back to Catholicism Is it because Tridentine council of Trent Catholicism is too modern for them They wanted to go back further and you see this in the Catholic church those who are going Well, see if you just go back to the Latin mass that Latin mass finds, you know, the current iteration of the Roman Catholic church comes from The council of Trent which is back in the time of the Protestant Reformation Now So what are we doing? What are we working on? And and why why this move back to orthodoxy? And that's what you see basically happening in in universal history it's and of course they quote Chesterton famous Roman Catholic a way of fitting Our story right the story of my people whoever my people are Into kind of a master story a master narrative Yeah I've got to be careful here because i've already done one commentary video on this video And if I don't stop it, i'll be in danger of doing another Now as some of you know, i've been watching I watched the first few seasons of vikings and there's a bishop baron video out there On this because when vikings came out i'm a little late to the party, I guess when vikings came out A lot of people watched it as I I did I don't know why I started watching it was about the same time that you know My wife tested positive for covid and i'm not sure she ever had it, but she tested positive So then I had to go sleep in another bedroom and then you know My wife, um Occupies a lot of my non-work hours. Obviously. She's my wife. She should But and so we do things together But and you know, well, what am I going to do without her? And I was a little curious about vikings i'd seen it advertised. I thought i'll check it out and the first season starts and i'm I'm just fascinated by See, I don't know I i'm not in a position to get it right because I don't know anywhere near enough about that time in history But i'm fascinated by at least the attempt of the writers To to actually translate The mythological substructure of these people and the class of civilization into the stories Just fascinated me and and you know, you have the sacrifices of the norse And that of course is coming into conflict with christian civilization in france and england And at least in those stories The treatment of religion wasn't dismissive and then a number of people when I mentioned vikings A number of people in the comment section said oh you should watch the last kingdom And I'm I just started season three in the last kingdom And and i've just been deeply disappointed in comparison Between the last kingdom and the vikings now the last kingdom tells a good story and hold your interest and has engaging characters And and that's that's interesting But The treatment of religion in the last kingdom is dismissive Now at the beginning of the third season a little bit less in terms of the viking religion and it's almost as if we can allow other religious groups to actually Operate within a religion, but when it comes to christianity we just kind of flip into this cynical This sort of cynical secular mode where people don't actually believe it it doesn't actually govern It's not real And when I real I don't mean physical I don't mean physical I mean real in terms of it doesn't govern us who govern physical reality That's in a way to understand sort of the pecking order here so You know, I continue to watch the last kingdom, I'll probably watch it through to the end although My wife gets increasingly annoyed as seasons go on and has a little bit of less staying power than I do and But i've got some of that in vikings because usually the first season is when you get all the best writing and they have all the best ideas And it's sort of like again when I when I train lay preachers their first sermon has Decades of pent up listening to sermons. They've got just one thing to say in their first sermon they Vomit it out And you kind of got to get the first sermon out and then it's like, okay Well, you're gonna work on another one. They look at you shocked like that was everything. That was my whole sermon Is yeah, but you you know, you just vomited, you know 30 years of sermon listening and into one sermon and it's a mess so just wipe that off the table and and you can begin to learn how to really preach now that you've sort of gotten that out of the way and You know, so the first season of vikings was I thought, you know Really good the second season was but usually with these with these shows it kind of goes down very few people seem to have the The foresight and the discipline like Breaking Bad to say here's our arc. This is where we're going to go It's like we have funding for one season. Oh, we got funding for another season Oh, we got funding for another season. It's just sort of the slow death of the idea And then of course there's Lord of the Rings versus Game of Thrones now I haven't read Game of Thrones I've never watched Game of Thrones. I've seen little tidbits of it But Didn't really capture me so much probably only saw little tidbits of it and didn't and and it had such a reputation for pornography that And I didn't have HBO when it was coming out. So it just you know, it wasn't on my radar screen But of course Lord of the Rings. I'm a huge Lord of the Rings fan. I read Tolkien when I was a kid I was a kid and in some ways have never stopped thinking about Tolkien or reading about Tolkien and then of course the movies came out uh 2001 2002 2003, I think it was and you know, I was eager for those movies and just sort of Holding my breath about what? Amazon is going to do with it You know the the the first three movies were good The Hobbit It was sort of like your sister Getting involved in a bad marriage No, no, I can't stop you, but please don't do that And then when I think about what amazon is going to do to it but of course We live in a consumer society. So when gain of Game of Thrones captured the popular imagination and i'm sure sold HBO like crazy But then died a horrible death at with the last show and I mean again I didn't follow any of it but I'd I'd hear all of the talk about Game of Thrones on the tech podcast that I would listen to and All of the chatter about and everyone's waiting for the new episode and then of course when it ends There was just this you know There's just this cry of anguish that went out throughout the land and it was like Guess i'm glad I didn't ride that train And then when my Favorite podcast treats Game of Thrones and a podcast called the rest is history What's with that? but No, there's something there. So And that's another thing that's sort of been stuck in my mind. So let's answer that question. Why would they have? A podcast which is dedicated to Talking about history Talk about this show Game of Thrones and I thought they were going to talk about you know How popular show was yada yada yada? No, it has everything to do with this question of the medieval period as this mythological substrate for our culture A Wise man once said a true history of the world is a history of great conversations in elegant rooms Sounds like the rest is history. Those are the words sounds like cs. Louis words of The dwarf from Game of Thrones Tyrion Lannister that great historian and that's our subject this week Game of Thrones Tom Holland Are you a fan of the sex and sandals and swords hit? I I am and I'm proud to say that I was an early adopter because I um, I read the early books before the tv show started and I've got to say that it was one of the great reading experiences of my life. I wow that's a big claim Yeah, I got the first book devoured it pretty much in a day Queued up early to get to the bookshop the next day to get the second one Those bookshops that they have across the pond I I thought they were really great and I thought they I kind of quite enjoyed the tv series as well But I thought that the the book was was brilliant So had you got all the way through before you started the tv series and you got to the as far as you could Yeah, I got as far as I could um And the other the other link that I have with Game of Thrones is that um, I once got sajora mormont, um lbw Oh Glenn In glen, yeah, I have no idea what any i've i've replayed that I can't tell you how many times i'm sure someone in the comment section will fill me in I have no idea what they're talking about I often have that with this podcast because they're talking about something. They're speaking english, of course the queen's english and it's It's all these uk cultural references that I have no frame of reference in so that's maybe part of the reason I Enjoy the podcast so much because it's got that it's got some suchness and it's got the moreness that it's it's just There's all the strange things i've never heard of i'm aware that for people who know nothing about cricket and haven't read Game of thrones that will mean absolutely nothing of all our facts. That's the most obscure That's the best isn't it? Which which I kind of I I guess kind of highlights the way in which this is um an episode that that we risk annoying two constituencies And and again, I almost didn't listen to the episode at all because it's like game of thrones I I you know in all reality I started the audiobook on the first one because I knew it was a big deal and I thought well I should know something about it, but that was kind of interesting, but i'm very adhd and I didn't I didn't stick with it. One of them obviously is because you know everything about game of thrones because You know, I it's a while since i've watched this i'm not Absolutely on top of every last detail But also of course there may be people listening who've who've never read the books You've never seen the tv show and may be wondering why on a history podcast we're talking about a work of fiction And I think that um the reason for doing it is focused by a question from david haskeer Who asks how do you feel about the likely fact that the tv series has shaped popular perception about the medieval period more? than um popular historical tv or books, I mean I I Ah And right when they said that line it was like oh And jonathan peugeot just saying well, you know the the medieval picture In the medieval period is sort of this mythological substrata and that's right well Historians and what history does is go back and rewrites the substrata and presents it and so And so then suddenly you have the question Well, is it the swords? Is it the costumes? I mean what? What exactly is it from this period that? Captivates us That's a really hard question That's a really good question. I'd go further and say that Nothing In the 21st century has done more to shape the way that a broader range of people now think about the past than game of thrones That's a That's a big statement bigger more than gladiator I mean historical And I think that um the reason for doing it is focused by a question from david haskeer Who asks how do you feel about the likely fact that the tv series has shaped popular perception about the medieval period more? Than um popular historical tv or books. I mean I i'd go further and say that Nothing in the 21st century has done more to shape the way that a broader range of people Now think about the past than game of thrones in other words game of thrones has become for a significant Number of people at least very influential people People Their mythological substructure and it sort of always expresses As well as informs. I mean religion always has this this dual nature it expresses and informs It's it's sort of circular in that way. That's a bigger more than gladiator. I mean gladiator much more much more if you remember uh the Dutchman who runs that blog that jordan peterson was at early on You know Paid a lot of time with gladiator and jordan peterson. So gladiator was a very big deal for him now this is where we're going to get into a little bit later i'm going to get into race and us because You know, he's a dark-skinned individual. He's a person of color But uh to what degree does the content of a certain Um pigment in our skin Really dictate who and what we are and where we come from I mean, this this is actually one of the initial geniuses of christianity By constructing an us That is actually Not tied to our genetics I Mean that's a really big deal and that's a really important aspect of this whole current conversation on race much more go further and say that Nothing in the 21st century has done more to shape the way that a broader range of people Now think about the past than game of thrones. That's a bigger more than gladiator I mean gladiator much more much more much more Now it's also going to be interesting because of course tom holland is speaking about now and so now we have sort of the darwinian truth mechanism Uh, the lindy effect that the get the question will be okay game of thrones is a very big deal gladiator was a very big deal Not too long ago How long will it last and of course the bible is well, that's that's the That's the book with legs Wow, yeah, because because it was such a phenomenon and although it's fantasy it the whole thing about it Is that it's rooted in kind of various historical episodes various historical periods all mixed together and I think it's Okay, that mixing is what we're going to get into because once you once you look at These questions of okay. Where where was game of thrones located? Well in this mythological space, but is it really england? Well sort of and was that really the war of the roses? well sort of and and and so what you begin to get into is How we as human beings do religion That's really what we're talking about in this how we orient ourselves in the world What stories are the stories that that finally? Allow us to be us Hugely influential on how and how people see the parts in a continuum though, isn't it tom? I mean lord of the rings walter scott. Ivanhoe sort of victorian historical Evocations of the middle ages. I mean game of thrones isn't isn't it just the latest iteration of These ways of thinking about the medieval past, right? So I think that's that's Another reason for looking at it is that Looking at it is that It absolutely does stand in a continuum of ways that that we over the past centuries have have understood I think I guess particularly the medieval past but dominic for the benefit of those who have never Read or seen game of thrones I'm sure it's your start of a tale. It's like kind of radio four panel show Yeah, can you give the plot of game of thrones in what so here you go some spoilers? This won't last too long, but um I didn't know the the essential plot. I knew it was swords and dragons and Battles and political intrigue and um You know dialogue well topless I heard I heard about that or that's how you can keep the audience through these long dialogue scenes have some You know beautiful woman take her top down and then at least at least the men will stay to listen Two minutes, but could that be a could that be a sermon a new, you know, could that be a new trick we could try in church I remember when I was a Okay, brett brett pull out your pdk bingo cards here when I was a missionary in the dominican republic You know, it was fairly common to have um, you know Haitian women nursing their children in the middle of the service and at that point, you know nursing was sort of You know is that it was the way back to nursing because my generation was raised on formula and the bottle And I think my mother gave me and remember when my wife heard about this I think my mother put me on cereal one week after birth. So, you know But so the nursing of course was big in the 90s and you'd have all these western women just very carefully Covering up and blankets and things and these these haitian women would be nursing kids two aisles down It was just life in the haitian church. So anyway, little this little little little tidalizing Little distraction in the middle of the video I did the french revolution in about 90 seconds So game of thrones is a bit more complex, isn't it? So for people so this is basically for people who haven't haven't seen it already Um, because everybody else will be appalled by my gross oversimplifications as no doubt they always are Um So basically game of thrones, I think is two things one It's a story set in the sort of vaguely middle ages-ish time in this continent called westeros Which is at the top of the near the top of the constant There's a there's a huge wall, which is basically hadrian's wall and on the other side. There's these snowy wastes and There have always been stories and rumors about Some terrible menace that's going to come from You know through the snowy wastes across now This is how the show starts and i've seen a little bit of the first episode I kind of lost interest quickly. I started reading the first book I kind of lost interest quickly and was like is this a zombie story? What what is this story about to the wall and these are the white walkers? These are kind of zombies and the show starts with the realization that basically the zombies are coming And this is looming over the whole story. So that's one aspect of it. So, you know, there's this kind of apocalyptic confrontation coming But then most of the narrative is actually about the fight for supremacy and what are called the seven kingdoms So there's the iron throne, which is the sort of you know, the throne obviously And there is a series of kind of wars of the roses style shenanigans and sort of soap opera machinations as these different families who are clearly modeled on different families from medieval history Are fighting for control and and sort of like the office I would imagine these these different families are rather archetypal in terms of I mean what their characters are? the beginning You're invited. I mean the the distinctive thing about game of thrones Because some people will be thinking that doesn't sound very distinctive at all But the distinctive thing about it, I suppose is that at the very beginning you're invited to empathize with one particular family from the north of the continent And it's very clear that they are going to be your sort of eyes into the into this world And and then the tables are turned By the end of the first book or the first series and you realize that she they start a lot of them are going to start getting killed off and you start to realize that this whole Enterprise has a sensibility That you don't expect that nothing can be taken for granted and the characters that you have invested in are going to be killed off Really horribly and and then it's sort of there's just twist part upon twist and yet all the time You know the zombies are coming which gives it this sort of other dimension. And then of course there is one third dimension Which a lot of people loved which is the fact that it has dragons and dragons these mythical creatures That are kind of the ultimate weapon that people don't believe exist anymore and they're going to come back and change the dynamic of the entire Show and that's basically game of thrones brilliant absolutely brilliant and To fix on the dragons, so I've got a friend who refuses point blank To have any dealings with anything that has dragons. Wow, just like the hobbits No, no, no, it's ring. Yeah, all of it hates it dragons for him are the absolute market. He's not going to touch it. So You mentioned both zombies and dragons chinese new year as neither Yeah No, but they're different aren't they? I think he's talking about the medieval western, right? Okay zombies and dragons Immediately mark it out as the kind of thing that that is not straight historical fiction Yeah, so perhaps we could I mean, let's look at both of them So so there's a question from now now he he obviously hasn't read for vakey's book on zombies goes to film past Where did the idea of dragons? originate from And one answer that is obviously it's very clear. Isn't it it now now pay attention? those of you who have Watched enormous amount of jordan peterson if you ask the question, where do dragons come from? Probably the first thing that comes into your mind is an evolutionary story about the origin of dragons dragons are Serpents because you know, we were these we were these mammals we you know this that People are fighting about the third person pronoun the pronoun to watch is the first person pronoun We Were little mammals hunted by snakes So dragons are serpents But they fly We were little mammals hunted by eagles Dragons are snakes with wings. We Are were little mammals hunted by bigger mammals cats Dragons are cats and snakes cat dragon is the apex predator Dragon is the thing that will kill you that's jordan peterson's answer, right? That's you know before I listened to jordan peterson What are dragons? I would have said dragons are these mythological creatures that we sort of Believed in after we found you know before we figured out what dinosaur bones really were and of course the relationship between tom holland and dinosaurs are quite interesting, but Um what were dragons and why and so you have sort of this You have sort of this modernistic Just so story which says well, we discovered these big bones and they certainly must have been ancient monsters Therefore we made up stories about them and called them dragons. Well You know you're hard-pressed to find You I would imagine you'd be hard-pressed to assemble dinosaurs in a way that you would come up with a dragon And so in that way the evolutionary story makes more sense or of course You have the book of revelation in revelation chapter 12 and the serpent and And and then you find out well, well, let's listen a little bit more about dragons. It's It's coming from medieval literature. Yeah, but more than that. It's it's it's in a way it's an it's Showing the middle ages in which dragons are real is kind of true to a certain way in which medieval people did understand the world because okay, so What's interesting about say richard roland and now Tom holland and others is that well, they're reading primary literature in the Middle ages and certain different things jump out at them Like richard roland talks about hagiography And how much hagiographic? Material was there. Well, why? Well in some ways hagiography are superhero stories and we'll talk about superheroes a little bit later in this video Yeah, this is going to be a long one. Like y'all y'all are there might be a there might be a pvk monologue drought coming in the next couple of weeks, so Get it while you can Why so much hagiography Why dragon stories I Did think that that dragons kind of existed so when the before the sack of lindis farm by the vikings Fiery dragons are seen in the sky Now again, we're gonna play some sam harris later on of course sam harris says well This is exactly the kind of thing we have to get rid of What's so funny about sam harris is he's so upset about the churches and the people walking around really Believing in these things but not upset at all about game of thrones When I would argue game of thrones is a far better religious promoter That the vast majority of christian preachers Uh, are they not common is kind of true to a certain way in which Medieval people did understand the world because they did think that that dragons kind of existed So when the before the sack of lindis farm by the vikings Um fiery dragons are seen in the sky, uh, are they not comets and they're just not comments Well, they might that's what we would say but if we Modern secular people that look back at the medievalists and say Dragons in the sky ufos Comets who knows in the chronicle? It's it says it's fiery dragons and you get reports from armenia in the early 11th century of dragons sweeping down and vomiting fire And you get this incredible report. I mean one of my favorite passages in the whole of medieval literature again Early 11th century of a monk from regensburg Crossing the hungarian plane and he's describing the details of his trip, you know, I saw this castle It's kind of an interesting path. Oh and then a dragon shadowed me And he had scales like uh, like metal plates and then he flew off. Where's this germany? Uh hungary hungary. Well Who knew so so of course, I mean we might say obviously he'd eaten something or drunk something or whatever he was on my psychedelics But In a way one thing that is kind of I think great about game of thrones is that it it does import the supernatural and and the sensational Why Why? What are we doing again sam harris isn't? You know railing about game of thrones and why a major, you know, the warner brothers corporation should be promoting religion like this But isn't that exactly what we're doing in a way that is true to the way that the medieval people perhaps Did see the world. Well, I suppose if you're a western medieval person, um a hippopotamus a rhinoceros Yeah, you know see now what's what's dominic sandberg doing? He's he's basically doing the The modern just so story well We have to we have to try to figure out what exactly we have to try to account for this With a well, he's just doing the human thing with the physical We have to try to put these worlds together and explain The text that we're seeing now just like with all these things if I keep going with this particular episode I'll Play the whole thing in this video will be 10 hours long and about five of you out there will You know will cheer and say finally paul, you know let off the governor and you know, we're we're we're out beyond four hours But um, I don't know. I don't know. I have to I still have to pack. I have to do wash i've got two randos conversations this afternoon, which Keeping my fingers crossed will be publishable So i'll have a little bit of content for you while i'm not sitting in this chair But uh, let's let's jump a little ahead Welcome back to the rest is history. Um, tom holland is about to embark on a discussion of the sensibility of game of thrones I think he will be talking about christianity. You have been warned tom Off you go. You have two hours Well, i'm sure christianity will will come up but I think that um Talking more specifically about the idea that game of thrones in any way gives an accurate portrayal of of medieval life Just think about that on medieval period let's say a thousand years an accurate portrayal How would you portray a thousand years of history History Which group would you focus on now this in some ways is the sort of thing that Every storyteller must deal with and it's it's you know when jordan peterson says well a work a work of fiction is more true than a Let's say a physical retelling of someone's life Because how can you portray a thousand years of history in even if you have a a 50 or 100 hour Or let's a little bit later. I'll mention super supernatural and 360 some episodes so 42 minutes each something like that, you know, even if you have 300 hours How can you portray a thousand years? Of history even let's say we're going to limit it to european history, you know, which is sort of this western rump of asia How do you do that? Well, it's relevance realization you have to find you have to find you have to find that thing that that everything can come together and it has to be everything and One thing and that's sort of what god is god is sort of everything and one thing and it's above all things And it's through all things and it's in all things and right away some of you are saying well, that's just that's just all Christian language, it's the kinds of stuff that you'd hear in church and liturgy. Yes, it is, isn't it? Well, what's going on? Well, let's maybe try and work on this period which is our mythological substrata In a representation and but now we're going to critique the representation a more accurate portrayal say than the lord of the rings does this is based on the idea that medieval life was unspeakably brutal And that everyone just went around pillaging and raping all the time. Yeah now those of course would be our fascinations because Privation is something that the modern world has set itself to address and now that we have food security to the degree that we have it and You know, we thought pandemics were a thing of the past Maybe not quite so past Um rampaging pillaging raping armies coming through So nasty brutish and short, it's not hobbesian. No one would deny that that It was a violent world But it it was not remotely on the scale of violence as game of thrones Yeah suggests. Um And I think that that on all kinds of levels uh Game of thrones Is essentially giving an 18th century an enlightenment idea of what the millenials was about Oh Well, that's interesting Okay, let's say for the enlightenment You know the very idea of of a middle age between a supposed civilized age You know classical antiquity when always light and people just start talking about philosophy And then 18th century when the philosoph arrive and again everything is returned to light and everything in between is Is brutish and and violent and dark ages And of course you get this from the vikings and you get it from the last kingdom you always have these scenes of viking raiders coming through to Rape and pillage and destroy and you know, you can get that reading Um the book of samuel and the book of judges you have this vision of these nations, but on the other hand you also have the idea and I think this was brought out in the I don't remember which or was it a conversation with my wife? I don't remember Where well part of what happens in the protestant reformation is all of these feast days came off the calendar And all of this church land came back into productive use And you know, it was sort of a reassessment of getting the people back to work all the time Because well you see this productivity bump And people just go around slaughtering each other non-stop and um, it's it's all right This is this is not true. Um medieval civilization. I mean in many ways medieval So just now keep this in mind when I play sam harris a little bit later the level of warfare um, actually Medieval warfare was far more codified. Um, there were far more inhibitions about violence and there were far more Controls on the ability of state actors to wage war than there were either in the classical period or in the early modern period Because arm is a smaller right? I mean, yeah, yes. Yes, and and battles last a couple of hours and they're done Now I was reading Something on napoleon, you know part of what happens in napoleon because you could Napoleon could be the father of father of modern europe but part of what happens in napoleon is he The creation of the modern army which is this in nor these enormous armies and and since napoleon onward We've had these, you know wars were these You know these enormous armies that simply couldn't be afforded by medieval kingdoms. They didn't have the scale Now again think about all of this when we later play a little bit of sam harris who is, you know griping about how awful things used to be and how Everything got wonderful once the enlightenment came well, there was a kind of that war army thing So the scale of violence that you see in game of thrones, that's the kind of so the storming of cities the the The destruction of entire populations. That's the kind of thing the romans went in for it's not what By and large people in the middle ages did and when you get um, the notorious example is I I remember when I was going through a one of those great courses series on The renaissance renaissance italy You basically had these little tiny professional armies that did most of the fighting mercenaries You you you paid someone to do your war for you, which is sort of what we do here in america now but again, part of me because of technology and because our machines kill so much better than Just individuals do that. Well, it's you know Conducting war is a matter of Economics more than let's say population which sort of sets up you've all harari and daniel Kahneman in some of their interesting conversations online where you have all too many extra people in the contemporary world, we don't need them to to fight wars and And make crops, you know farm crops and all of those things Um 1099 when the first crusaders seized jerusalem and the streets populations That's the kind of thing the romans went in for it's not what By and large people in the middle ages did and when you get um, the notorious example is um 1099 when the first crusaders seized jerusalem and the streets supposedly run in blood the reason that that's remembered and and is Kind of preserved is that it was exceptional. It was the exception that proved the rule That scale of violence did not happen and the the vast kind of teeming armies that you get with Increasingly over the course of the show again This is you know, you need a kind of early modern state to provide that level of violence But isn't one of the things that people think is as modern isn't it? So interesting that people equate being being accurate and being a sort of A properly modern portrait of the past with being very cynical very bleak and drenched in sex and violence Now this is so interesting because on one hand We have this this this meme that says well people are basically good But yet this hobbsian vision of humanity is sort of what we're portraying because well that will be more accurate of the middle ages if we portray people like We're sort of used to seeing them in more recent history So in other words people say or Tolkien's terribly unrealistic Because people are nice to each other and some people are virtuous and people applaud george r.r martin's portrait Of human nature, which is unbelievably Sort of downbeat brutal. Everybody is really horrible. Yeah, anyone who is virtuous ends up dying basically uh everybody stabs each other in the back and it's an interesting reflection on our Uh loss of trust and authority and our disenchantment with politics that we think that is a true portrait of what medieval politics Must have been like I mean the thing is that there were all kinds of attempts to regulate the violence inherent within Mailed mailed men with horses who by their nature can can can dominate and brutalize So Again the the 11th century the period, you know that we talked about in in the episode on 1066 the period that sees the emergence Of castle sees the emergence of of knights. Um, this is also the age that sees um, what's called the truce of god where? Churchmen bring out relics from churches and monasteries and succeed in compelling armed warriors To essentially kind of swear oaths that they will they will not brutalize those around them. I mean, of course these oaths were broken But it was assumed that that they would be obeyed and followed and there was You know, i've just been reading Over the lockdown was reading chaucer and chaucer, of course is always associated with with um Boredy and people having sex and people sticking arses out of windows and things like that But on the on the knightly level that the the tales that deal with the things that knights do The whole point is is that they're not going around raping. So in the knight's tale, you know, it's interesting because this section just brings up number of years ago read don Quixote and The way in which These ideas. I mean you you find them in star wars Why lightsabers and blasters are sort of considered crude, you know even batman until some of his Latest iterations of batman. He's totally given into the gun. Whereas before guns were considered You know didn't like guns. He was going to beat people up with his fists and his and his cleverness You know part part of what's interesting about you know bow and arrows. Okay, but guns and These are these are things that are of the modern world and and of course some of these Sensibilities are in Tolkien as well sort of built into the story, you know legolas is a sharpshooter with a bow Not a sniper rifle It's very very interesting how these things are working in us the whole thing is is that that you have two two Brother knights who spend years both hankering after the same lady. They do not rush out and seize her Yeah, and and you know chivalry is this You know don Quixote again this longing for this woman and of course in don Quixote Dulcinea is a You know a barmaid at best and And yet this elevation and and this this continues to haunt us And draw us and inspire us this chivalric literature and it's again. It's it's within star wars It's within all of these things It keeps coming through Even when you do get a rape so in the wife bath's tale That rape is punished the whole dynamic of the plot revolves around his attempt to avoid being executed for committing rape So essentially What game of thrones does not get is the way in which there are controlling ideologies frameworks of morality ethics that govern how Warriors behave certainly ethics that govern sexual behavior That are simply not reflected in the way that the game of thrones shows it with a ton and That what he said right there is exactly What the respect I had for vikings And my continual frustration With the last kingdom There's a questions about this actually because people know your predilections so jim longhurst asked a question about who captured the human spirit best and You know is westeros sort of the the grimness without the buddhas christ and saints that made the real world livable carolina Asked the question. What did game of thrones misunderstand about christianity's impact on the medieval period so Okay, so some people say of game of thrones. I mean we're sort of creating straw men here But I mean they do exist They say game of thrones is more realistic than tolkien because it paints a medieval world in which there is a religion There's seven gods. I think the faith of the seven There's a there's a and there's also this really interesting kind of ref reformation movement or this sort of evangelical movement Um by a guy who's called the high sparrow and who's played by jonathan price and he's very pious and austere and he's this sort of This sort of purging flame with his acolytes and they have a roller Yes, yes. Well, we've got a question about that somebody said is he you know david morgan They look like savonarola in his army of boys and young men now do you say the savonarola again savonarola? interesting figure in In italian renaissance history has this religious revival and movement that goes, you know It doesn't go well the um, what's he florentine? Yes, who the bonfire of anities and he summons all the the forentines to To chuck their fripperies into a great bonfire He basically runs for instance in the same way that the high sparrow in the is clearly based on him Runs king's landing for a time and becomes the great the great sort of power now the question I suppose thomas do you think this does elevate game of thrones above, you know, its its predecessors in making it more realistic I repeat. I think it's it's an 18th century view that that religion exists solely as um A kind of fraudulent trick played on people An 18th century view Did you ever think of sam harris as an 18th century character? Well, he plays one on youtube So it's because none of them actually this is interesting none of them in game of thrones I think really believe in their religion So they talk about the faith of the seven and they pay lip service to it But nobody ever has these sort of inner crises where they say sugar. I really am going to go to hell And and that's exactly part of the problem with the last kingdom and now at the beginning of season three where there's a witch and You know the the witch isn't bothering the christians because the witch says I put a spell on you and of course the vikings are like the christians are like You know, but but the christians in the last kingdom are all secularists and and The religious people well, maybe bjorka Kind of the monk who begins the journey with utrid um, maybe bjorka actually believes something but the christians are and and again these guys in this These guys in this podcast said a lot better than I do. This is what I actually genuine, you know Nobody seems to believe it other than fanatics And even the fanatics are you know, this kind of implication is that it's all about power and and control Yep, that's exactly it. Even the fanatics and you see that again in the last kingdom. It's all about power and control Whereas at least in vikings You had characters who were You know, they didn't always get it right they would often get killed but they understood as This is you know I hate to harp on about representation because that Christians know their prayers aren't answered often Christians know that just because you ask the pastor to pray for your sick child That your sick child might die and Most christians I know when their child is sick They take this child to the doctor and if they come to me I said well have you gone to the doctor? Did you go to the hospital? But yet they still pastor would you pray for them? Well, why well what's what's what's going on? They've been to the doctor And they still want to you know, if you if you look at every living stones Service that's on our youtube channel There's a time in the middle of the service where people bring their prayer requests for it Well what they can't pray for them at home while they can't send me a note while they can't well There's something going on where we bring forward our prayer requests in that room in that service And in a lot of ways it's still a medieval Pageant. I am a minister Priest minister the difference between those world words are not incidental I'm a minister and in a sense god is the head of state And I mean we're playing out this drama even in Protestant regular clothes no vestments. I mean and in that sense, I think part of the reason the Religious traditions with vestments are gaining so much traction because everyone understands they're playing a drama And why don't the characters? Get dressed up to play the drama that they're in Um, I mean it's it's a very It's a very modern perspective on it a very modern take on it and That is why I think Tolkien is is truer to the middle ages because Tolkien of course was a very great scholar of and and here's the deep irony that There's no overt religion in lord of the rings And it's You know, it's always underneath the surface and but see now well when did Tolkien write? Well The 1930s I mean after the first world war very much at the height of modernity And so Tolkien Just reenergizes fascination with the medieval period in a very modern tale Yeah, someone like tom holland will know well Tolkien understood religion even though there's no representation or portrayal of religion but somehow Tolkien communicates What it's like to be a religious person Even when he's not representing religion medieval literature and yeah and control um, I mean it's it's a very It's a very modern perspective on it a very modern take on it And that is why I think Tolkien is is truer to the middle ages because Tolkien of course was a very great scholar Of medieval literature and yeah, he entirely understood that and he was also a catholic himself. So it He he he believed so he not only understood it from the outside as a scholar Which is where the academy looks at things, but he understood it from the inside Because he lived the drama And he lived In that world he chose to inhabit it personally which of course is right You know the point tom holland is that this little cusp between them, you know, he sees it from the outside but He wants to he wants to dress up and live inside of it and he says it's just better If it and the paradox is is that is you fixed on that in lord of the rings There are no gods. There are no priests. There is no religion. There are no temples. No equivalent of churches And yet it's saturated in a kind of theological understanding of the world that absolutely derives from medieval literature Isn't that interesting? But again when we listen to sam harris at the end sam harris will be like We know what that horrible midi midi ages is like oh but what you what you can't see Is that there is beneath the surface operating? A religious layer and and you're just completely he's the he's the assassin robot that has no clue about his programming Um, yeah the way that medieval people would have understood the world as being divided between good and evil Game of thrones isn't and so the the seeming realism I think is not realistic at all And particularly on the topic of sex. Um, I mean the sex again a bit like the violence is more classical So the orgy and and now this is so interesting because of course The Contemporary promoters of the enlightenment Keep saying that well this whole christian period that was one big long dreadful mistake if we can only get back to Well, they're kind of doing that and they're kind of horrified by it and they just simply don't have any understanding of how they've been deeply Deeply impacted by christianity is people isn't and so the the seeming realism I think is not realistic at all And particularly on on the topic of sex. Um, I mean the sex again a bit like the violence is more classical So the orges people eating grapes. Yeah, there's a real there's a real trend in um, dramas about the classical world now To to show the kind of casual way in which you know in a roman household, um slaves for instance would have been treated um that that Essentially their various orifices are the equivalent of a urinal that that they are nice. They are there to be receptacles for the bodily fluids of the of the master and this is where you get into this question of Okay, how do you represent? a thousand years of history in a continent Well, there's relevance realization was of course revaki's term and you Well now we're going to represent the classical period which is you know, another thousand over a thousand years of history and Well, let's focus on the slaves and sex with slaves why would we focus on that Because there's near there's there's innumerable things that you can focus on What's going on inside of us that makes us so suddenly, you know the the psychologists jump forward and say I have an idea I have an idea why ask dr. Freud he'll tell you ask ask dr. Jung ask dr. Peterson The depth psychologists are trying to answer the question why this why that the evolutionary psychologists Well, they're they're trying to paint on a far larger backdrop Which is of course what was interesting between jordan peterson and bishop arron when they talked So There's a ton going on here. Yeah, and that is something that that you do you see it in in hbo series rome It's there in the the new series that's out about um augustus's wife livia domina, which is it's good. I recommend it Um, and it's absolutely in game of thrones as well, but this is this is a kind of far more classical take um, yeah, we've got a question from um demetrius bogdansalis So hyped for the game of thrones episode. Hope it's not disappointing. Um, I would like to hear your opinion on any roman inspiration that martin used in his work But the court is very roman, isn't it? Yeah, it is landing politics. Yeah, it is but I think um, it's also Deeply rooted in i claudius as so many That fascinated me because I remember watching i claudius I was quite a bit younger obviously when it first came out on pbs and just fascinated by it and it continues I should probably Find a copy of it and find out where I can see it again because it continues to sort of I should watch it through my eyes now Oh, yeah, kind of the great dramas of uh of 21st century american tv are hugely hugely influential and there are elements of the julia claudian court Absolutely to the degree that um the guy who plays Joffrey who is essentially jack gleeson jack gleeson. Okay, so he's for those who haven't seen it He he's the most terrifying ruler perhaps of the lot. Um kind of young Murderous it's a teenager. Isn't it? Yeah They just done an episode on teenagers, which was great too. I mean, I do love this podcast typically Channeling john hurt in um in uh in uh i claudius. He's john lennon gone He's not john lennon. He's he's john hurt John lennon with the supreme power anyway, but he looks eerily like a portrait bust of calligula and i've always wondered whether that was deliberate But also that sort of idea of the sort of power corrupting You know of of supreme power being incarnated in one ruler and then using it for sexual excess for Sadism that's very kind of suetonious. Isn't it rather than medieval? but Again, I think it's kind of there in enlightenment pornography Actually, I you know, it's marquis de sardre really Yeah, I think that game of thrones is clearly there's all enlightenment pornography Is sam harris an enlightened pornographer The kind of medieval stuff and and we just discussed maybe roman stuff as well There's the modern stuff And then there's this kind of controlling 18th century sensibility Yeah, that is mediating both of them which sort of and so for trying to work and maybe that's you know So maybe we've got the medieval period on this one hand and then the 18th century, which of course was Really trying to come to grips and and overthrow the medieval model and you know Now i'm I haven't joined the orthodox church. I haven't joined the roman catholic church I continue to be dutch reformed and a minister and not a priest and all of these things And part of my you know what what lurks in the back of my mind is to To those who wish to go back to oh let's undo the protestant reformation. Oh, let's undo the great schism Oh, let's undo the philioqua clause or let's undo. Okay. Uh, we all have our golden ages, don't we? The protestant reformation rose for a reason Was it a good reason Was it wholly negative It's hard to participate in a contemporary social media platform Have the benefits of automobiles air travel vaccines Food security Climate control Again you you sort of become like people who You know are all into creation science and say well, I I believe in a biblical cosmology And I usually to them respond. Do you believe in a biblical anthropology? If you if you go to you if you go to the university and say well, I don't want any of that evolution stuff Do you go to your doctor and say I want all of the medicine that you give to me Give me to be completely free of any evolutionary modeling Never hear that Well, why not? You just go to your doctor and you trust him you go to the gas station and all of these geologists who used All of this geology built on a post, you know a framework that Didn't believe that the Grand Canyon was a result of Noah's flood So, yeah Sees the medieval world as this sort of cesspit of of so so it's like it is a kind of pornographers fantasy in that sense Do you think Yeah to a degree because that's how pornographers in the 18th century certainly saw it. Yeah. Yeah, what about this? We've got a few questions about An event that people always mention which I think they see but lots of people see is the sort of emblematic moment of the entire series Which is this event called the red wedding? Oh, my wife Sadie asked about that and of course, I know nothing about this. She well, this is your opinion on that What was this? What was your was there a source for that? So for those people those remaining listeners who are not game of thrones fans Um, the red wedding is this moment where i'm i'm i'm a the rest is history fan I will listen to everything you put out. Okay, I just will This sort of heroic, um young king is sort of hemry the fifth or something. Isn't he rob stark? Um, who is the sort of king in the north? He pitches up at this wedding And you've been invited to believe you'll be led to believe that he's going to be one of the great victors of the whole series Because he's such a heroic such a virtuous and noble sort of figure And basically the wedding all ends really horribly in and the starks all massacred at the wedding And um, it's shocking because it's a sort of breach of the laws of hospitality and all that and there is a precedent So, of course, it's it's a scottish hospitality, isn't it tom? The precedent is an event called the black They're not too worried about audience capture. It's just you know, the americanization video. I heard no more americans will listen to no more scots Will listen to this Dinner the black dinner. I think it's from the early 15th century the earl of douglas pitches up at the king's court king james's court And he is served a black bull's head a severed black bull's head, which is a kind of symbol You're going to die and then he and I think his son or something like that are taken out and horribly murdered and it's kind of remembered As this but I suppose the reason it's remembered is because it's so unusual because this kind of carry on doesn't apart from the massacre of glen coe So the scots do have form but it doesn't this sort of thing doesn't happen very often It doesn't and also it doesn't it's not a wedding So a wedding in the milages is a sacrament And to to desecrate, you know a sacramental event like a wedding is is incredibly serious So we're back to the mass. Well, it's a wedding. Oh, but it's a sacrament Oh, well, this is serious. Oh, well what things control you? Well, this is really where we get down to the nuts and bolts of religious things. Do you say no to your sex? Your sexual urges because of your religion. Do you observe the sabbath? Because of your god How do these things control you and again, this is this this is all the kind of stuff that that sam harris says Oh, this is all This is all the things that must go away for us to finally arise at But but really how do you know the good how would you know the good what is the good how can the good be arrived at? Communally so people did kill each other in church. I mean thomas becket died in the church, didn't he? Yeah, but but but by his own altar, but again if the exception that proves the rule Um, the the the king Is whipped through the streets of canterbury thomas is enshrined as a saint. It's remembered as the most shocking thing imaginable Um again this kind of violence is it doesn't really happen. That's That's the point of it. But what I would say but dominic what I would say also just on it doesn't really happen Well, what do you mean by that? Well, did it happen once? Yeah, it did happen once did it happen physically? Yeah, it did happen physically Um, it doesn't really happen Well really what what what on earth do you mean by that word? On why game of thrones is so addictive and why it's such fun? Is that I think it does give you Everything that a great historical drama does it it gives you the sense of being in a past period Governed by strange customs governed by strange ways of doing things family done dynamics Uh, all the all the kind of stuff that you get you get from a drama about the wars of the roses or the julia claudian court but Because it's fantasy you have no idea what's going to happen. Yes, that's why this has the I mean, I remember reading it and go Being devastated and there's the famous footage of people watching it on the on the tv annotation and kind of gets pulling pillows over their heads and screaming Now another thing from this podcast that really grabbed my attention was And I haven't we'll see if I ever actually get around to a commentary on they go christin peterson Maybe I will because I I plan to listen to that in its entirety carefully While I am on my vacation because I said I usually get more chance to listen to some of these things Peterson makes this comment he says something similar to To Roger Scruton There's a way in which The world is most real When it defies our expectations That's a really subtle and important observation to make Because what it seems we're always doing is we're projecting madly onto the world And when the world With the amount of feedback that comes through our projection Our anticipation and our expectations are confirmed Well, we don't pay any attention. There's no relevance realization there. We just continue on into the world but when Something happens that isn't according to our expectation. That's when we sort of wake up and then we pay closer attention Because we've got to integrate that into our into our internal mapping Because once that is integrated, you know fool me once shame on you fool me twice shame on me it's it's a little saying that basically has this idea that You fooled me you have my attention. I'd better map that internally so we won't be fooled again the who So this is so you have this this scene in Game of thrones that I know nothing about it has absolutely no Attraction on me or or but then this idea here about expectations um again this kind of violence is it doesn't really happen that's That's the point of it But what I would but dominic what I would say also just on the on on why game of thrones is so addictive and why it's such fun Is that I think it does give you The sense of being in a past period Governed by strange customs governed by strange ways of doing things family done dynamics All the all the kind of stuff that you get you get from a drama about the wars of the races all Okay, the strangeness so the historical drama Well, there's a realness you've got the vervecian suchness and moreness And and everything that's happening in the world is happening in the world And And every storyteller needs to tell a story which now we're getting again into this relevance realization needs or this chaos and order thing needs to tell a story where there's enough order so that it's accessible to us but enough chaos so that it's It feeds our need for The desire to map For the learning for the finding information And so his historical dramas have this because it's a little bit easier because we don't have to construct everything but again, if you look at the difference between vikings and The last kingdom Well, there's the difference. Okay that i'm dealing with between those between those two stories because well I'm watching the people and i'm watching a good amount of the crowd for the last For the last kingdom would be about yeah. Well, this is what christianity is christianity is sort of this sam harris Game for suckers and con men That's what christianity is but the viking religion. Oh, there's a oh that enchantment. There's a there's a curse that was put on utrid by this this witch Character who's also attractive and blonde and you know utrid's wife You know, my wife was a little bit upset when we were watching It's like well, how many times is this dude gonna be married? It was so funny when one dead soldier comes back and says how many wives have you had? And and my wife's like oh these stupid writers, you know and introduce this hottie and you know will you know And part of me it's like oh, it's the sexual tension. It's back to the office you know you have to have jim and pam in the office because There's a certain element of your audience that is going to demand romance and unless you're unless you're Your story has some kind of romance or sexual tension You know, it's it doesn't hold the interest for especially those people for whom romance is Is is the one thing that it's catnip to? Certain portions of the population its pornography. It just keeps grabbing them because it's it's romance. It's romance. It's romance It's it's and and romance is all about will I be will I discover my one true love my soul mate my It's it's basically an eschatological utopian relationship that that some people Often of a certain sex. I won't say anything tend to be fascinated by and But then men are sort of more fascinated by these other aspects, but we we won't go there, right? now the julia claudian court, but Because it's fantasy you have no idea what's going to happen. Yes, that's why this has the I mean, I remember reading it and go Being devastated and there's the famous footage of people watching it on the and of course It's the starks again for what I which is almost nothing but you know the the show begins sort of with the starks and they seem to be the archetypal The us we want to be where we follow rules and we have a moral code and we Are respecters of other people and we're not we're not users We we're not users of other people etc. Etc. Etc. But you know the underlying idea beneath this is that well You know You're suckers if you follow the rules. Well, where do the rules come from? Well, the rules don't come from The physical world around us the rules come from watching each other the rules the rules come from religion so That's those are the those are the elements. There's some other really nice tidbits in this game of throne episode in the rest of history So again subscribe to their podcast listen to the whole thing. I I find their podcast Entertaining I've got a I've got a couple of them saved coming up They have the World Cup of Gods that they have a preview for I haven't listened to it yet But this is this is great stuff to listen to listen to as while I'm on vacation, so I'll keep doing it now one of the issues that comes up when we start talking about universal history is very much going to be race and So I didn't watch much of this either but my daughters were far more interested in it and so I you know, I I I Was It's I do like I do like I remember my father doing through much of my youth which is Watching TV over a book So he's got the book here and he's reading the book and I'm watching something on TV and he just looks up every now And then it's just sort of you know TV is sort of slow in some ways sort of tracking What's going on in the TV while he's reading an article or reading a magazine or reading a book or something like that? The Bridgerton has been a show that that caught people's fancy on YouTube and Oops, let's go back. See if I can click on it here So we're using these historical stories to try to why are we telling these historical stories? Well, we're trying to orient ourselves. And again, this is this is what it seems Sam Harris completely misses we're trying to orient ourselves and we're trying to find a universal history and Well, what about race? Well so many of our stories are coming from this one little corner of Europe and Well, let's say in the 18th century 19th century Race Kind of played a particular role then which you know, nobody wants to let us forget so then you take something like Bridgerton and And And what what so surprises me about these is because on one hand they're supposed to be out here on the on the connect on the canonical streaming services such as Netflix and well a Big part of the whole race debate now is colorblind or not color blindness well that was so 1950 1960 now we're supposed to pay attention to race and race is supposed to be all important don't ghost People's racial identities, but then Well now we've got the service of representation and so we have to We want to stick dark-skinned actors Into these historical dramas and well, but there's going to be dark-skinned actors but then there's but remember actors are playing roles on television and Culture is not just you know skin color is not just skin color It's culture and so then the debate over Bridgerton and race Bridgerton wants to have black characters while hand-waving The reality of racism and so I mean very quickly part of the difficulty in the current Racial conversation is that? Well, what do you do with the universal history? Because if if if skin color and and this is actually Working through right now because very quickly it's all about the color of your skin, but then very quickly But then a whole bunch of it's just sitting down with a man yesterday who was telling me You know everybody thinks that because I'm black I have to act a certain way That's exactly what everybody is telling you now And he's saying no I don't I Like these things I like these musical groups I like these for him a lot of it is orienting on education or an entertainment genres I like these things and they're not considered black But I like them and so I'm going to continue to listen to them and enjoy them and I don't care when People try to take away my black card and I think that's exactly right Because the pigmentation of our skin while has had a Devastating history in many respects is not all we are and and so then when you start well playing around with these historical pieces You know and and it's been interesting because Vikings and there and The last kingdom haven't done this because it would be a little little strange to have an African Viking and And so very quickly the questions of of these color palettes and and people that we can cast in these roles, but but of course I mean skin color is just one tiny little aspect and Well, how really will you work when we have questions of which you know a lot of the race conversation is whiteness Well, what exactly is is showing up on time reading a book and getting good grades white Well now things are things are is is how you treat Your spouse a function of whiteness. Is there a white way to treat a spouse and a black way to treat a spouse? Culturally. Well, yeah, cuz you know, I've seen a numb, you know that Had a lot of chance in my life to be up close to different people different cultural groups But African American is a cultural group. It's quite distinct from Dominican or Haitian or Puerto Rican or Nigerian or or South African or on on on on on on on just like you know Dutch Reformed marriages are different from Irish Catholic marriages are different from Italian Catholic marriages are different from on on on on on and What what really struck me here was see if I can manage to manage these windows without pausing the video when In the Bachelor which has all of this talk about Romance when you know, first of all the first black bachelor picks a white girl Don't think that many many people Especially African American women weren't paying very close attention to that Yeah post-racial and And Then when it's discovered that she dressed up in period costume and went to an antebellum party Which hey I get that like I've said in previous videos. I I get a visceral reaction when I see a see a Confederate flag I was trained from the youth to you know to fight that civil war in my little youthful brain and to and to be on the side of the Union But You know and then all of these breathless comments in the show about your person and You know how love is basically at the top of the hierarchy and you know when I pick someone that will Because so many of the people are are children of divorce and this particular bachelor had an African father not an African American father an African father and a white mother and You know there were episodes devoted to him working through these issues and could he actually commit and would he be the kind of husband and father that his his father was not and Would he treat his his person because I can't say wife Would he treat his person better than his father treated his mother and I mean all of these issues just came Vomiting out onto in our little entertainment packages and then to Have this happen at the end. It's and Then at the same time we're playing around with race and historical Historical shows, but of course if they were if they were doing You know if they were doing a drama like I don't know sounder Which was a book and then a drama in the 1970s or if they were to recast roots and Kunta Kinte was Chinese So All of this stuff is a big deal and Well, what are we doing with these stories? And what are we doing with these? reality TV shows and We're trying to figure out the world Now Peterson just I just a couple of nights ago or night or two nights ago watched Peterson's Question and answer one is it wasn't as much stuff in this question and answer to to sort of grab me But there was a question about superheroes so What are your thoughts on superheroes? Well, they're quasi religious figures there, you know, they're they're literary figures Literary figures Symbolic figures they're amalgams of what's it my admirable. So you imagine that we have this instance Superheroes are amalgams of what is admirable just superheroes or Do we in fact again back to his I mean if you want to watch the biblical series watch the first one Because most of the a lot of the good stuff was in that first one Because well, what are we doing with drama? What are we doing with these stories? What are we? How are we trying to portray the Middle Ages? How are we what what are we doing with all of this stuff? We're we're trying to figure out not rationally because He could do that and you can have a video on YouTube where you walk through You know rational ethics, but but what we do with them is a look at again the show the good place you Incarnate them in story and you work it out. Why? because There's actually more canvas in story. It Communicates better to us it it impacts us far more deeply far more broadly It's an again in that way where something is A piece of literature is more true because it can take within it all these other lives, but now some of our historical dramas have canvas issues with respect to the world we have today and we don't know how to We don't know how to we don't know how to construct a universal history Well, it sort of has to be a history But it's not just a history and there might be dragons involved and there might be zombies involved Because once you expand the canvas further now suddenly you can actually work out The questions about how to live and how to act because that is actually what we're doing Thank you for a matter. You know, they're they're some superheroes. Well, they're quasi religious figures They're you know, they're they're literary figures symbolic figures. They're amalgams of what's in my admirable So you imagine that we have this instinct to admire? It takes us over it doesn't happen voluntarily exactly you admire someone sort of despite your will and you tend to admire the ideal So and and so well, this is exactly what happens in almost every story There's the protagonist that we're supposed to identify with we're supposed to see the land of game of Thrones through the through the eyes of the Starks This is this is just what happens while we're watching people While we're watching stories while we're updating our maps This is exactly what we're doing. And so what superheroes do are sort of expand the canvas Here's an example. I was talking to a great biologist this week Randy Thornhill dr. Randy Thornhill who discovered the role of symmetry bilateral symmetry in sexual attractiveness while he showed for example or people who were Influenced by his research showed that even babies will look longer at a symmetrical face And symmetrical face is more attractive or an averaged face is more attractive and an average Symmetrical face is even more attractive now part of what makes Jordan Peterson so good at this are You know, I've watched enough of them now that I'm continuing to do relevance realization is He has he has captured the art of the scientific sermon illustration What do I mean by that? One of the things you learn as a preacher is that? most of the points that you think these abstract theological points that you think are so important and as a minister you study the text and you study the word and you abstract them and you get this idea and and And so these are sort of the these are sort of the skeletons around which you construct your sermon Or your message or whatever teaching that you're doing But one of the things you very quickly learn as a minister is that it's the illustrations that people remember not the points Because I can I can craft multiple sermons with exactly the same point and it will it will take people five ten fifteen sometimes dozens of sermons before they actually Recognize the point and can sort of suss it out. There's a whole lot of reposition repetition in terms of the points and And I remember a Friend of mine who was a retired minister was at this church. He would get kind of tired of my preaching because He because he was a preacher was was sort of trained to see through to the points But the vast majority of people They just remember the illustrations So I'm very careful about repetition and illustrations in some ways far more careful about that than I am about the points What Peterson is able to do is he takes these little stories which are just dynamite Illustrations that really sink into us and the points sort of come later At a symmetrical face and symmetrical face is more attractive or an averaged face is more attractive and an averaged Symmetrical face is even more attractive Newborn babies even are very young babies will look much longer at an attractive face Than a non-attractive face and that's because they are primed to admire the ideal that they need to strive to become And that's just a terrific example of jordan peterson using this scientific Illustration to make his point. This is part of the reason he's such an effective preacher Why do I why do I call him a preacher because I think Fundamentally, that's what he is. He is he is a preacher Mentally, that's what he is He is he is promoting a world view, but he's not doing it in a church even though he wanted to buy one But the problem is for him to purchase a building now makes no sense It makes far better sense to rent a theater, which is a lot of what's happening with uh church planting these days That's the instinct for admiration and it's part of the fundamental religious instinct, which is the instinct to admire the admirable as such now right there it almost slides it in the fundamental religious instinct to Admire the admirable as such Okay, ask sam harris. Is that what religion is about? No religion is about well, it's sort of what religion is But no religion is about made-up stories and old tales and and wisdom that that we need rationality to make new wisdom Uh, and narrative is good for illustration, but we need rationality. Oh but Here's the funny thing with story again stories are these massive compression these massive compression Devices that that bring worlds down into themselves And so what we see in game of thrones or lord of the rings or any of these great epics are an attempt to boil the world down into a manageable thing whereby this religious mechanism of admiration can sort of highlight the character and well now we'd have understanding why You know if you're you know, if you're african-american why you need to have a black superhero Because well and this gets into you know questions i've had with um representation in Representation in let's say the orthodox church and pageot says, you know quite readily says no the The organization the the culture is going to have to represent the ideal in that culture But it's really tricky because Okay, well, what do you have jesus wearing I mean jonathan pageot's whole story Is Deeply a part of this because what the sort of modernist ransacking of religious and deconstruction of religious traditions was all about was trying to update it and bring it into the contemporary story and what Fundamentalism is sort of a resistance to that but it's always got to be a selective resistance because fundamentalists usually take Certain elements and say this is what we will refuse to update but everything else can update So I will not send my child to a school where they teach evolutionary biology But I will go to a doctor that has been trained in all of that and I will buy from a gas station that has a dinosaur There's no escaping these things they're really hard And so here admiration superheroes. Well, this is this is what this is about And then he just drops in this thing about about physical beauty too It's just a killer illustration in some sense to feel awe in the presence of what's great That's the instinct for admiration and it's part of the fundamental religious instinct, which is the instinct to admire part of The admirable as such in some sense to feel awe in the presence of what's great and to wish to develop towards that spontaneously and so Well superheroes in some sense you really wouldn't need superheroes in a culture that had a fully functioning religious structure because I don't know about that It's a it's a it's a really important point but I think part of the reason we're using this Is because we're having to construct new stories And as peterson points out to sam harris and the debates we're constructing those stories from very old archetypes But we're updating them with new clothing and so This is really what's going on with I mean these superhero movies are religious movies Because the religious structure would fill in the superhero gap But since the death of god so to speak well, we need superheroes because that's part of the way that we rebuild our gods and There are other canvases that we need that the historical canvases We feel uneasy about aspects because again, we're trying to construct A universal history the new york times 1619 project is an attempt at trying to construct something of it's not really a universal history But to redo history because well, why do we do this because we need to locate ourselves? Inside of this functional moral universe Where there are characters we aspire to and and characters that we allow ourselves to despise And so you take a given superhero and he's an amalgam of some admirable traits You know He might have some flaws too just to make it more interesting or sometimes because an admirable trait comes along with a flaw and that that that's part of the complexity of the world, but the superhero is Not a normal person. He's a super person obviously and super means superordinate It means above and so You know if you took three people and took the best from each of them and made them into one person They would be a sort of superhero And so, you know, there's a fictional element because the powers are expanded But that's also a way of exploring the fact that with admirable qualities comes an increment in power so That's perfectly fine. And so superhero The reason our culture is so enthralled by superheroes is because we're nowhere near religious enough Obviously, that's the reason it's the same why same reason we're entranced, especially the engineering types who tend much less to be Classically religious because of their thing like orientation rather than their people orientation They get all their religion through science fiction. They don't even notice that it's happening, but it doesn't matter It's happening. If you're interested in that sort of thing, you could read the hero with a thousand faces by joseph campbell That's a great in illus a great Representation of the emergence of heroic themes in literature across cultures literature and religious religious thinking Or you could read the origins and history of consciousness by eric neumann n e u m a n n eric is e r i c h eric neumann the origins and history of consciousness both of those books I think are on my list of Recommended books on my website. I'm not sure about the hero with a thousand faces It should be there if it isn't because it's a great book um in any case superheroes are quasi divinities and I mean obviously look at thor and and I mean marvel comics has divinities in its superhero pantheon. And again if you look at well arthur It's quasi divinity And they fit in perfectly because what's the difference between iron man and thor, you know Immortality I suppose although thor's immortality Can't be absolute or he wouldn't be interesting because you couldn't kill him and you're not interesting unless you can die so so, you know superheroes evoke the the the evoke admiration and the desire to emulate and And you know, the superheroes are always battling They're always good against evil and so the landscape that superheroes inhabit which is good and evil against a background of chaos Which is fact all of these fantasy shows the medieval shows good and evil in order is the mythological or the religious landscape So it's it's all religion Just repackaged so that people don't notice because they have to be religious and if they notice they criticize the religion and then they can't Be religious and so And then they can't orient themselves So it sneaks up on us and takes us over in forms that we don't tend to notice consciously are religious But nonetheless that is what they are But now if you if you take this a little bit further of course harry potter Look at how look at how harry potter plays with time You know, he's he's in the contemporary world and in some of the episodes they're they're flying through modern london But you know, why the fascination with the uk for the americans? Well, they're the mother country in some ways Well, they're not my mother country my my ancestors don't come from uk at all, but i'm speaking the language I've been colonized by their language. I've been colonized by their culture I mean my jewish freesian dutch ancestry well But here we are so so look at you know a train transports you back into this Alternative reality and they have it's but it's overlapping with the contemporary world and owls fly back and forth With mail and when they you know this this other sort of shadow world in the midst of the uk is sort of You know, when is it? It's sort of steampunk dickens London that they're but but the the worlds are always coming in and so, you know, we're playing harry potter Of course is another christ figure obviously um But you're playing with with all of these elements voldemort this satan figure and of course the jk Rowlings had to oh gosh, we got a great representation. Why aren't there any gay characters in harry potter old? Dumbledore is gay Oh, you're having sort of the priest figure be gay Gay Don't show heart aren't we a little worried about young, you know His young favorite harry potter spending all that time and then dumbledore's room But you've got You know dickens and dragons and magic and medieval and I mean it's it's just all it's just all Shot through there because again, I think part of what we're working on our canvas is that we have the medieval period But there's this but but we have to somehow how can we fit in the other groups? And I think part of what happens with black panther in the marvel cinematic universe is well Africa has to come into the story What about latin america? Now, of course you're going to have this more diverse palette and others are but you can't just you can't just put that at the top of your hierarchy and act like nothing's going on because Because once you expand the palette once you expand the canvas You have more things that have to be integrated and that's what we're doing We are living in the age of story multiplication with these streaming services I mean, there's never been a greater demand for story and and books and stories and genres I mean, it's been pumped out like crazy, but very quickly you have a Pareto distribution that that develops and you know similar thing happened with music back when Music has been jumping into mp3 and digital formats. Well now anybody can be a musician Yeah, but we still listen to just a few groups of people. Well Are they the best musicians or did in fact they get in early? And so because earlier things and things that survive have basically a twofold advantage They're both early and they've survived and so now these things continue to dominate the story and everything has to weave their way around it It's it's not unlike You know the development of a of an individual I was um Just driving to work this morning and thinking about a particular vivaldi concerto that I as a Uh as a boy As and an adolescent had to master on the violin and I practiced that sucker for hours and now I listen to it some you know 40 some odd years later And I realized just how that piece of music is stuck into my head and how that piece of music makes me feel And oh Well, well i've been formed And so let's give sam harris's do those those brain connections have wrapped around Certain There's a piece of music they've wrapped around certain religious things They've wrapped around certain theological things they've wrapped around things that have a lot to do with race in america because that was Because of you know, my father's church and his ministry that was very integral in terms of my formation Harry potter's sort of like narnia and that you know, um tolkien was appalled at what lewis was doing but lewis was sort of Kind of casting a bigger canvas and and taking on something which you know It's up to you whether you think lewis can pull it off. What's interesting about narnia though is there There are ways there's sometimes when I read certain Certain books of narnia. They seem more dated than tolkien Well, that's interesting so you have the staying power question that that we get into So so we've got to mash up these worlds because our world has changed so much And and and we we have to figure out how to do it now again, I I agree with the creators of vikings. I mean to have To have vikings from the north come down as asians and africans Would would just seem silly because History The history that we have written for us now again part of what's interesting about game of thrones is because well Game of thrones just think listen to the first things I said about it game of thrones is Reinventing our history for us as is the last kingdom as is vikings because these historical representations Are part of the project of this universal history, but these other stories they're not history, but They're religious they certainly are Supernatural never i've watched two or three episodes kind of watching over my book as you know My daughters would watch some of these Strong female characters, but they didn't watch watch mind watching the dudes 15 seasons 327 episodes But again overlapping worlds Thinking a lot about you know, jonathan peugeot's Video on montero and wandavision. You know, I had a lot of thoughts about wandavision And you know some of those mirrored some of john's and jonathan had other ones that I didn't think of and I have some other ones that he didn't talk about there, but Is Is this imagery just arbitrary our desire to we need to have overlapping worlds. We must have it that's the only the the overlay that we all walk around with this Augmented reality is the only way we can function in a too big world and so we these stories are in fact as these are our religious stories because they are how we Orient ourselves and navigate ourselves through this world And when I when I think about this I think about frank paredes this present darkness Now for some of you have never heard about this, but there's a very big deal in the 80s And when this when this book hit it was like a You know it banged two and a half million coppers sold Over two and a half million copies sold 150 weeks on the christian book distributor bestsellers cbd Was a sign of a catalog service before amazon the way that if you didn't have a christian book shop partly because even in the 80s and 90s the book shops didn't have Anywhere near the kinds of books I wanted to read necessarily although if you lived in grand rapids you had bakers and zondervans and urdmans and At least while I was in seminary that was one of the best places you could do seminary shopping because A dutch student like me a lot of these commentaries are seconds from urdmans, which means there was a Imperfect thing and so they'd sell them in their book shop at a at a 40 or 70 percent discount as a You know starving student seminary and that was a cool thing frank paredes book was a very interesting book because again you had an overlaying of Creatures but more in terms of you know supernatural you had Demons and angels and they were represented in the story Now what what frank paredes managed to do was? I don't know if they've ever made a movie of this It would sell it might but you know these this also came at the same time of the um, you know as pojo mentioned the um, You know the the demonic scares that were that were taking place And I want to give you a sense of what this of what this book is like Complacency unfurled his wings What is complacency complacency is a demon and in this in this book demons are characters? And but is complacency a character is complacency a demon? I mean, this is exactly the kind of stuff that would um that sam harris is talking about Complacency unfurled his wings and drifted into stewart hall so if the world's coming together Sinking down through the main floor and into the catacombs of the basement levels, you know, is it is it a surprise tom holland wrote? vampire books in terms of Where he's at now Because what is the vampire genre but the same thing? It's the same stuff basically Um Complacency unfurled his wings and drifted into stewart hall sinking down through the main through the main floor Of course because the demons aren't limited by the floors as they go through floors and things And into the catacombs of the basement level the area set aside for administration in the private offices of the psychology department I just I just went to it's been years since i've read this book. I think i'm going to reread it. Um It's going to be very interesting reading it again So Complacency, you know Sinking through the main floor and into the catacombs of the basement level the area set aside for administration And the private offices of the psychology department In this dismal nether world the ceiling was low and oppressive and crawling with water pipes and heat ducts That seemed like so many huge snakes waiting to drop Everything walls ceiling pipes woodwork Was painted in the same dirty beige and light was scarce which suited Complacency and his associates just fine because of course complacency is a demon They preferred darkness the complacent and complacency noticed that there seemed to be A touch more than usual the others must have arrived He floated down a long burrow of a hallway to a large door at the end marked Conference room and passed through the door into a cauldron of living evil The room was dark, but the darkness seemed more of a presence than a fear of physical condition It was a force an atmosphere that drifted and crept around the room out of that darkness glared many pairs of dull yellow cat eyes cat cat Didn't cats hunt us so let's say jordan peterson and frank pareti and put them together in the sick imagination of paul vanderclay Out of the darkness glared many pairs of dull yellow cat eyes Belonging to a horrible gallery of grotesque faces the various shapes of complacencies fellow workers Were outlined and backlit into a sourceless red glow This is a complete destruction of the buffered self Yellow vapor slithered in lacy wisps around the room and filled the air with its stench As the may as the many apparitions carried on their hushed gargling conversations there in the dark Complacency could sense their common disdain for him because the devils don't get along But the feeling was mutual enough These beleaguered e-bleegered egotists would walk on anyone to exalt themselves And complacency just happened to be the smallest hence the easiest to to persecute He approached two hulking forms in the middle of some debate and from their massive spine covered arms And poisonous words he could tell that he could tell they were demons who specialized in hate planting Engravating and spreading it using their crushing arms and venomous quills to constrict and poison the love out of anyone Complacency asked them. Where is prince lucius? Find him yourself lizard one of them growled a demon of lust a slithery creature with darting and shifting eyes Slippery hide overheard and joined in snatching complacency with his long sharp talons And where have you been sleeping today? He asked with a sneer. I do not sleep Complacency retorted I cause people to sleep to lust to steal innocence is far better But someone must turn away the eyes of others lust Thought that over thought that over and gave a smirk of approval He dropped complacency rudely as those who watched laughed Complacency passed deception capital D, but didn't bother to ask him anything Deception was the proudest haughtiest demon of them all very arrogant of his supposedly superior knowledge of how to control Men's minds his appearance was not even as gruesome as other demons He almost looked human his weapon He boasted was always a compelling persuasive argument with lies ever so subtly wove in this is one of the I just Thought you know to get to the juicy parts of the book just go to the Hindu book hit the Kindle book and grab the most popular underlines Many others were there murder his talons still dripping with blood Lawlessness his knuckles honed into spine like protrusions and his hide thick and leathery Jealousy as suspicious and difficult a demon to work with as any But complacency finally found Lucius the prince of Ashton because of their princes of these you know prince of Persia There's princes of these and those of you who grew up in Pentecostal churches know all of this very very well The demon who held the highest position of any of them Lucius was in conference with a tight huddle of other power holders going over the next strategies for controlling the town He was unquestionably the demon in charge huge to begin with he always maintained an imposing posture With his wings wrapped loosely around him to hide his outline his arms flexed his fists clenched and ready for blows Many demons covered his rank and he knew it He had fought and banished many to get where he was and he had every intention of staying there He trusted no one and suspected everyone and his black gnarled face and hawk sharp eyes Always carried the message that even his associates were his enemies Complacency was desperate and enraged enough to violate Lucius's idea of respect and decorum He shoved his way through the group and right up to Lucius who glared at him surprised by the rude interruption my prince Complacency pleaded I must have a word with you Lucius's eyes narrowed Who was this little lizard to interrupt him in the middle of a conference to violate decorum in front of others? Remember they're meeting in the psychology department in the basement of the college Aren't you with Hogan he growled I must speak to you dare you speak to me without my first speaking to you It is virtually impossible. You're you're making a mistake You're bothering Hogan's daughter and Lucius immediately became a small volcano spewing forth horrible cursings and wrath you accuse your prince of a mistake You dare to question my actions Complacently coward expecting a stinging blow at any moment, but he spoke anyway Hogan Will do us no harm if we leave him alone the power of complacency But you have only lit a fire within him and he casts me off now The blow came a wallowing swat from the back of Lucius's hand and complacency Tumbled across the room. He debated whether or not to speak another word when he came to rest and regather himself He looked up to see every eye upon him and he could feel their mocking disdain Lucius walked slowly towards him and towered over him like a giant tree Hogan cast you off Is it not you who released him? Do not strike me. I only only hear my appeal It seems complacency is more of a team player than any of the other demons Lucius's which is a little surprising for complacency Which Lucius's big fist clenched painfully around Lucius's head Lucius's big fist clenched painfully around Handfuls of complacency's flesh and snatched him up so they were eye to eye He could stand in our way and I won't have that you know your duty perform it Well, I was I was complacency cried He was nothing to fear at all a slug a lump of clay. I could have held him there forever So do it Prince Lucius hear me give him no enemy Give him no enemy. Let him have no need of a fight Lucius dropped him on the floor in a humiliating heap the prince addressed the others in the room We have given Hogan an enemy They all knew how to answer no indeed Deception Lucius cried and deception stepped forward giving Lucius a formal bow Complacency accused his prince of bothering Hogan's daughter. You know about that You have ordered no attack on Sandy Hogan Prince deception argued Complacency pointed his taloned figures and screamed you have followed her you and your lackeys You have spoken words to her and confused her Deception only raised his eyebrows in mid indication and answered Sedately only upon her own invitation We have only told her what she prefers to know that can hardly be called an attack Well see they're trying to organize and it seems well kind of a difficult team to work with So we just had that scene with the demons in the psychology department And well see what makes the book so engaging in the design the genre of work is that the demons are in the middle of the regular world Now remember the the video I did on on On the comic books and well the superheroes are in the middle of the regular world When Lucia saw the Coleman's come in the front door he was agitated in the past He had never been very strong against the defeats and the discouragements Lucius had ordered and their marriage had had just about dissolved Then they aligned themselves with the praying the praying Bush Hearing his words and became stronger all the time before long They and others like them had become a real threat But their arrival didn't give Lucia's as much agitation as the huge blonde haired messenger of God See the angels show up too who had accompanied them Lucia's knew for sure he'd never been this one he'd never seen this one before As the Coleman's found a seat Lucia swooped down and accosted this new intruder I've not seen you before he said gruffly and all the other spirits focused their attention on him And the stranger where do you come from the stranger This is pronounced Chimon of Europe said nothing He only riveted his eyes on those of Lucia's and stood firm I'll have your name Lucia's demanded the stranger said not a word Lucia's smiled slyly and nodded are you deaf yes and dumb and as mindless as you are silent The other demons guffawed and they loved this kind of game Tell me are you a good fighter silence Lucia's drew his scimitar that flashed blood red and droned Metallically on cue all the other demons did the same The clatter in the ring of burnished blades Notice we're using medieval imagery aren't we The clatter and ring of burnished blades filled the room as crimson crescents of deflected light danced around the walls The other messengers of God were barred from intervening by an armed ring of demons as Lucia's continued to toy with his other single newcomer Lucia's peered at his solid unmoving opponent with burning hatred that made his yellow eyes bulge And his sulfurous breath chug out with widely flared nostrils He toyed with his sword waved it in small circles in the stranger's face watched for the stranger to make the slightest move It's very medieval it's swords and sandals and sex huh With an intense cry Lucia's swept his sword across the front of the stranger slashing his garment Cheers and laughter came from the crowd of demons Lucia's poised for a fight held his sword with both hands crouched his wings flared Before him stood a statue with a slash tunic Fight you listless spirit Lucia's challenged The stranger did not respond and Lucia's cut his face Another cheer from the demons shall I remove an ear or two shall I cut out your tongue if you have one Lucia's taunted I think it's time we got started said Alf Brunel from the pulpit It's not an angel or a demon that's the preacher or the person the people in the room stopped their hush conversations and the place became to quiet down Lucia's slered at the stranger and motioned his sword go ahead with the other cowards The newcomer stepped back he took his place with the other messengers of God behind the demonic barricade Eleven angels had managed to get into the church without raising too much ire from the demons Triscull and Crioni had already entered with Hank and Mary because they've all got angels with them They had been seen with the pastor and his wife so they were not much paid attention other than that they usually threatened expression and postures Guglio was there as big and threatening as ever but apparently no demons were the slightest bit interested in asking him any questions A newcomer a burly Polynesian made his way over to Simeon and tended the wound on on Chimans face while Chimon repaired the slash to his tunic Oh see the angels have ethnic ancestry too Moda came him for hear from Polynesia Chimon came from Europe welcome to our numbers Can you continue? Moda asked. I will continue see the angels talk too I will continue Chimon answered skillfully reweaving the tunic with his fingers Where is Tal? Not here yet a demon of fever tried to stop the Coleman's sickness No doubt Tal was encountered No doubt Tal has encountered an attack on Duster I don't know how he'll ward it off having made himself so visible He'll do it Chimon looked at looked about I don't see the bail prints anywhere He may never and he may never see Tal and on Brunel brought the meeting to order standing behind the pulpit and looking over the nearly 50 people who had gathered from his vantage point Even he couldn't help but try to guess the final tally Some of the people were definitely going to give Hank the axe Some of them were definitely not going to and they were and then they were frustrating and unpredictable And then there was a frustrating and unpredictable group that he couldn't be sure about So you're having a church fight you have angels and demons you have all of this going around Well of course Sam Harris will have none of this but all of these stories Harry Potter They're all basically doing similar things Now this present darkness was very popular for a minute didn't seem to last I don't listen to anybody else talking about it Like many Christian stories one might argue if the artistry had been better perhaps the story would have would have gone further I don't know but I'm kind of engaged I'm kind of intrigued by it you know talking about the superheroes and all of this going on But now of course what forms of Christianity are flourishing around the world Well very much the kinds of forms that are very much like this story and deal in the aspects of this story And then there's Sam Harris Jordan Peterson Lex clips and this one the I saw that I sort of keep an eye on Lex And I don't watch or listen to too much of it but every now and then when there's a clip or a guest that that I'm interested in Well it'll come and very interesting this little clip But speaking of apes with egos some of the most compelling apes to compelling apes I can think of as yourself and Jordan Peterson And you've had fun conversation about religion that I watched most of I believe I'm not sure there was any We didn't solve anything if anything was ever solved so is there something What would solving something look like That's a question to ask with respect to a lot of these things because again it's it's in time that these things work themselves out Like a charitable summary you can give to the ideas of that you agree on and disagree with Jordan Is there something maybe after that conversation that you've landed or maybe Maybe as as you both agreed on is there some wisdom in the rubble even of even imperfect flawed ideas Is there something that you can kind of pull out from those conversations or is it to be continued I think where we disagree so he just believes and frame that many of our traditional religious beliefs and frameworks are Holding so much such a repository of human wisdom that we repository of human wisdom Okay well what does he mean by wisdom probably Peterson says they're telling us how to act they're telling us how to live These traditional things hold this repository We pull at that fabric at our peril right like if you start just unraveling Christianity or any other traditional set of norms and beliefs You you may think you're just pulling out the unscientific bits but you could be pulling a lot more to which everything you care about is attached as a society And my feeling is that there's so much there's so much downside to the unscientific bits and it's so clear What are the scientific bits that's the hard part because okay we've got patch Harris here and all of that stuff is part of the manifest image He just wants to go on the scientific image well Clear how we could have a 21st century rational conversation about the good stuff that we really can radically edit these traditions And we can take we can take Jesus you know in in half his moods and he just find a great inspirational How would you know which half you know thought iron age thought leader you know who just happened to get crucified but he could be somewhat like you know the Beatitudes Who just happened to get crucified it's like Jesus walking down the street when they were up I'm getting crucified No they crucified him for a reason and in fact even just in that statement alone just happened to get crucified No they killed him for a reason they killed him because he was saying stuff they didn't want to hear lots of people got killed and none of it was arbitrary Goods and the Golden Rule which doesn't know rich to originate with him, but which you know he put quite beautifully And again all of this stuff is about well how do you know what is good how do you know what is good that is what all of this literature is us trying to figure out And again we don't sit down and do it rationally we rationality is certain part of it what we make up these stories and we dream these things and we tell these tales and we and we try to figure it out and we watch each other we do all of this stuff to try to figure out how to act and Sam just doesn't seem to understand any of that I was going to play more of that but I just don't really feel like it because I again I listen to him and I just think It's just so astoundingly naive When you look at how human beings actually work why they write the stories they do why they tell the tales they do all the work that goes into telling these stories and trying to figure it out and you know in the in the Jordan Peterson conversations with with Harris and even get into super heroes and and for Sam Harris This is just what my daughter's doing and Peterson know what she's doing is actually pretty profound and important and the fact that she's using these stories and these stories continue to have certain shapes is has everything to do with all of this selection It's it's we're continuing to try to work out the Middle Ages and so we're we're using where you're writing Game of Thrones you know again the one video that I'll put the link below it was one of my early videos and sometimes I look at these early videos and it's like wow technically and But you know I what was I doing and why am I so incessant about Jordan Peterson I often get that question you know so why so many videos about Jordan Peterson because I'm thinking about him why so many videos about Jesus because I'm thinking about him why so many videos about everything I make videos about because I'm working through the stuff and we're working through our stuff and well what what is religion well what is spiritual well how is it represented well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what is spiritual well what or how are we supposed to think about it well what is the Middle Ages when was a period when everything was sort of piece together and at least we have a whisper that it was or was that just brutality and and barbarism and and what about the characters in the office what do we do with the authoritarians like Dwight and what do we do with the politically incorrect like Michael Scott and and what do we do with what was the name of the Christian woman with a cats who was who was of course because the the authoritarian and the and the Christian were the ones who were always going out with each other. And of course the, I mean, it's, it's amazing watching the office and watching the various little subcultures in our country work out their stuff. You have Phyllis, who of course is, is overweight and you have to have the fat stuff. You have Creed, who is, you know, probably should be in jail for, for something creepy. You have Ryan and you have, what was her name? Mindy, I think, is the act, the actor's name, you know, the great comedian, the Asian woman, you know, and their relationship. And of course you had Jim and Pam are sort of the normies through which you see it. But even, even the, you know, in some ways in the office, Jim and Pam are the superheroes. They're the normies because Jim is the hot guy and Pam is the hot girl. And, and yeah, the, the show certainly lost something when, you know, they, they, you know, the sexual tension was lost. Same thing happened with Cheers. And of course there was the Pam's old fiance who worked downstairs in the warehouse in the underworld. And, you know, this is why we tell stories. This is why we talk about stories. This is why we represent the world as we do. We're working this stuff out. And, you know, in this video, I talked about this, there's sort of a triangle, cause triangles are funny things, especially relationally. You have the spiritual, but not religious soft supernaturalist and sort of Jordan on the cusp there. And then the religious supernaturalist who might read Frank Paredi and this present darkness. And while they're, you know, while they're huddling together in their church, they're deriving tremendous amounts of meaning, imagining the angelic and the demonic forces. And then the naturalists who are saying, no, we don't do this. This is all about the votes. Oh, okay. And why do people vote as they do? Is there, is there anything spiritual happening? So yeah, we're working out the middle ages and, and we're working it out. And, you know, even shows that aren't anywhere near as popular as Lord of the Rings and Game of Thrones, but you know, it's gotta be swords and not blasters, Star Wars. It's gotta be wands and, and, and what to do with race? How, how are the, the rest of the nations of the world and how are they to be integrated and how is a universal culture to be told? And, and why do we reshape the canvases for with, with superheroes so that we have bigger canvases to play and, and how are they overlapping? Like in, in Harry Potter and, and in Narnia and well, this is, this is what we're doing. Why are we so obsessed with medieval stories? Not just medieval stories, but there's something in those stories in the integration, in the synthesis that we somehow sensed we got right, but it wasn't enough. And so we're still working. And so, you know, I still think that, you know, the modern period could be known as a dark age as well, as human beings, we're just suckers for enchantment. We want to live action role play. We want to lark our way into this. And so, you know, we're watching Jordan Peterson and Tom Holland figuring this stuff out. And I think all of us with them, even those of us who are, you know, securely in the middle of the Christian church world in its various different tribes, and we're, we're figuring it out. So anyway, like and subscribe. But better than that, leave a comment. Let me know what you think. So I'll have probably have plenty of time on vacation to check out my comments. But anyway, so thanks for watching.