https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=G92d7CntxhU

 Okay, so now we're on. Well good morning, Warren. It's morning in, it's morning in Melbourne and it's afternoon in Sacramento, but on different days. Yeah, it's a beautiful morning here, clear sky, warming up. Warming up. We've had everything from 40 degrees C to freezing, so typical Melbourne. Wow, that's a big range. Yeah. Yeah. So you had an idea of what, go ahead. I was just going to say it's going to be a hot summer. Okay, I saw on the news you've got fires in Australia. Yeah, we went up the East Coast, Queensland and New South Wales, and on the day that we drove from Brisbane to Sydney, we're completely in smoke all the time. Wow. So it's it's a bit of a worry. So that's a result of drought in New South Wales in particular, but Queensland. I'm going to pause the recording. All right, so you had you had a list of questions you wanted to ask me for this conversation. Yeah, I've met some people recently, and in particular, a guy at church last Sunday, who's one of your fans, and he's much more interested in you than he is in Peterson and the other intellectual dark web participants. Okay. And so I said, Well, yes, I'm I and I've just written some questions to ask Paul, when I speak to him this week. So yeah, not in any particular order. But the first one is, how do you think that your experience with Peterson and your role in the intellectual dark web has changed you? That's a really good question. I'm usually the one asking the question. So it's a lot easier because you don't have to think about the answers too much. Right. I remember both time, well, two of the times that I've I've shaken Jordan Peterson's hands at one of these little after meeting things I thanked him because the last two years have been one of the one of the most fruitful learning episodes of my life. I have simply learned so much not just from Peterson, but from all of the different people that I've spoken with. It's given me a real appreciation for how large God's kingdom is, and how God works in how many different ways all around the world. I had I had always had an appreciation for the breadth of God's work. But now that I'm talking to people from Australia, or the UK, or Canada or all different parts of the United States, people who are, you know, looking at, you know, Orthodox churches, or even many who don't by any means identify as themselves as Christians, or are working on all sorts of other stuff, I just have a much bigger sense of the work that God is doing to build his kingdom and to gather people to himself. Yeah, it's fascinating. I guess my experience is the same as that too. So where do you think this is leading you? I talked to Preston Sprinkle this morning, and I'll probably post that video tomorrow. You know, I what I said to him, I've said to many other people, I have probably never been as convinced of the truth of the gospel and the power of God to work in people's lives through surprising ways as I am after these two years. I find that tremendously encouraging for you, but in particular, because of your role now and influencing so many people. And that's a very simple message that I share. And I've been really influenced by the idea of the eschaton. And so, of course, that's a time yet to come. But it's also now. And it's a real experience that I find to be completely intriguing and exciting. I'm more optimistic and more hopeful for myself, I suppose, but for those that I care for as well than ever I've been. But on the other hand, I'm worried about the direction that the world is taking, you know, at least the popular secular contest of ideas that's going on all the time. That worries me. Yeah, I think, you know, part of what the last two years have done for me is just to open up so much new opportunity as a pastor of a small congregation. I was able to work in my denomination at a fairly high level just by being here, which was enjoyable and meaningful and fruitful. But the opportunity to go to Australia with the conference that you did, I was just in, back in Massachusetts and in Connecticut, did an event at my sister's country inn where 10 people gathered from all over the eastern seaboard of the United States. And, you know, these are 10 people who self-selected, I only had spoken live to one of them, I'd had significant email correspondence with another one of them, but just amazed at the wealth and diversity and beauty of God working through people's lives. And we did basically what, kind of what you and I did for many mornings and afternoons in your apartment and what we do at local meetups here. We just talked and shared our lives and our thoughts. And so 10 practically total strangers coming together for 24 hours, probably having a good solid 8 to 10 hours of just conversation free flow and left tremendously encouraged by, I've always been amazed by people, but the more people I meet, the more amazing they become. So has it affected your idea of the central message of Christianity, of Jesus? I think it's illuminated more vividly what I saw probably in lower resolution, that Christ loves this world, that the path to renewal goes through the cross, that little people matter to God. You know, part of what has happened began with newspapers, then radio, then television, now the internet, it's just exploded where more and more people have status and visibility and all of those things. Again, I think it's a very important thing to have a good foundation, a good foundation, and a good foundation for the community and all of those things. Again, to sit down in a room with people who if I rattled off their 10 names, which I could do right now, almost no one here would know who they are. But the work that God has done in each of their lives and hearts all in special little ways, not everyone who gathered was a Christian, but that work, I can see that God is doing some things. We in this world always imagine that God's work looks like success in a corporation, or a fun time on a vacation. God's work so often happens in the kinds of things any reasonable person would flee from but can't, and so then are forced to actually dig in and take a good look at themselves and realize how much they need to change or work on a marriage or lovingly, faithfully care and love in a relationship that everyone else in the world would say, well just throw that away because what you need to do is self-actualize and have your best life now. So often the path to glory is the way of the cross and I get nothing but more examples of that every day. Yeah, I think that's the big lesson that I've learned, which it's easy to get confused with your idea of success by, as you say, the idea of, you know, rich and famous and achieving your personal goals and all of that sort of stuff. But when you mediate your encounter with reality through the cross, not just that that's what Jesus did, not just that's what God did, but that's how we encounter reality and how we become aware, conscious of our need for transformation. Which then is both grace, God's provision of a gift, but it's also what we do consciously and so I think the idea of that being a symbiotic relationship, an interactive relationship is fundamental. Well and your book, you know, you know how good is the, if I forget the title right, the golden rule, I know, but I, you know, before your book I hadn't really, I had always thought of the golden rule as, well here's this standard by which we are judged sort of third-personly and oh okay, that's another one of these laws or rules that we should live up to, we should aspire to fulfill. But I think through your book you nicely showed how this rule is actually something, it's something we need to work ourselves not to necessarily reach God's standard, but in fact it's a tool of sanctification by which we actually learn to love. That's right, which is why the subtitle is learning the language of love and so I've really come to understand it as a learning tool and of course it's a learning tool we think we understand and we apply in our relationship not only to God but to other people, but in the process we realize how much we fall short and how much change we need to commit ourselves to, but I think the real thing is that it creates an atmosphere of humility in us which I think is the prerequisite for grace. Well and that, you know there's this weird duality that happens where if we achieve something we get full of ourselves and so much of success as the world measures is that way, but love is, I mean loving someone is the opposite of that because it is so costly and just by attempting to do it you very quickly realize how bad you are at it and that is naturally so humiliating and so you begin to realize what grace is and then through grace what glory is and how where we see glory so often as status and being full of oneself, this kind of love, grace and glory come together in a way that is true humility and you know and it's the gospel of John is so strange because Jesus keeps talking about the hour of his glorification and well what's the hour? Well the hour of his glorification is his crucifixion and again if you look at someone like Tom Holland's book Dominion which I think is offering modern readers a refresher course on the historical context of the cross. No one in the ancient world in fact according to Tom Holland it took hundreds of years even for Christians to sort of figure this out that because the cross was the absolute opposite of glory but yet Paul gets an inkling of it and writes about it and John writes about it and but that is the way of love. Incredible I'm not sure if I mentioned the other book that I read recently which is can you see that? Yeah the Sermon on the Mountain Human Flourishing I can't see the it's Jonathan Pennington and it's a great book a lady at church gave it to me and it's a tremendous insight into the situation at the time of Christ and the way that he responds to Jewish wisdom literature and Greek philosophy and his answer is addresses both of those milieus in a completely unprecedented and unexpected way and it's a fantastic book for for working through in particular the Sermon on the Mountain and then which concludes in the Golden Rule to say this is just a completely new way of being a new way of encountering the created order and so I think that that's an important idea that we that we begin to see the created order in a new way as God's gift to us and it is in many ways not what we would choose for ourselves and so that's the challenge of both understanding that which we can only do I think in part but then responding to it and submitting ourselves to it and of course it's love it's that's what it is and the cross the crucifixion of Jesus is this strange mixture of an event that quite clearly from the Gospels Jesus could have talked himself out of it's his disciples warned him and knew quite well that heading to Jerusalem was a bad idea Peter made that quite clear and yet Jesus was Jesus led Jesus allowed himself to go into the situation where the the Roman off the Roman soldiers would lay hands on him and where he would be beaten and where he would be tied and nailed to that cross and so that there's this loving loving is is always the strange mix of volition where you you decide to enter into you decide to try to love and again I love how you said it in your book start with the people that are around you at home because in some ways they're the easiest and the hardest to love because it's so demanding 24 7 and you and Elaine have been married how long 40 years 40 years so is it a 40 no 50 years okay I was gonna say but but you know and so it's the strange thing where to to love you have to keep turning into love in one sense there's a there's a stuckness to it but in another sense it's every day what am I going to do am I going to love which is going to be costly and sometimes painful and not always rewarding or am I going to pull back and say no I demand that I that you serve me and that you know and it's and that's in many ways that's the heart of the Christian life learning this dance and of course Christ himself goes first and and we we're we're really bad at it you know he he says I seek only to do the will of him who sent me yeah and and he he also said I can't remember the exact words but it was in anticipation of of glory as you said before and his relationship with the father and I think when we start to glimpse that and realize that what we're doing now is preparing ourselves for that and that if we if we're not prepared if we haven't got the right clothes on as it were we can't come to the party yeah that's incredible and it's it's ordinary stuff it's got to do with what we do when we get out of bed and how we talk to our wife or husband or kids or grandkids or whatever it is and uh that so that's my vision of the of the eschaton that we see now well particularly in grandkids and so it's just such a delight to to see the circle of life completed and and the relationship that you have with them if you choose to and the potential that has for you and for them marvelous yeah I don't have any of them yet you will this younger generation seems slow to produce but uh but you know all about that I do no and I think that's I think that's right and I like I like how you said it in terms of preparation for the eschaton and you can begin to see Jesus miracles then in that light and and the one thing I wrote on my blog boy probably 13 years ago on on hell it's so interesting to me how people will stand up on stage sometimes in a church sometimes in a beautiful destination and spend tens of thousands of dollars on this enormous party to proclaim to the world their undying love for a person that they themselves have chosen only within a few years to find that that person is a person they never want to see again in their life and and we tend to frame that as well bad match or something like this and well maybe you know there's always a world of possibilities but the the challenge is to turn and love and and once in a marriage you very quickly begin to learn what that requires and then when a child comes along you very quickly learn that the child's very life depends on on you learning to love and and the degrees to which you fail to love that child and you know we we have children when we're so young we don't know so much and and I remember when we had our first child and I thought you know I thought marriage was a was a challenge to my selfishness and then when I had a child I realized oh just how selfish I am well something that really helps me is to remind myself that humanity is a man a woman and a child because without the three there's no humanity and so that's not just the idea of procreation it's the idea of relationship and to individuals not related committing themselves to each other and then producing something that's the offspring of both and and then creating a new reality and then and so the the work is sustaining it and being becoming conscious of your role in the relationship but in in the propagation of the species as well yeah yeah yeah no very true well did you want to get to some of those other questions uh yeah well here we go I guess the another one well what's the role of the church in the immediate future because we're seeing huge change uh to institutions particularly as a result of sexual abuse uh I don't know that we're responding adequately to that and the church I think needs to do something dramatically different what do you think that is most of the most of the response to sexual abuse that I've seen has been has been has been managerial and procedural yeah and and that's appropriate I mean let's let's let's um let's fix the easy things first and that's true but the you know there's a reason I mean the the most high profile cases have obviously been in in the Roman Catholic Church and I think by virtue of by virtue of their ecclesiology where in many ways in a Roman Catholic ecclesiology the institution itself is so foundational to the church unlike say Protestantism that tries to sort of shift it onto the book um but and that's why the the the Roman Catholic priest scandals have been so devastating to the witness of the church because the priests in themselves are to embody Christ in a very special way whereas in Protestantism with the priesthood of all believers it's a little bit more diffused and so sort of in that two-speed Roman Catholic system priests are you know priests play that role so what does it mean that these situations of abuse have gone on it's you know the Protestant Reformation began in a to a great degree because of corruption of the priesthood and and that corruption was was well known and it went all the way to the top you know you look at the some of the medieval popes and and so in a many in many ways a strange blessing of the Protestant Reformation for the Roman Catholic Church was that it had to clean up its act in many ways and it did now these things take long periods of time when we look back in history you know the Luther might have been the flashpoint for the Protestant Reformation but the issues that that Luther basically ignited like the dry woods of California or Australia had been laying around for centuries and so I think the I think the challenges that we're seeing in the church now likewise indicate far more far more fundamental issues that need to be addressed and and I don't want to you know two Protestants well you're Anglican so you're kind of halfway in between but you know two Protestants complaining about the Roman Catholic Church is not how I want to spend the video because there's plenty of that all throughout the church and you know part of what part of what caught my attention about the Jordan Peterson moment was he was doing something in an extraordinary way seemingly unintentionally that the church was failing to do and so well whereas you know obviously there's no real strong connection between Roman Catholic priest scandals and Roman and Jordan Peterson they they both they both expose they both expose corruption and weakness in the church that the church needs to take a long hard look at and just as we talked about in the love conversation that look won't be won't be easy and it will be very uncomfortable because how have we taken this this power which is so clearly evident in Christ and and in the very messy early church how have we turned this wine into water and and what will be God's judgment on us for being such poor witnesses of of the one that we call master yeah that's very very challenging because I I really don't know how the church should respond I really like Robert Barron, Bishop Robert Barron but and he's tremendously effective apologist and historian and and an evangelist but he's really inviting people to the church and that worries me because he's inviting them to the institution as you say I I think we need to invite people to Christ and more specifically to the cross and begin more to explain what that is not just intellectually and I I'm interested in the Kanye West phenomenon that's emerging and the influence that he's having for instance and where all of that's going I've got no idea yeah but it's intriguing and I'm expecting something hoping something will happen that's completely different to what we've experienced in the past and I I hope for myself that we're ready that we see it coming and that we can you know we can put our sails up to catch the wind of the spirit well and and I think both you and I agree that we saw some of this in the Jordan Peterson phenomenon we'll see what we see in Kanye West but in in a sense in a sense you've got Christ crucified and you've got the you've got the command to love you've got the golden rule and when you put these things together you're going to get church in that you're going to get you you cannot you cannot learn to become a Christian without people around you and and what you need along that way I mean I I have one of my favorite self phrases is ontology is its own justification and what I mean by that is people will often say read the gospels and say oh Jesus doesn't seem to be setting up an institution or anything like that but if you if you think through what he does and what he commands you won't help but set up people gathering together to remind themselves and reinforce and you know and then you know the in in very Protestant fashion you know the two things he tells us two of the things he tells us to do are baptize and eat this body and drink this blood and so the Protestant Reformation kind of explodes the institutional container that had gotten quite corrupt but and then in some unhealthy ways proliferates those containers yet what I think we saw in Jordan and in Kanye are reminders that the Holy Spirit is is always breaking out of the containers we create for the spirit yeah that's right and so we need to be light on their feet don't we we need to be ready and I like the analogy of the dance and we need to be looking for dance partners and ready to join in the world so what advice would would you give your your audience whether they're Christian or non-Christian and so just in terms of personal encouragement direction something to do what would you say to them well I think I think one of Jordan Peterson's aphorisms is a really good one do what is meaningful not what is expedient that's you know that's a you know whereas I have issues with I think Jordan's kind of conceptualization that that meaning can be sort of an internal compass within a secularized iron box meaning isn't a bad compass generally speaking with respect to do something meaningful I think have a I think have a we used to call talk about this in church planting you know have a bias towards action you know a lot of us will tend to sit back and we'll build castles not even in the air just in our heads and we'll go out and do something try something and now that's that's dangerous because there's certain personality people that they just do and never think I'm not advertising that but for those of us who tend to think instead of doing just just begin to do something and and go you know have a conversation and learn to listen what again one of the things that I'm most pleased with from my last two years is that I mean and and almost everything that I've done that has been worthwhile has been unintentional and accidental so when when I was talking to the same people over and over again and there wasn't really room to talk to new people I told the people that I talked to if I've talked to you twice you know talk amongst yourselves and I'll talk to you later and and out of that grew the discord server where people are getting together out of that grew the randos channel mary hatter channel karen has her channel a bunch of other people have their channels and and then I'm watching them basically doing what I'm doing in terms of they're they're having meaningful conversations with each other and they're starting things and and that's that's really important do you remember that that was the the outcome from the conference that tj mentioned tj was that big tall bearded guy that was in julian clark's group which had a lot of people in it and basically he his summary was uh keep doing what you're doing and invite other people to join with you to participate tell them what you're doing because you'll you'll have an interest group of people who follow you for whatever reason it might be because of some completely uh you know irrelevant activity in terms of faith but uh if you if you if you invite people in um to your interest group then you have an opportunity to explain uh the whole thing about purpose and meaning and I think that's right and and also I tell people don't worry if it's small you know people will say oh I started a youtube channel and I only have you know 15 subscribers or 100 subscribers or 300 subscribers and that's that's not the important thing and again that gets back to to love in terms of keep keep keep working on doing keep working on keep keep trying to do better what you're trying to do yeah interestingly um the comments uh after our last conversation uh included someone who's um got a uh paul van der clay bookshelf and and on it is don garlet's book king of the draxters he says yeah he says it's the only book that he rereads and yeah and there's been a couple of comments like that uh that have come out of our conversation relative to don garlet's that have inspired me now to revise my earlier book about him and and to emphasize his uniqueness uh and the fact that he has somehow uh combined being a drag racer with an advocate of the gospel and so it's just a completely ironic story and he's enigmatic and so I think I'm thinking that I'll change the title to the enigmatic man big big daddy don garlet's and so it's the same story but I'm emphasizing his orientation to action and his commitment to achieve and you know to go faster and win the money and all of that stuff but beneath all of that is his relationship to his wife and so that's the thing that transformed him initially and was a consistent factor throughout his life she encouraged him and so she also restrained him um and there's lots of aspects of his story about uh the way in which the relationship between between he and his wife led him to to greater heights as a drag racer but also led him into a relationship with god and that's that's the story that I'm wanting to emphasize with with the revision that I'm doing now huh that's that's interesting Well it's it's certainly not unusual that you know again it's a it's a relationship of love it's a relationship of commitment you know one of the things that I was thinking when you were talking in the bible so often there's there's basically the phrase where when god anoints someone or authorize someone and and then the the command is something like and go basically go and and do what your hand finds fit you know something something of that nature and that's that's that's that's straight out of ecclesiastis yeah to to find satisfaction in your food and drink and do what your hand uh leads you to do yeah yeah and and I and I think you know so often when I talk to people people are they're discouraged they're struggling but often I find when they tell their stories that they're working on the right stuff they're working on what they need to be working on and so I I think often people do need more encouragers that can say yeah it's hard but don't don't quit early keep at it and in time you know it may be blessed and and by blessed I don't necessarily mean you know you're going to make a lot of money or you're going to get famous or a lot of people will see you know one of the you know one of the the Oz Guinness I only own one book of his now I own two I ordered one that you mentioned before I haven't looked at it yet um you know one of the books that he wrote was an audience of one and and that is such a powerful you know I do a lot of thinking about okay the you know the personhood of God and our and the relationality that we have our relationship with God so often in this world I'll hear especially in the west where the we have gone from a rather duty-oriented culture to a a culture of enjoyment and escape and people look at their job maybe or not whether or not they see it in terms of vocation and they say I'm doing all of this work and I don't get paid enough and I don't enjoy it enough so therefore I should quit and do something that I find enjoyable it's like well maybe but there's there's the other there's the other side of this and and again I think Christianity affords this vision where we in fact toil quietly in unseen places before an audience of one and this idea that well I've got to get all my enjoyment in before I die at age 70 or 80 or 90 or whatever whereas no we can we can pour our lives out in love towards one another because we don't only live during this age and and that is so enormously liberating especially when you work through to the dynamic when you begin to realize that that that long to again quote Eugene Peterson that long discipline in the same direction eventually also brings joy and glory and satisfaction in ways that a very surfacy world usually never works hard enough to to find at the depths. That's interesting and it leads me to to observe my rereading Walter Wink and his his couple of books put them aside and it's really about our encounter with the the spirit world and he quotes Alfred North Whitehead very significantly I think and so and what he's talking about both of them are talking about is the the inward journey and that's that's our encounter with God and it's looking into the he calls it the interiority of of our being to to see what's there measured against our relationship with God and that sense of encounter and accountability and then the external journey which is our relationship with others and I think in fact I've I've finished reading Walter Wink and Alfred North Whitehead because they both trend to toward I can't get the name of the word now a diffuse sort of concept of God you know that God is everything in his in everything more pantheistic pantheistic that's right and I think that's exactly wrong I think God is personal and so that's what it means to be created in the image of God and that's why we need to respond to him so as I say those words the 10 commandments become significant that we should have only one God and that we we need to not have graven images and not have any confusion that might become an idol in terms of our concept of God and so it's it's this idea of the the inward journey which is spiritual and the outward journey which is relational and they happen simultaneously but it's inward first and then it's outward and it's another concept I that's been reinforced in my thinking is first the natural then the spiritual and so our first action is very much got to do with instinctive drives and what we would want for ourselves just as an ordinary human being but treating ourselves important sorry treating ourselves as being valuable not just to ourselves but to God and and to others and so therefore trying to understand what the highest good is that we should pursue and and so then that leads us into this ongoing very dynamic symbiotic relationship of inward and outward movement and in that process if we seek God we'll find him and we'll find him in all sorts of places but he'll always have the same sorts of characteristics and I'm very much um encouraged to uh to keep that sort of framework in mind that that's what will always happen yeah no I think that's good I think that's good the again the in part of my part of my reason behind Jordan Peterson is the unauthorized exorcist and and expecting to see God do some good things through Kanye West and not to say any of that against all the good things God is doing through people whose names we will never know um if you if you read if you if you read the Bible carefully you begin to notice things that that you would that might surprise you because we we always met there are all these things that we have so much difficulty putting together and and so that God Israel is God's chosen people he's the God of Israel and so that seems extremely tribal and then you know well here you have Melchizedek and you're like where does this guy come from and and Abraham tithes to Melchizedek and he gets pulled up again in the book of Hebrews and you would say now now wait a minute he's not he's he's not part of that oh well um yeah no uh God gets to God is free to do what he wants and so every time you know we try to encase God in a structure he he he's like he just kind of looks at our structure and kind of laughs but um and might indulge us by you know well like like he's like the Gospels tell he you know he will come and live with us he will make his home with us but we will never um in a sense well we are the bride of Christ but um he he does what he wants and he's committed to us but he plays in 10 000 places so yeah and overlaid on that is uh that we are sons and daughters of the most high co-heirs with with Christ and he wants us to engage in the process of creation with him and so I think that there's tremendous latitude within that allowing for us with all of our uh faults to to begin what really is just a complete delight and and I think we see that manifest in the diversity of animal and plant life it's just it's it's just delightful and entertaining and funny to see what God's done and and there's more of that in store and he's saying come on do your best yeah I I so agree and again part of part of why I said I am this whole journey has done nothing but strengthen my faith is is that I I now look at because I have many more conversations with atheists than I was having before at least new atheists um and I I think when I when I see the vision of the age to come that that we that we are given in the scriptures and of you know right now in many ways we are so limited we are limited by our our sinful nature we are limited by our unwillingness to love and by how badly we love one another we are limited by the short span of our lives when when we think about the age to come and you know just recently I watched the Joe Rogan Richard Dawkins conversation and Richard Dawkins says well I this whole idea of living forever well I think that would be terribly boring and I think well that probably says a lot about you because when I think about what exactly we are promised and when I think about you know you and I are having this conversation you're you've turned 70 and I'm in my mid-50s we we have very limited time to talk in this world and we're separated by the big Pacific Ocean and and all of that but when I think about life in in the new heavens and the new earth and in no longer being bound by sin as we are and in being able to pursue all of the amazing things that we have the beginnings of in this world and we'll have the time and we'll have the relationships with I mean think about how many others whose names we've never known and the ones whose names we've known and and you think about this it's you know we very quickly you can see why the apostle Paul talks about death yeah um that you know to be with Christ absolutely I can't wait for that day but it's in continuity with now and so the the the many projects I begin now and can never complete and the many conversations that have to be truncated by time now and and and and now when you take that and you look at the life of the age to come or Richard Dawkins says I don't want to go it's like hey buddy that's that's your choice but me um you know I'm right there with uh when we've been there 10 000 years by shining as the sun and and singing God's praise is not just what we experience in worship now but it's it's it's working praise to God and all of the ways that we were made to right there built into the Genesis 2 story where we're taking the we're taking this world that God is as just infused and is replete with potential glory and bringing that glory out of it and we have all of eternity to do this you know how can you not want this you know it's it's far better than the best dreams we imagine for all win the lottery oh I'll get to I'll get to retire early oh I'll get to those are such small things and they're so short on meaning so I'm right there with you yeah yeah and that's what I experienced to a very short degree in making things with my hands and and writing and I guess you have the same experience when you do something that's genuinely creative and encouraging of other people uh you get a glimpse into the possibility when we're no longer limited by sin as you say and time and space and and I fully expect to be given an assignment in the far reaches of the cosmos I've got no idea what that means but it's glorious absolutely absolutely and and then and then so to say so then when I so then when I meet people who don't believe any of this and they're like ah I'm like okay but what do you got you know really what do you got that compares to this and okay maybe I'm wrong maybe I'm delusional but my delusion actually leads me to sacrifice my life and pour it out for others in a sacrificial way and and your imagined lack of delusion leads you into selfishness which bless this world and you have no imagination for the next so which which life now do you want to live I'll take mine no no question about it yeah I agree completely yeah all right well that's exhausted my questions Paul and we haven't talked much about the book but it's um well I guess a lot of the things that we've discussed this morning are what the book's about particularly the relational thing and the inward and outward movement and then that eventual fusing with God and Christ in us the hope of glory yeah that's a real experience and and something to look forward to because that's the promise that's already started to happen and we'll see its completion yeah and and we begin we begin to taste it now and and what's I mean what's so beautiful about that if you so if you just taste the thing itself you know that's that's wonderful and that's glorious but if you taste the thing itself and you have the promise and idea and hope and you know real thick hope that what I've just got now is a taste and what I will have then is to live within that taste it's it's a it's a it's a rush it's a high it's a tremendous thing that in fact we can experience now and doesn't end and you know again the Christian life to me I I encourage people to pursue it if I'm a Christian minister of course I do but even if I wasn't a Christian minister I would encourage people to pursue it because I think it it is the best life it blesses this world and gives us joy and can give us joy even in the midst of suffering and can give us motivation to do to do the kind of costly love that you write about in your book so you and I will have more conversations and we can we can dig into some chapters of your book and some of those but right but this was but this was good so anything else for today or no that's it I just was was so intrigued by the discussion and the comments after our last discussion and some a couple of guys in Australia in New South Wales that have have said let's get together and have a coffee and and so I'm looking forward to that it's probably going to be next year before it happens but it's just just opening the door and and seeing other people thinking the same thoughts and hoping the same hopes and just fascinating to see where it all leads Paul. Yeah I just this week on Monday I have to send him the video to see if he wants to publish it but but George Pryor who came to the conference got a slot and and so talk to him so that that that little I again I you embody you know you embody so much of what we talk about you have lived a lot of this to me you are someone who has a you who has a bias towards action you know you thought I'm going to do a Jordan Peterson conference and you did it and I'm going to build a race car and you did it and I'm going to write a book and you did it and so I think I think in many ways especially for for younger men and women you know you can serve as a role model to say yeah you know what and you know and and in our other conversation where he got into your life a little bit more you also know what it is to go after something and fail but my those are sometimes the most important and the richest things that we learn from yeah I think in summary it's it's to see there's a through line and it's up and down but it's it's leading us to to become conscious of what I called before the created order the way things are the way they should be the things for which we're designed and when we discover it we we resonate and we respond even when we're sort of down looking up you know because we've had some sort of a disaster and we say to ourselves well I'm not going to do that again but but making progress the whole time and so I I would want to encourage people to to look for the through line you know the the the sort of the the theme in their life that makes sense and and draws them in and there's a couple of other characteristics one it it exposes our contradictions it doesn't tolerate contradiction and the other thing is that it leads us toward the characteristics of God his his compassion his justice and his mercy and the way that they combine in us yeah to make us into what we're supposed to be is his creatures yeah yeah yeah well said so good note to end on your phone I've lost sound Paul I can't hear you you can't hear me ah I came there okay okay it's it's that same message about the internet connection being unstable yeah I think it's giving us giving us a little note to close on I think time to land the plane all right thank you Warren we'll talk again thanks bye bye bye bye