https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=ZYhedAIM_LY

 Well, hello, hello, hello, as I get things set up here. Just curious about what people think. I saw a whole bunch of people in the Discord in another room. They can leave there if they want to. I don't want to disrupt their conversation. Just setting up my other little computer here so I can see what I'm doing while I'm doing this. I've been putting out a lot of videos. We had the Peterson Sam Harris video, which there were a number of opinions, which I found very interesting. I'm still not finished with the Joe Rogan stuff. Let's see. Do I get to be in this? Ah, she came in! Hey, Andrea, how are you? I really wanted it, Paul. You received it. You are here. How are you? You know what? I have to be honest because I can't lie. It's been a bit rough. I got a ticket for being on my phone, like on speaker. I thought it was okay to be on speaker on your phone, but no, not while you're holding it. You can't touch it while you drive. No, I did not. They will give you a ticket for that. I'm a little bit of a naive one. Anyways, so that's that. And go to check the mail. Guess what's waiting in the mail for me? A police... It's from the police department. What could this be? Another ticket. Two tickets? For what? For like a red light. My husband received one. So that was a nice present. Wow, lovely. He doesn't actually know yet. I have to tell him. I was going to wait until he finishes class. Oh, oh. Anyway, oh yeah, so I was just like really honest there. So we can move on. Oh, well. Here we have the sort of the usual regulars for the afternoon crew. You can turn on your camera, Andrea, or does that not work for you now? Yeah, I'm just switching over to my computer from my phone. Oh, OK. How are you doing, Mark? How are you doing, Al? I am super depressed. So I bought myself tacos and that's helping. Tacos? It's not perfect? That's better than those serotonin uptake inhibitors. We're just all having a great day. I would never do that. Yeah, we got we got tacos. They're looking pretty good. I got them delivered like ultimate and laziness. Oh, got a good taco delivery place near you. Well, I've got Uber Eats. Well, sometimes not always because I do live in the woods, but I'm on the outskirts of the city. So, OK, you know, it's six miles away. Like everything's there, Chipotle and, you know, five guys and all kinds of crazy stuff. But it's six miles away and that six miles is emptiness. Well, it's trees. Yeah. What about the trees? Trees have feelings, maybe. Trees definitely have feelings. I can confirm. And I was in I was in your room. What is going on with the server? This is week two of super busy Discord server. Really? Oh, yeah, it's been packed. So I was talking with with everybody out there about meditation. They're they're bothering me about meditation, although I got accused. We're not accused. That's probably too harsh. But but I'm harsh. So whatever. Well, you you need to submit to the to the Catholic Church because your family was Catholic. And I was like, not really, because they didn't go. And then it got it quickly into, you know, well, if you didn't go and that wasn't part of your family thing and what are you doing? You know, why do you need to do that? So that was that was a fun a fun conversation. So the estuary wants me to be Pope. You too. I thought I thought we were going to have Chad for Pope. Well, Chad is Chad is reticent. So I was like, well, I'm going to get Casey Pope. And then I talked to Adam about it. And he's like, well, look, I think you can be a cardinal. I don't like I think so, too, dude. I don't think there's much in the requirements for Cardinal. And it turns out there's not. So we just got to find somebody to make me a cardinal and then I can vote on Pope in case he's in because. It'd be very but then he's going to have to relocate to the Vatican. Yeah, but see, this is perfect because he's not going to want to do it, but he'll do it. He'll do all the right things, make a bunch of changes and then decide the only way out is to abolish the papacy altogether. And then I will get what I want. He will get what he wants and the world will be safe. That's the plan. You just want access to the Pope mobile, though. That's what the end game is, really. No, I'm not going anywhere near it. I'm just sending him out to do the work. I had a funny thought where we'll start the Cleveland papacy. I couldn't think of anything worse. I think I think the paper she should relocate to Cleveland. I think I think, well, you know, Ohio is an up and coming place. What is Ohio getting recently? They're going to make chips in Ohio. Intel is going to make chips in Ohio, something like that. So I'll say foundations of America like anti papacy, anti popery. Yeah, they really are. They really are. So, Andrea, you are. I'm bringing it real to be really fun here. Sorry. What? No, you've been crushing it on Twitter. That picture of your grandparents or great grandparents and your black. OK, OK, OK. That that wasn't my grandparents. Sorry. What was just a picture? No, I said I never said they were mine. I just said they were your grandparents age. Oh, where is it? I just just it's Valentine's. A lot of a lot of vintage, happy, you know, just pictures of couples are floating around the vintage Instagram. That's what gave the picture magic that I feel like I should have left it. I'm sorry I ruined it. I ruined the misuse of the picture. Come on. It's just been like, hmm. Yeah. Yeah. How did the how did the talk go with Mark? When is that one released? He's right here. So I'd actually really good. It was funny because I'm going to probably do it in about a week, like release it in like, you know, five days to a week. But he I said, so this is actually a compliment. It's not going to sound like a compliment, but it is. I didn't have to write any notes and write anything down for this talk because I because I was that confident in it being just. We don't need notes where we're going. We don't need notes. Wow. The spirit. The spirit emerged naturally, and she she had faith that the spirit would emerge from the comic. I thought I thought it went good, went really well. And I I look forward to see if I made any sense to anyone else, because I think I think Andrea actually got some of what I was saying. So I did. No, but the funny thing is, because, you know, I released that little my my monologue five minute monologue, which I love. That was great. I just love you called it a monologue, Paul. I was like five minutes. That's it is five minute monologue. Yes, I will work my way up to an hour. You should you strive to be at five minutes, an hour is too long to three. I'm just I'm just joking about being like how how your monologues are. But no, but I I made that the night before I spoke with you, Mark. Like I actually made that before I spoke with you. And so much of what we touched on was like I wasn't trying to drop off on that. But it was I didn't even bring these things up. It was like really, really. Yeah, it was just like it was the vibe was like the spirit of enchantment was in the air. Right. Wonderful. Well, Mark's a talker, you know, Mark on there, it's going to go fine. Yeah. Yeah. I have to decide if I was a parrot down at all. It's like an hour 45. So we'll see. Big one. Oh, that's good. I expect you to watch this one, though, Paul. I here's the here's the I feel so much guilt with this. People are always sending me videos. It's like, oh, oh, I really feel guilty about Mark. I owe Mark so much. Well, this is why this is why I'm the good gateway to Mark, because, you know, like, OK, you like you have your seasons for watching my channel. I know you do. That's that's very true. This is you can just fall back in because I usually leave a comment. If I watch, I leave a comment. You do. So we just did it. You just gave me the five minutes of your time. Appreciate it. Thank you. But this way, you're like, oh, I'm already clicking on Andrea with the bangs click again. Oh, there's Mark. I am I am paying tribute to Mark. And oh, look, there's his channel like that's linked in Andrea's little description. Easy peasy lemon squeezy. It's a gateway. I'm the gateway drug to Mark. The topic is irresistible. Like, they really want to hear about the precursor to the meaning crisis, which is the intimacy crisis. How good is that topic? Yeah, I picked it. It was me. Good. No, no, no. Excellent. Perfect topic. And she was the perfect person to talk about it first, because I've been agonizing over this for like a year, like, oh, I know there's something here and I want to talk about it. I know I shouldn't do it, you know, on my own. Right. I need that. I need that divine feminine energy to manifest. And like, could you could you ask for better? No, you could not. It would be OK. Now. OK. They'll say so Grim Grizz wants me to ask Andrea if she likes being Agent Carter. Oh, I mean, it depends. It depends on the day. I mean, today I'm an 80s, 90s housewife mom. Like, look at look at this. Like, actually, like this is like it's like a pinafore that's from Austria. So wow. Wow. And here's Topher the salty. I haven't talked to Topher for a long time. How are you, Topher? He's got it. He's not ready for sound. He's right. He's talking to it. He doesn't love us. The nice little toque. Can't blame him. Excuse my Canadianese toque. Toque. Beanie. I got to tell you, it's 68 degrees in sunny California today. It's going to be in the 70s this week. Well, it was plus 10, which is, I think, 50. So we're doing pretty well in Canada. It's pretty good. That's pretty. Oh, wow. That's not bad. Yeah. In February. Yeah. Yeah, that's really good for Canada in February. And points, Andrea, for having pictures of the mountains in in your video. I took that. Yeah, that's like that's one of my favorite photographs I've ever taken. But like I put it up on Twitter and someone was like, well, you know, like in some locations, it's really like the setting that does the work for you. And I was like, thanks for stealing my authorship of this photograph. They lied to you, Andrea. Who are they? I did good framing of that. I framed it. Like, give me an address. I'll take care of them. We know how to do these things in Boston. I got to I got to have Kermit sit up straight. You know, oh, I'm so glad I'm here because that's why I wanted to be part of this. I needed to tell you face to face. Kate, Jonathan is a fox and for Vicky is an owl. It just fox and owl. And just because like the fox isn't a wolf, right? He's not he's like he's just enough to pick, pick at things. And he's clever, you know, that's good to kind of reveal your. You're like the unseen. And then I don't know, I'm just thinking of the like the professor that was like the lollipop guy. How many looks to to get to the center of the lollipop? Do you remember that guy? I'm trying to keep it out. Although, you know, burn, burn. He's an owl. He's an owl. That's that's that's an animal. That's true. That's true. It's still an animal. It's true. It's still animal. Now, Burn, Burn Power had some something to say about these soft, plushy American puppets sort of, you know, the decline of puppet dumb. So but I keep them anyway. Oh, Marionette's versus. Stuffed animals. Those are creepy. Let's all get out though. They're supposed to be creepy. Like howdy doody. That's a creepy dude. Hey, here's Reggie. A Calvinist with a Marionette. Yeah, no, thanks. That's creepy. It's life, life, life, imitating art, art, imitating life, it's to. Behold. We got all sorts of foreign folks popping in. All right. So you can win, Paul. Well, I want to hear I want to. So, you know, I put I was a little salty for for Sam Harris. He just he just he just triggers me. And then people are not being and Nate Hiles response to my videos. That was the that was the surprise. What was it? Oh, Nate was they was not having it. You're mocking Sam Harris. You shouldn't do that. It's like, well, I got a little I got a little weakness for mocking that. Manuel. Yeah, go ahead. You have Manuel was was was on that train until he started to listen to your video and he said, wait a minute. He gave Sam Harris credit here. And my argument was no quarter for Sam Harris. Sorry, I'm a full no. Right. And then and he said, well, he treats for Vicky better. And I said, OK, if but if anything, he needs to treat for Vicky more like Harris. Manuel and I went back and forth on that. But then he he said, no, he definitely gave gave Harris credit. So, you know, Manuel and I, the last Sam Harris video we tried to watch, we were 10 minutes in and we were both like on the ceiling and click. We couldn't watch it anymore. So I'm probably going to watch yours, Paul, because Manuel read a bunch of the comments on your video and they were like fascinating. I was like, oh, that sounds like a good comment. Yeah, the comments were interesting. So and we have a new face in here. I don't I don't think I've met you. Nahama, hi, Nahama. Welcome. Nice to meet you. I don't think I've seen you on the discord before. Very new. I've been enjoying your discord. It's it's a really lovely place. I've been meeting some interesting people and learning a lot of new words. There are a lot of interesting people and they do use strange words. Sorry you had to meet me then. Yeah. Yeah. And as a result of the other live stream there, Paul, she's hiding that fact. But now you draw in with the with the bachelorette talk. Maybe not that part specifically, but. Well, welcome. And it's not it's not my discord. It's a it's I'm connected to the discord. I am an admin. You're the patriarch. You're the patriarch. The patriarch. Is that is that for the beard? It gives me. I think I've seen a few of your. Yeah, I've seen a few of your videos as well, so it's really lovely to see you. I've enjoyed. Oh, it's nice. I'm just happy to see another lady. Not many on the discord. No, the gentleman think I'm here for a husband. I have a Jewish background, so I have a strong preference there. So I don't know that that's what I'll find, but who knows? Well, we've got Jacob. I have my Jacob. Yes. We've got a single Jewish man. I've got one. Oh, you are a big Jewish man. Oh, you are playing a game. Oh, my God. Can't handle it. My grandmother, she's like, you're a guy, you're a girl. There you go. It's done. That's it. Yeah, that's all you need. That's kind of true. That's kind of true. So and Chad, the alcoholic came in and. And then someone just left. And then someone just left. So so, yeah, any any other any other feedback on the I mean, we got the Joe Rogan stuff, too. I don't know what anybody wants to wants to bring. Yeah, I always agree to say here because I just so I just finished it on the way home from school and then I got like five minutes in to your commentary. And I had already heard from people that you were pretty salty on about her. But so with that in mind, throughout the whole Sam Harris conversation, I was surprised with how much I was appreciating it. I I do it. I really want to go back to it because there were a lot of points where it's like, oh, like that's Joe and like, oh, that's like very God number one from here. Right. And so I think he he grassed it, but he had this deep seeded bias against all the other reasons that is preventing him from seeing that the source of those things are is rooted in these organizations. But I suspect that. I'm probably still more entrenched in that new way he is thinking because I grew up with it and not as far from it as a lot of you are. So I'm more OK with it, I guess. I'm working on it. OK, I did. I did a really I did a good conversation today with a guy who's got a little he started his own little YouTube channel. And and he talked quite a bit about Sam Harris and he's a Sam Harris fan. So I'm hoping that he he said, I'll be able to share that conversation with this channel, too. So hopefully that will come out soon. But I'm just I'm just I. So I think in in tomorrow's video, I'm a little less salty. You know, I took my admonition from from Nate Hile and dialed it back a little. But I think I was a little bit more. I think I explained a little better why Harris is sort of peak modernity and basically why it falls apart. So and that tomorrow's video is really going to be that much time. What was that? Oh, my student knows nothing. OK, so hopefully, hopefully I can hopefully I can raise more light than heat. A little little heat sometimes good cooks, cooks things. Don't eat. Can you guys hear me? Indominus, I think you're trying to jump in. What's what's up? Can you guys hear me? Yep, we can. We can go. OK, cool. Uh, first of all, hi, Paul. Hey, how are you? I'm doing all right. Been watching your stuff for a while, but first time in here. Oh, boy. So I just want to say thanks for all you do, because you have become a pivotal point in my life, one of them. And. Say a prayer for me, because I have a one hour conversation with Pazzo tomorrow. Oh, good. Congratulations. And may just be one of the most important conversations in my life. So wow. Is it private or recorded? I don't know yet. It's off of his Patreon. So. It's one of the perks you get for supporting him. OK, OK. So I'm not sure I'm going to ask him, but. I have a lot of questions and. Um, but just say that I'm on Nate's side of the whole Sam thing. Yeah, I remember I saw your comments. I have my reasons, and one of the things I've noticed is a lot of the people who are speaking out against this have used psychedelics and mind altering drugs. I know who have who are against say that again, I didn't quite pick it up. A lot of the. Several of the people who voice their opinion against the way you took the conversation. They've all used mind altering drugs. Yeah. Including myself, I mean, I've been using medical cannabis for 10 years now, so. So that was something that I picked up. I'm like, OK, obviously, and I know both Sam and Jordan have used psychedelics. So, yeah. You're going to you're going to you're going to you're going to go into the psychedelic topic with Pichot. Oh, you bet. Oh, boy. He's more he he's more dogmatic on it than I am. Oh, yeah. Well, it's not. My style of conversation is not conflict, so. But that's one of my big my big issues like you're you're trying to dismantle his tower and I'm trying to be like, OK, well, this is what we have in common. So so what do you see you have in common with Sam Harris? A willingness to step outside of boxes. OK. What's the box? Anything that smacks of dogma and an unwillingness, a hardness, a hardness of heart, really? It's an unwillingness to change or be open to change. You just put that's how I see it. And you. Like, you think you're right and you think he's wrong. That's fine. I think he's wrong, too, but I also see where he's right. And I focus on that and I try to build bridges from that. Where do you think he's right? Exactly what Nate was saying about the one that was at work, Luke Thompson, the oneness behind everything. That whole experience, I don't know, I'd have to listen to the entire conversation again, everyone listen to it once. OK. I would I don't want to grill you or anything like that. So I just I'm really focused on this right now. This is impromptu. Yeah, I'm focused on. Yeah. If I can, if I can try to offer a way that Sam Harris might be right. In the same way that. That like his critique of religion might be guilty of kind of throwing the baby out with the bathwater. I think people's critique of the new atheists might similarly throw some baby out with bathwater. You know, when you listen to Sam Harris or when you listen to Christopher Hitchens and you hear their kind of like just affrontedness and just absolute distaste in many cases for organized religion over the course of history. In my opinion, it's way over the top. Like, and I think it's it is throwing the baby out with the bathwater. And it is it's too much. But then on the on the flip side, it also isn't for no reason. Right. Like if we take if we take if we take for very seriously the the human suffering around the world, that has been alleviated by, you know, the, you know, essentially material material gains, right. That whether it's modern sanitation, modern medicine, right. Like the fact that so many women managed to successfully have children, which is so miraculous and so many of our children survive childhood, et cetera. And to the extent that like orthodox perspectives and, you know, theocratic perspectives stood in the way of those things finding their, you know, eventually happening like to to to like that, that is something that some anger and some affrontedness about is justified. Like there's something there. And so similarly to how like I think Jordan is right, that Sam is guilty of of dismissing religion too quickly. I think to dismiss the new atheist critique is also, I think, perhaps too too dismissive. And that's been my experience as well. A lot of Christians. The I talk to are very ready to dismiss that atheistic standards perspective out of hand, but I feel like they haven't done the work to do that. Right. They're just doing it to avoid the existential questions that comes with investigating that. And like, Tim Harris made me deconstruct about when was that two years ago now. And then watching your videos, Paul got me out of that. But that watching your videos was not a proposition or experience. That was a perceptible choice of participation for the really experience that got me to get dismissed that. But it's like, I'm not going to dismiss it with my mouth. I can't do that yet. I still need to take a wrestle with it and take it serious for it, because I'm still persuaded by a lot of those arguments. And if I ignore that, that only causes more problems down the road. Yeah, I like I like what Richard said, for sure. I think that's a much, much better argument. I mean, I think part of the problem with Tim Harris and a lot of the new atheists is that they make arguments from the point of view of the reason why these bad things happened is religion and therefore, when a lot of times their facts are wrong. They're just completely wrong. And they don't account for things happen because people do things and they use all kinds of excuses and they manipulate all kinds of structures, governments, churches, popes, like whatever they can. Right. And so the problem that I have with Sam Harris's arguments is that most of his theological objections seem to be based on what is rightly called Western Buddhism, which is a corruption of proper Eastern Buddhism. And they pretend as though the questions raised in Western Buddhism that are unanswerable because the Westerners threw out all the stuff that looked like Christian, you know, the Church Father, you know, deep biblical reading things and just chucked it out to know it's all dualism. That's you know, it's just this that they threw it out in the Western tradition. But they don't they don't engage with the fact that Eastern Buddhists don't think that at all. And they find, you know, there's plenty of addressing of those issues in the Bible. You just have to look for them. That's not you're not going to get it if you were traumatized when you were 12 years old out of the church because you didn't have the deep understanding of the Bible yet. You have this very cursory reading, you know, and maybe you were indoctrinated in Sunday school and a bad Sunday school. But Mark, Old Testament God is mean. Yes, exactly. Exactly. If right. Exactly. And that's the problem. And especially if it's if it's Protestantism, because you've got the the Sola Scriptura nonsense, which Manuel and I've been listening to Lord of Spirits. And the yeah. Well, the last two episodes we listened to, I am not this last episode I am absolutely furious about because this is the first one they didn't make an argument at all. They literally God. God has a body. That's the one we were. Oh, that's where you're at. Oh, OK. Yeah, you're terrible. I don't remember. I have to look back. Define body. They didn't do it because Manuel and I said, they're going to define body and then they're going to change, you know, an earthly body from a spiritual body. What a cool like never like, oh, this is going to be and they didn't do it. And I was like, what? And then they just said, well, this Bible passage says this, and therefore it means that it's not metaphorical and therefore God has a body. And I was like, this is why people hate Christians don't make that argument. You guys have been doing the weeds. This is getting into the weeds of Lord of Spirits. And as you're bringing up Lord of Spirits in the first place about what was that? Why do you bring them up? Well, because because, again, there's there are these deep, deep readings of the Bible that are that are possible, that are that are being done to engage, you know, this enchanted way of engaging with the Bible. One of the things that Peterson does in the biblical series is he re-enchants the book and he says, well, you can read it this way or you can read it with this depth, with this with this width, with this expanding understanding of things. So you don't have to live as a traumatized child from Sunday school. You can actually live inside the story of the Bible. If I can give a little like of a, we'll go Christian here, testimony, my personal, no, my experience over the past few years. So I started with, oh, Jordan Peterson, great. Then got introduced to the other intellectual dark web folks. I hadn't really listened to the new atheist people before. So that's how I was really introduced to them and really got in. Like, for some reason, I attracted all the atheists on Twitter. I don't know why, but like the the real flat landers were just sorry, that's metaphorical. They're not flat earthers, but like spiritually flat. Anyway, so that was what I was around a lot. That's who I was interviewing a lot. And I did become disenchanted. I didn't have the words for it, but I called it my dark night of the soul. I did have those words. And and that's why I found you, sir. That's why I found you, Paul, because I was like, I need I'm drowning in darkness of a flat space that has no enchantment at all. And like objective truth was just like, that's I guess what things are. Again, I didn't I didn't fully deconstruct, but I did enough to to know I I'm missing something like I was missing Verbecky's four P's is what it was. But I that's why that's why I came to Bridges like Bridges. Gave me like new new life in the it as I was a bouncy castle that was deflated. And it gave me gave me air to fill back up. That's a vivid word picture. It is. No, it is. That's why that's actually one of the reasons why one of our members early on. He passed away and it hit me really hard because what he told me. Like made me like, oh, OK, like he said, you. You know, I actually think as an atheist, it takes courage to be a person of faith, and I like that was like manna from heaven for me. So anyway, oh, good. Bring in the feminine here. Come the waterworks, people. No, but women on here, all they do is cry. It's been a long day. No, but that's but like, no, I'm not bashing the new atheists, honestly. Like, but this is this is this is the space that I was brought to was very materialistic. I'd never really lived in that space before. I came from a Christian home, but online again, online even. I was on I wasn't even in real life talking with people. I was online, like sort of going through this this not real, but not spiritual, but not material, material, but not material, you know, whatever it was like, it was almost like a contradiction of like talking about material materialism, but through the Internet, which is not really tangible. But anyways, and so then so it just it led me to a place that was like a learning space, but I don't want to ever go back there if Lord willing. Go go back, go back where back to like Scotland to like disenchantment to do like paper dolls. Hmm. Wow. Another vivid image. You're rolling today, Andrea. Well, that's that's that's a preview right there. Some of the stuff we were talking to. It's going to come out in her video. You got to do teasers, Andrea. You got to do some teasers. That was it. You got a personal teaser in the moment live from Andrea. Come on, Paul. What more could you ask? You are blessed. I am blessed. Let me get it. Let me get it out first, guys. Come on. Oh, this is this is this is very, very interesting. The the dogma thing comes up a lot. And I'm really curious what people's definition of dogma is. I want to be a real Catholic. There we go. I liken dogma to the difference between idol and icon. Like, I think it's the same broken sort of relationship. So dogma dogma is the solidification for a starting point for a way in. And then once you get there, what you're supposed to do is break out of it. You're supposed to use that as something that you can't do. You're supposed to use that as something to hang on to get into some concept or into the faith or whatever, and then you're supposed to move past it. Just like any idol. Right. You have not passed it, but through it because that's the idol. I kind of. Yeah, either way. But I think, yeah, yeah. Well, certainly with idol and icon, it's easy to say through with dogma. I think it's passed. I think. I'm not sure. I'd be curious to ask you about this, Paul, because I stumbled across Louis Berkhoff during some research for school. Louis Berkhoff, big blue book. Yep. And he has a book on Christian dogma. So this word dogma has shifted a lot. Right. So what is the traditional or not the traditional, but the older sense of the word that the original Berkhoff was using it in? It just means teaching. Really? OK, I have my Bible school definitions that I remember from like over 10 years ago. OK, so there's dogma, which is like non-negotiable to be to be within the Christian faith. Like Jesus died for sins, for the third day, the hypostatic union, blah, blah, blah. And then there's doctrine, which is a tier below. But it's not it's like we have a not a complete consensus, but more or less, you know, that's a little bit more like flexible. And then under that, you have opinion. Well, do you not think that we would have a hierarchy of truth statements? Things that we hold more securely, more centrally and things that we hold more loosely. That doesn't seem unreasonable thing. Are you talking to me? No, I'm not talking about anybody. I mean, because I get the sense that there's a a the word developed a reputation and a culture around it. And OK, that's that that happens. I also get the sense of authority, which, you know, this this gets really this gets really interesting because. I mean, part of part of the American part of the reason the American experiment and the rest of the Western world sort of followed America in this is they wanted to uncouple church teaching from civic affairs. And that was that was quite successful. And but I think part of, you know, some people are some people are some people are a little nervous about that now as we get to the end of modernity, because there's we run so much on just in here. I mean, he was really he was right about a lot of inheritance that we run on. I mean, we really do. And once we sort of get to the end of the inheritance, that's when people start doing things differently, suddenly or someone has a new program to to remake the world. So then there's the question, well, how do we sort of sift out all of these truth statements, because, you know, and also part of what part of what developed and in late modernity is the rise of the subtraction story where the idea was, well, back in the old days, churches were in control of everything. And then I'll make a statement like, well, the peak peak church attendance in the United States happened in the 1960s, not the 1860s, not the 1830s, not the 1760s, the 1960s. And so people's imagination of freedom and and custom. I find, generally speaking, doesn't hold much historical water. Right. You know, I live for for, you know, for seven years in the Dominican Republic. It was very interesting the notions of freedom there. For example, I went to the National Zoo and pet the rhino. It was a baby rhino, but I just walked up and pet that darn rhino. That would never happen in an American zoo. Why? So who's more free? In a lot of ways, I'm more free in the US, partly because there's more order and more structure here and Dominicans know that you live in the Dominican Republic. And if you have status, you can get away with just about anything. At the American Zoo, someone's got their someone's got their computer on a little delay. I'm more free in the US. It's so fun listening to myself in there's a little bit of a baritone more in the in the. I was like, who's who's the echo chamber man? So, you know, this this these ideas of freedom, authority, autonomy, they're they're quite interesting, especially if you start to move around and live in different places, because in some ways I was very free in the Dominican Republic. In other ways, I wasn't because I wasn't a national. And that was obvious to absolutely everybody, the way I looked and the way I talked. But I had status and money in some ways, but I didn't have I didn't have status in other ways because I was a foreigner. So, I mean, these kinds of things and I often get the impression that, OK, dogma. And people just have this this picture of some authoritative, irrational structure that's bearing down on people. And of course, history is full of authoritative, irrational structures that are bearing down on people. But, you know, and now we're starting to get some sense of, well, they don't necessarily have to be religious structures that do that. Well, yeah, that's a point, right? Because the way I see the way new atheists used dogma or used to use dogma originally, we'll say back in the early 90s and early 2000s, the way they were using the word, which is really important. This is to some extent what my channel Navigating Patterns is all about, right? We're fixing the cultural cognitive grammar, right? The way people used the word, if you listen to the definitions really closely, I'm not saying this is easy. You can hear what they're talking about is these are truth statements, they're absolute statements and they're tyrannizing by their nature. And I think the change in the new atheists came when they realized, wait a minute, we have scientific dogma. Hold on. We thought that the dogma was in the church. And once we got rid of that stupid church, that the dogma would go with it because the dogma is in the church. Everybody knows the dogma is in the church. Come on. We already said that. It's a churchy word. Yeah, it's a churchy word. And it's a Beetlejuice syndrome. So if I say it three times, it must be true. The dogma is in the church, the dogma is in the church, ha, now it's in the church. And then we find out it's not. And this is part of, I think, Paul, is why I like your end of modernity, even though I hate the whole concept of modernity. I really like it when you say the end of modernity because we're figuring out, oh, the dogma wasn't in the church. Well, then what was it in? And modernity is really about these structures that we thought were tyrannizing us. We're not the things tyrannizing us. The things tyrannizing us are in us and they're expressed out in our structures. And so we find the dogma even though we left the church. It's the snakes in you. Like, you know, back to the snakes in you. A Christian would say that, Andrea. How dare I? How dare I show my cards? And then the dogma is at the bottom of the stack, because, like, one thing I would add to your three-pronged definition of dogma, Mark, is that the way the racists use it, they assume the dogma is false. Always. Yeah, it's that true. Right. And you can see this in Sam Harris. It's like, I can face Paul for this. I think Sam put it early on, or is that his standard definition of dogma, which is a claim based on a claim held with insufficient evidence. And then two minutes later, he says that you cannot rationally persuade someone that evidence and reason are valuable. That's a dogma. Well, like, how can you not see that, bro? So, like, I can face Paul for that, but, like, I'm willing to forgive him there. But that just goes to show that dogma is... This is one of the things you pointed out, Paul, that got me out of Neurathism, that dogma is everywhere and it's indispensable. Yeah, it's indispensable. You need it. Yes. We all have blind spots. Well, not blind spots. You need rules. You need structure or, I mean, just run a family without one. You're going to work. You at least need a starting point. You need somewhere to start from. I mean, that was the conclusion that Manuel and I came to in the Awaking from the Meaning Crisis Discord YouTube. We've got that talk on the religion that is not a religion. And in the first one, we were talking about credo and creed and dogma. And that's what we came to is you need a starting point. You need it. You're not doing without it. The problem is when you don't move past it or whatever, when you're stuck with it and you can't open again. And this is this is the valid critique from the new atheists, although as near as I can tell, they're not talking about Catholics because I never met Catholics who were stuck the way fundamentalists are. But yeah, you have to be able to move past these things and not to rely on them solely for your arguments. I don't think the atheist problem with dogma is so much with dogma. I think it's dogmatic people. I think it's the people who Christ was referring to that couldn't handle the new wine because they're old wine skins. I think it's the people that he said, you know, you search the scriptures because in them you think there's life. So I don't mean to define dogma as a gating mechanism, and I would say that the new atheists are more concerned about any gating mechanism. They believe that there's a merit that can be measured and that that's all people should be merited by and not by creeds, essentially. But that depends on the exact definition of dogma. So, yeah, but I think you have a point with focusing on dogmatic people because one point that came to mind when I was in St. Harris is that, well, the straw man argument, right, you're just taking the straw man of Christians. But then specifically, it's Pizzeria's point about the hierarchy of manifestations that he makes when he's talking with Peterson. Right. Christianity is scalable because its ideas can be understood in different ways throughout the hierarchy. But even though they're different, they're of course human and they're all true in a sense. Right. And so St. Harris doesn't realize that he's not looking at the top of the hierarchy of manifestation. Right. Now, when I saw that, I'm like, OK, why were the William Lane Craig's and people like him who are supposedly at the top of the hierarchy of manifestation, not, why were they not getting traction with Sam and why was Sam not getting traction with him? Right. And that's a current question I have right now. Is it because the operating system is modality and we need to move into a Pizzeria and Pavilion, etc., operating system or is it something more basic or talking back? I don't know. I'd like to add that when Sam was talking that whole thing that whole time, he put off a lot of the same energy that I get from David Bentley Hart and George McDonald. So as far as their stance on organized religion, I guess you would say, confessional religion. Yep. I've had atheists try to convert me. So that's OK. There's so much to not believe in, though. Well, also, the interesting thing is a lot of atheists that I came across who were the most evangelical in the way they're trying to bring me over to their side, they were ex evangelicals. So, yeah, I mean, you can switch over what you believe, but you still have that same tenacity and that, like, no, I remember asking, like, why, why, like, you know, my, why do you want me to come over? Like, what, you know, what does it hurt? You know, and I think it's just you need to just truth. You need to know that it doesn't matter that we're dead and then dead. And who cares? Like, that's that's the end. But I'm like, but life well lived, can't I have life well lived, even if I do? No, but just it's better lived if you have the truth. And it just sounds so evangelical to me. Prove it. Yeah, I think I think that's that's the problem. I mean, I met a guy in Clubhouse a while back who was one of the most dogmatic people ever. And then he's very science, you know, science says this and science is wrong about almost all of it, by the way. But, you know, he's like science definitely says this and science definitely says that. I'm like, that's that's a lot more there. You're missing some nuance. And he told the story. He is a fundamentalist Christian at some point. And he ditched the whole thing and the dog is still there. It's just located in the science. So, you know, he just became dogmatic about science instead of dogmatic. People's personalities don't change. Yeah, it's just the or an upbringing and all of this. Yeah. Yeah. And I think that's that's part of it. Casey, did you find the the your definition there for dogma? Well, the church basically states that it's truths that have been revealed by revelation that have been articulated. And these are our lights on the path. Right. You can go you can go off the lights on the path, but you're going to end up in darkness. So there's something to keep you from running astray, basically. Like these are the starting points. You can follow along here, but you can continue. This is our, you know, I think due to Chester didn't call it a fence. Right. This is the fence we can play in. But you move you move past them. Yeah. Yeah. I tell you my story real quick. It won't take long. Yeah, sure. Love to hear it. OK, so and of course, it starts with a woman. We broke up previous girlfriend, we broke up. And the reason and I still I mean, I understand it now, but I understand them. She said I needed to find my identity in Christ is what she said. And. That because I really thought that God wanted me to marry her. And so that began the whole questioning thing like, OK, well, how do you really know God's will? And that got me into the atheist debate scene, the whole Christian apologetic scene. And then. I didn't know what I was doing. I didn't know what I was doing at the time, but. I began emptying my mind of everything I couldn't justify, rationally justify. And then basically, I began building two towers, one on the theoside and one on the atheist side, using a foundational epistemology, and again, I'm a carpenter, not a philosopher. So I'm learning the stuff as I go. So I construct those two towers and I'm thinking, OK, one of them is going to win, but that didn't happen. I just constructed two world views in my head and that led to what all only thing I can describe is true agnosticism. Well, I really don't know what's happening. And I would describe that as the outer darkness, because I've heard it described as limbo. You don't believe in anything at all, completely realistic. But it's an unwilling nihilism. It's like you don't want to believe this. You just want to know the truth. So. Some key memories are. I remember being in bed, just absolutely in despair and just crying out to everyone, to no one. I didn't believe in anything. And I just said, I don't care what's true, I just want to know what's true. Because I knew that I couldn't guide my life unless I knew it was true. So. And then, you know, while doing marijuana, you kind of have all kinds of crazy experiences, so the thing of it is, is that these experiences aren't narrativeless. They fit a narrative. They fit the Christian narrative that I'm apparently in, because I don't really feel like I'm in control of my life, but I do feel like I have momentum and it's carrying me to a good place. That makes sense. So this is really taking somebody who has lived, lived in the propositional world got destroyed by it and now finds himself in an experiential world. So what do you want? Say again, so what do you want? What do I want? Yeah. I don't know, man, I'm in for the journey. Like. I don't know, it's like Peter says, I got. Who else has the words of life? Like, as far as I'm concerned, Peugeot has a theory of everything at the highest level. Because it includes everything, it includes wisdom, includes science. I mean, it is the it is the remedy to the nihilism. I'll tell you this. The perfect medicinal remedy to a fractured soul is the name written in light. It's also the greatest energy drink. You can find that in revelations. That's one of the things I'm going to be talking to Peugeot about tomorrow. I'm still pretty fractured right now. I'm healed, fractured still. Yeah. Yeah. Do you have a church you're going to? No, but I have visited a St. Gregory of Nyssa and a St. Bernabas. So they know me. I've been there. It's a. Because apparently God wasn't done after he healed my mind, because I went straight back into religion. And he sent a terrible thorn. Terrible thorn to me because my addiction to pornography just went skyrocketed and I would by both light and darkness this whole time. So this is really. Oh, and I take I have a condition that requires treatment in order to live even remotely normally. And medical is the lesser evil, to be honest. And you just bleeped out what is the lesser evil? The medical marijuana is the lesser event or lesser evil. So, I mean, seriously, like, I don't want to shave 15 years off in life. Yeah. Well, I really do hope that you can land in a church and that you can get a pastor and you can have a community around you because, you know, there's there's no video, there's no YouTube Answer Man. That's just going to kind of, you know, zap your life and and to have some people walking with you and, you know, because there's there's there's a lot to there's a lot to work through and to sort out. I do have a few people that I have met through your estuary, like locally. Good. So cool. So, yeah, you have helped me out there. We meet we try to meet once a month and there's three of us right now. A fourth is potentially coming. So, OK, good. Well, that has that has really helped me. There's a lot. I do have a talk. I mean, I'd love to watch it whenever you put it up, your Peugeot talk. If it gets recorded. Oh, sorry. Yeah, I have a one hour with Karen Wong from the meeting code next week. Oh, good, good. Yeah. So apparently I'm getting pulled into the gravity of this thing. You're making the rounds, baby. Now I just got to do is free up some more rando slots. Yeah, as you see, I mean, I really wanted to talk to you, but I was also still cooking. So I didn't know what I needed to talk to you about. Yeah, yeah. Exactly. So let's just say that I. My experience led to you and Peugeot was the next person I found. So most of my. World, I live in the Christian world, and I don't know how to describe it. There is no doubt in me whatsoever. I don't know if that's pride or what, but I don't have a doubt. So I appreciate you sharing it. And this is part of the reason why I like doing the randos conversations, because then it can just be the two of us and then we can talk. But I can only do that. I can only do so many of them a week. So that's kind of the way it goes. It's hard to get a slot. You're innocent. Yeah, but I do. You can't be everywhere, man. You're one dude. Who's a popular guy? Yeah, I get that. I mean, he's he's Santa. Look at that beard. All you need to pick one day a week where you just make six three hour videos and then the rest of the week you have randos. Oh, my gosh. Question for the room. Who has a question? Chad, Chad, Chad, the alcoholic Chad. I'm Chad, I'm the alcoholic. I did. I was wondering if we can get a general idea of what each of you around around the table here, how do you each of you maximize your meaning in your life? Like, what do you is it something you do? Is it is it something you read or what is that all about for you? How would you? Yeah, how would you best lay that out? We had to a minute to say it or whatever. Maximize meaning, right? Yes, yes. OK, meaning. Yep. Like what makes it all worth it? Well, I hate going first. I'll do it, though. I'll bite the bullet. I think I think for me, the interface that I have with the people on the Verveki Discord server and on BOM, that interaction and being able to talk with people about what they're doing and what they're feeling and what their story is and how they integrate that in their life and see what results from that. Because a lot of stuff has resulted, say, from our meditation, which is going on two years now from the Verveki livestream. That's brought a lot of richness to me and a lot of sense of meaning. Talking about the meaning crisis can give you meaning or rather practicing the practices around, we'll say, fixing the meaning crisis, which is more about the meditation series than it is about the about the 50 hours itself. So that's my pitch on that one. For me, it's my relationship with God. Just being able to pray every day and know that everything in my life flows from that relationship and that it doesn't my sufferings are known and they're accounted for. They really do have meaning. There is an ultimate purpose and it's it's in a relationship with with the good. You really will direct everything to good. And I know that. And that really does make everything that I do in my entire life meaningful. And I can get that if people are skeptical, that's fine, but. It just seems true to me. OK. I'll I'll just say that Christ rescued me from hell, so I follow him. That's what gives me meaning. Whatever way I can. Go ahead. No, no, no, I've talked too much. You go, Topher. I thought that was Niki Moza to talk. Go ahead. Yeah. I think it's such an interesting question. I think I've come to a lot of the things that are very meaningful to me through loss or near loss, just really clarifying, oh, this thing, I really love it, right. And it almost slipped away or it's gone. Maybe I can find more of that or, you know, and and the times that that's happened in my life. Kind of being forced in a position to take a really hard look and go, if I get through this, what do I want my time and focus? You know, my giving this thing, because I've had a few sort of near death experiences. It was one incident where I had a close call with my eyesight and thank God everything is all right. I'm grateful for that. But it allowed me to restructure. I remember when the thing with my eye happened, I had to confront the possibility that I could possibly not see. And I went, oh, my God, if I have three weeks to see, what am I going to what do I want to see? I just started making a list. You know, you like in those movies and you're like, I want to see these mountains. And if I never saw this thing in my life, I'd be just totally distraught. And so that those kind of experiences have totally like, re-informed my relationships, my environment, country that I'm living in, all of these things, the kind of work that I do, who I'm willing to work for, how much I'm willing to work for. So I would say a lot of my meaning of value from life has come from loss. Yeah. Do you feel comfortable sharing some of the things that were on that list? Yeah, yeah. 2015, I have was diagnosed with Crohn's disease and my my large intestine just completely disintegrated. I'm sorry. Yeah, well, you know, it happens sometimes. And so that, you know, there was a really dicey week there where, you know, I remember going to sleep every night going, oh, I don't want to open my eyes. This is, you know, and I with all the medical details, quite frankly, it amazes me that I'm alive. I if I go through the actual facts, I cannot come up with a reasonable explanation as to how I'm alive. So that's that's a pretty incredible thing. I feel very lucky. I do sometimes wake up and I'm like, I my you know, what's going on in my dreaming. So there was that I had my intestine removed. I had to have another subsequent surgery after that. I had an ulcer in my eye. It's a lot of sort of health medical stuff that I think I'd already experiences at a young age or necessarily experiences. You know, yeah, yeah, things like that. So there's been a lot of silver lining because in many ways before that, I was putting up with a lot of misery. And I didn't realize it was my choice. I didn't realize that these were the you know, I thought it was more everybody else's fault and that whole thing. And then I realized, no, I'm choosing all of these things. I can change it, you know, so I feel a lot more agency. I feel a lot more divinity, all of these things. So, yeah, yeah. As a as a loose, loose tangent from there, I my my dad has diabetes and he's slowly going blind and in a similar way, I'm currently planning a trip to try to take him to go and see some of the places that he has always wanted to see before his eyesight gets too bad. So in a similar way, yeah, just being forced to seize those things that you want to experience and see what you still can. Yeah. Yeah, I live on the beach now on the Mediterranean. It's like, what? You know, it's like it's crazy. And I wake up every morning like, whoa, you know. Yeah, yeah. So we're we're told for where you guys going. I miss that. We're we're going to the desert. He's always been fascinated by the American Southwest. And so we're headed to like Arizona, Utah, maybe it might make sense to hopefully it'll make sense to drive back up through kind of like Yellowstone, Mount Rushmore, the the Grand Teton Mountains or Teton Mountains range and stuff like that. So kind of a Southwest and then north and then back across to Canada, which is where I am, or I'm in Toronto specifically. Oh, wow. That's a big. Oh, that's awesome. A big trip and vicious trip. We'll see. Look, it'll be great to answer Chad's question, though, for me rocking my daughter to bed while kind of contemplating existence would be my answer. Pipe up from the cheap seats for a second. I think that meaning is sort of it's basically the same thing as being based kind of it's when you accept that what you're doing in your day to day life is sort of, you know, it's real, it actually has value. So like, you know, you're really tough day at job, you're like, no, I was actually fighting a demon, like with my full arm and all this sort of stuff. I actually believe in war. Yeah. Yeah, I'd say I kind of varies from from like what space I'm in. The first I'd say from 2017 to 2020, I was really finding meaning through conversation, but since the past, I'd say, two years, I've been really honing in the participatory of the feminine arts. Finding meaning just like through my knitting and also I've noticed the past. I'd say I don't even know what it was. It sparked it, but just being a little bit more present with my kids, like watching myself, it's easy to say, yeah, being present with my kids. But actually, like going up to my one, I have three sons going up to them and be like, hey, I love you. And here's a little thing specifically to you that is just you, you know, just trying to be more present and like here's here's I'm giving you nurturing, like not just I'm not just like, oh, here's your lunch for school. And like, oh, I'm not just watching it go by. I'm trying to be more specific with with my mother. Yeah. Yeah, I thought one of the one of the difficult things sometimes, you know, took video tapes when the kids were little and that had to be video tapes. We didn't have smartphones. I'll tell you, sometimes I watch those videos and I think I was not present enough. I did not value because the strange things about your children, my wife and I were just talking about this the other day and though. The strange thing about your children is that they disappear and they grow up, but, you know, those little those little pint sized creatures that used to inhabit my house that you just love with all your heart. They're gone and they're inside my kids today. And I've been blessed that all my kids are alive and they're all healthy. But I would you know what I wouldn't give to pop back into, you know, 2002 or 1999 and because I can still I can I can, you know, in my mind, each one of my kids, I can basically sort of feel still, you know, their little bodies and. Gosh, it's powerful, powerful stuff. And, you know, one of the things that blows me away is when I listen to people, they're like, I don't want to have children. I think, really? You have no idea. You have no idea the glory and the mystery and the power in that. And to and to just say, nah, I mean, I'll take my kids over. I mean, I love going to the mountains and looking at scenery and going outdoors. I love that. Take my kids over that any day, any day. So. Yeah, I'm like, regret not having any kids. But we're trying. There's some fun in that. But. And all else fails, you can always be the uncle, the alcoholic uncle to the to the discord kids. You'd be one heck of a fun uncle, too. I can tell. Cool uncle. I mean, my my I have the five nephews and one on the way. So. Good. Good. Well, I hope you're I hope your children are a blessing. I hope you're blessed with them. So many of the biggest blessings are also weighty. I mean, that's the thing. Again, I think our culture, the dogmas of our culture does not appreciate. So many of the biggest blessings are weighty. Relationships are weighty. And the more consequential the relationship, the more weighty, but the more potential for glory within that relationship. So I mean, you can see this in shallow ways. You want to you want to be a great guitar player. You're going to have to practice. It's weighty. And to to to quote to quote Tom Hanks in a league of their own. It's the hard that makes it great. So that's good. There is no crying. She's still crying in baseball. You can cry in the discord. You can try in the discord, Andrea. Don't worry. Your tears are welcome here. Well, I managed to hold them back, but it is the hard that makes it great. It is. It is. Well, folks, I have to run. So I'm going to end the live stream. So all of you out there on Internet land, if you want to. Sorry, I'm painting with sounds. I didn't get your weighty question. I will do questions and answers on Friday. We sort of moved it to 11 o'clock because that's when Rick can. He's got a meeting at 10 and he's got a day job now. You know, imagine the the inconvenience of getting a day job and, you know, so so we do it at 11 o'clock and you can if you find your way into the discord, you can have it write it down and I'll I'll I've caught up on my question. So it won't be too far. But if you're if you love this kind of conversation and thank you always left the room for your story and Dominus. It's and like Mark said, the discourse been happening almost every time I just sort of pop in. There's like 10, 15 people in a room chatting. So that's that's what I love to see. I did. I was on Unbelievable Today with Justin Briarley and and we were talking with a guy, fun guy who runs like a ethical center comes out of a 19th century Jewish guy who didn't want to deal with God, but kind of founded a quasi religious movement and the movement's basically dying. And well, this guy was pretty cool. So we had a fun time with Justin Briarley. But, you know, it's we talked about the fact that we do need spaces. And I mean, one of the things that is the coolest is, I mean, there's no. You all make the discord that's a discord is made of all of you. Yeah, there's a there's some moderators and I want we should give them credit. We should give them thanks for doing the work that Joey and others do. But it's it's you all in your presence here that really make this awesome. So thank you all. Thank you. But what's that video coming on my channel? Barbecue is a story. And hopefully at some point, we'll be able to do this much more in real life than just online because that I'm really looking forward to that. So, all right, everyone, it was so good to see you. Thanks for thanks for you online folks for for checking in and stay in the room. Enjoy. Keep talking. Bye bye.