https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=agGKZLFNp14

 Hi, this is Paul. Just wanted to give a few thoughts at the end of the day. Last night we had our third Jordan Peterson meetup and I usually host it at church. And a number of us gathering from the Sacramento area. A couple came in from the Bay Area. That was great fun. You see right there, Bucko the Lobster, he is our mascot. I think if you have a group you have to have some little insider things that bond you together that you can joke about. And so we hung out at church for two plus hours and we talked about Jordan Peterson stuff. And we talked about some of our own things and we debated some things and it was a good meeting. And I especially thought about that in light of another video that I saw this morning, which is the sorting myself out guy. And he had a Here's the Truth video where he kind of comes clean on some of the things in his own heart. How he began that channel. Here I am, I'm living at my parents' house and I'm overweight. In the coming clean video he kind of came clean about a lot of things. Here's the truth. He had moved back to his parents' house. He had in fact previously traveled the world. His weight had gone up and down. He had been doing health videos before. And whereas in a sense he presented himself as someone who had a different narrative than what he had had. And so he came clean about that. I thought that was a good thing. And then he talked about his struggles and his struggles in terms of reading the comments section. And that made me think about this strange thing called social media. And this is something beyond us in some ways. It's something that none of us are really capable of dealing with. But part of what I thought about when I was watching him was in fact our little group meeting. I got into this Jordan Peterson making videos partly because I wanted to be helpful. And I think actually the church and the gospel have a lot to say to people who are looking to sort themselves out. And what it has to say is a little counterintuitive. I personally have a fair amount of skepticism about self-improvement. Now I want to qualify that because I think people can do dramatic things in terms of losing weight and disciplining themselves. To do the right thing in relationships and do the right thing by their children. And often it's helpful to get Jordan Peterson with his future authoring program talks about both the desire to go someplace and then fear. And how both of these things motivate you. And I think that's true. What I pondered as I was listening to this sort myself out guy was how what I think Christianity offers is a foundation of the story of the Bible is not finally here are ways that you can save yourself. The story of the Bible is that the God of the universe out of no necessity of his own made himself, Philippians 2, made himself a slave and came down and tabernacled among us, says the book of Hebrews. And in three short years the Christian faith says that the incarnate God started talking. And whereas people, some people for a while were kind of fascinated by him, a small group of people decided to follow him for a while. Huge crowds followed him. But when he, you know, when he kind of objected to the way that they chased the bread and the miracles, they turned on him. And the story ends. We're coming into Holy Week. This Sunday is Palm Sunday. The story says that when the God of the universe revealed himself to the fullest extent, we human beings wanted to shut him up to the degree that we would kill a man for no other reason than to shut him up. That is instructive about a whole bunch of things. And it is instructive about our capacity to improve ourselves. We do have dramatic capacities to improve ourselves, but it isn't easy. And here's again another little Jordan Petersonism that human, you know, that life is a sexually transmitted disease that is always terminal. And we improve ourselves, but we never improve ourselves fully. We never arrive at a certain destination. We all stumble. We all lapse. We all fall. And so what this means, I think, in the context of the gospel is, first of all, God saves us. We don't save ourselves. And that's why if you listen to my Rough Draft to Sunday videos, you'll hear me always say misery, deliverance, gratitude. Misery is that I have a natural tendency to hate myself and my neighbor. I am by nature self-destructive. And just as this young man is struggling with with pot, with truth telling, with with porn, with never having had a relationship. And now, you know, he's talked about porn in the air and he wants to, you know, he wants to have a relationship with a with a with a real woman. And what if she sees the videos and and and and. It's a great comfort to belong to a faith that says I don't finally save myself. That again, the first question and answer of the Heideberg catechism, I am not my own, but belong body and soul in life and in death to my faithful Savior Jesus Christ was fully paid for all my sins with his precious blood and has set me free from the tyranny of the devil. He loves me. He watches over me in such a way that not a hair can fall from my head. And a lot of them have fallen without the will of my father in heaven. This is this is this is the kind of this is the kind of setting that that the gospel nests me within. And so I have a natural tendency to hate myself and my neighbor. I am naturally self-destructive. God out of sheer love and desire comes to save me. All of my self improvement projects are expressions of gratitude where I look at what God has done for me and I see the beauty and the self-giving character of that. And I begin to say, that's who I want to be. And at that point, then after the larger nesting of God's work on my behalf, then this this these other dynamics, which are fully true, I begin to say, I am not my own. I don't want to be the man I used to be. I want to be. I want to be a different man. And again, there's a lot of wisdom in a lot of the Jordan Peterson stuff. Don't compare yourself to others. Compare yourself to who you used to be. You know, so so, Lord, I want to move forward in this. And I know some of you made the comment about the fact that Christ wouldn't be Christ if he didn't have the church. I'm not I'm not making any statements about the incarnation in that statement. What I'm saying, what I'm trying to reflect in a sense is what what the Apostle Paul talks about whenever he uses this tiny little phrase in Christ, which is an extremely strange statement. Because what Paul says is that what what happens to us is is that we become part of the body of Christ and and by and by his Holy Spirit, we begin to come together. And and so when I when I look at when I look at this guy and he's in a sense, you know, kind of chased by the comments section and I completely understand what he's going through. And I think, you know, I think about the I know many of you have been scarred by the church, but I think of the genius of what the church could be. And now this is just a group of Jordan Peterson fans getting together. This isn't the church. We don't celebrate the sacraments together. We haven't we haven't made vows to one another. We haven't. You know, some of us here are in this group are Christians. Some are atheists. Some are, you know, exploring things one way or another. At least one person is from another religion. So so we gather together and we have a good time and we talk and and we really enjoy our meetings. But but the the vision of the Christian life is that in fact, Christ by his spirit begins to weave people together. And that is an extremely messy process because he weaves broken people together. He weaves failing people together. And, you know, I as a pastor, I listen to this guy and I think about how many people that I have known who have who have stumbled, who have, you know, maybe they're there are even a long ways me in their into their Christian life. They may have been a Christian all their life and they get to a point and something has been revealed and there's terrible shame. And and that causes some people to say, well, what about the program? And I say, well, Christianity really isn't a program of self-improvement. The Bible is not the story of God giving us wisdom and rules and laws and ways that we can improve ourselves. That is not the Bible. The Bible is the story of of we get ourselves into a spot and God rescues us. And you find this over and over and over again. And you find this over and over and over again on the Bible until finally the definitive revelation that we see of the Creator God in the incarnate logos where where God, you know, God comes to earth and we kill him. But then he rises again. And we're heading into Holy Week. So we have Palm Sunday this Sunday. And then you have Holy Week where you have you have Good Friday towards the end of the week and then Easter Sunday. And so you'll you'll hear some of these themes as I do my rough draft to Sunday sermons. But just just thinking about the Jordan Peterson meetup that we had and the and this young man trying to sort himself out and sharing his frustrations. And again, the finally the Christian faith is as Jordan Peterson says, it's a comedy because it has a tremendously happy ending. Because finally what we see is that God does win in the end. And this this God who gives and gives and gives and created the world out of his generosity. Finally, as C.S. Lewis says, we rebels, we lay down our arms. And and as one person who sent me an email just just yesterday said, you know, where is where is love in the Jordan Peterson thing? Where is the love of First Corinthians 13? And and and that I thought that was an excellent point because in the Christian story we are made for love. We are made to love one another and we are made to love God. And and this process that we go through again, this process nested as gratitude, not as saving ourselves, finally leads us towards that love. So there's a few thoughts at the end of a busy day. And yeah, there it is.