https://youtubetranscript.com/?v=0ThylnRdMkI

 How are you doing, Michael? Good. How are you? I'm doing fine. Today's youth pastor day on the on the randos channel I just got talking to finish talking to a youth pastor. Yeah. Well, yeah, yeah, but then my little blurb I was like, what do I put in this I don't know, but, you know, I wouldn't. You've been saying that people were complaining about how hard it was to get a spot with you and so I was like, well, I'll try and, you know, maybe it's going to take a long time. And I kind of thought this will be like motivation to, you know, try to start a channel or something. And then it happened a lot sooner than I was expecting. So, but, you know, it's good. And and, you know, I've been thinking about, you know, what I want to talk to you about for the past week. And, you know, I thought I do have a kind of a story. Actually, you know, I have a lot of similar history to you and, you know, some of what I've been hearing about your background and stuff. And so, but I'm, you know, firmly embedded in church world and speak fluent Christian ease. And, you know, but, you know, I love just listing all kinds of different stuff. And I actually came up on your channel by I was searching for Jordan Peterson and Francis Schaefer. And I found your video with Burn Powers. Yeah, yeah. And he had a lot less videos on his channel. So I watched all his videos first. Wow. They're long though. Yeah. Well, so so right now, so I'm a carpenter. I work full time doing that and I get to listen to stuff about eight or nine hours a day. So I can consume a lot of content. And for some reason, my wife is just like not as interested in talking about it all when I get home. Really? I never hear that. My wife watches zero of my videos. Someone would say, do you watch your husband's video? She's more like, why would I do that? Yeah. So but yeah, that was, you know, because I've been watching Jordan Peterson kind of late to the game. But, you know, more since his kind of a second wave here, you know, I'd heard about him before. But, you know, you know, and something that brought to mind, oh, actually, what it was, was, you know, my kind of way to providentially find different things to read is just whatever is free in the library app. And one of the Francis Schaefer books I found in there, the How Should We Then Live? And I remember I'd actually seen that video series when I was a teenager. And so then I watched it again. I was like, wow, this is really good. And I realized, you know, I bought a couple of his books and I was reading them. And, you know, he kind of touches on a lot of the same philosophers that Peterson deals with. And it's like, man, why can't Jordan Peterson just talk to, you know, some evangelical, some stripe? And, you know, it might make a little bit more progress towards, you know, what I guess most of us are kind of hoping for, for him to connect the dots a little bit. But, yeah, so I found I found your channel. I've been watching it and really enjoying it. And, you know, one of the things since seeing your commentary, I'd been putting it off and I finally started listening to the Mars Hill podcast. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. And I kind of wanted to like, this just seems like it's, you know, I don't like watching things that I think are just trashing the church or Christianity. But, you know, it's it's it's out there and it's popular. And so I figured I should, you know, be aware of it. And so, you know, my story kind of made me think about my own story a lot. And so I thought, you know, I had some background that I could share and and that maybe I could be a voice that, you know, is coming from a different direction than, you know, a lot of what what they're putting forward. So, you know, just kind of start from the beginning. You know, I grew up in a Christian home. Both my parents were first generation Christians. They got saved, you know, in college or I think my mom got saved in high school. But like, you know, my dad had it as a pretty crazy testimony. He was he was watching the exorcist. And he said, I think I'm being oppressed by demons. And he was he grew up Catholic. You know, he isn't so he went to a Catholic priest and confession or whatever. And you know, he was kind of hoping the priest would say, oh, don't worry about that stuff. And he was telling me, said, well, you know, that stuff is that stuff's real. And he's like, oh, boy, what am I going to do? And he had a friend who, I guess, you know, I've been trying to share the gospel with him or something. And he ended up in this like Christian real estate office. And he got saved. And then somebody else just kind of shared some scripture with him and he got delivered. And so that was his story. So, you know, not the the presence of like weird stuff has always been there a little bit in my in my growing up. And so he and my mom, they had got involved at a college fellowship. Yeah. And they actually. Oh, yeah. So they had a seminar seminary student. This is in Massachusetts. So and I know you said your mother's from. Yeah, yeah. I'm in Massachusetts fairly regularly. So, OK, so they were at Framingham State College. And there was a seminary student who came down to help them with their their Christian fellowship from Gordon Conwell Seminary. And his name was Tim Keller. So I didn't I didn't find that out until later on. You know, I, you know, said, wow, I told my mom, I read this great book. And she said, oh, yeah, we know Tim Keller. And she pulls out these books and there's all these personalized. So, yeah, they had known him since college and he had helped them kind of set up their thing. So, you know, I guess, you know, the really great thing is that my, you know, I was saturated in Christianity, but I didn't have the, you know, sometimes I, you know, hear from people that grew up in really like fundamentalist backgrounds, you know, that the parents are fearful of the world. And, you know, the teaching was very rigid. And I didn't I never felt that sense of like that. There was anything to be afraid of. There was no question that was, you know, we, you know, had to fear. And my dad, he's a science teacher for pretty much his whole life. So, you know, the, you know, there was no like this divide between church and science and all that things, you know, there's always there's always a different perspective, a different way to look at things. You know, if something seems like it contradicts, we just search a little bit more. And, you know, we'll figure out some kind of a solution. So that was that was the environment I grew up in. And when I was about 10 or so, my dad kind of became the interim pastor at our church when the pastor left, because he was kind of the most experienced person. And he, so he started, he was an interim pastor, and then that lasted for about 25 years. So, so, you know, I have a little bit of the PK experience, but it was a very small church. You know, maybe it was like 35 people if everybody actually showed up on a Sunday. Yeah. Yeah. And actually I watched one of your Sunday morning videos and I saw you guys are doing like the prayer requests in the middle of service. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's just like my dad's church. You know? So, yeah, yeah, yeah. It can easily do it. There's not that many people out there and most of them don't have one. If you have a hundred people, it gets tougher. Yeah. So, you know, so that was, you know, that was the kind of environment I grew up in. And then when I got to about high school, you know, my parent, you know, tiny church like that, they didn't have a lot of separate things for the youth and stuff like that. So I ended up going to a youth group at assemblies of God church down the street. And, you know, that was a, it was a much bigger church for, you know, it was in Menden, Massachusetts. Yeah. That's, that's. Yeah. Cause I know you're in Whitesville. Yeah. Yeah. So, and it was pretty big, pretty big church for the area, probably about three, 400 people, something like that. And they were very involved in stuff. Like when I went there in high school, the youth group was also like a, a, they had like a separate building. It was like in a strip mall downtown and it was like a concert venue. And so there was all these like punk bands and stuff. And I started getting involved in like playing in some of these bands and things like that and made, you know, the pastor's son became one of my best friends. And so I kind of got really involved in the, in the world there. And, you know, they had, after high school, I went to, you know, found out about through that, like a discipleship program at a big assemblies of God church in Illinois. So it was like a 5,000 person mega church. And then came, came back and did some other things. I went to a local Bible college for a little while. And then I ended up working in another church in San Diego, had kind of a similar program because I, that was like what I wanted to do is be involved in like the ministry training kind of stuff. And, and then around the 2008 financial collapse, the church there shut that down. So I ended up back home and, and I started working at the assemblies of God church near where I grew up. And, you know, I worked there for a long time and they were, they were like, they're really great people. The people there love God and they cared so much about the community and the whole, their whole family was very involved. The pastor, the pastor's wife, his children, and they had a very like entrepreneurial kind of vision for things. So they found a lot of ways to make inroads in the community and also help people out. So for a while there, the pastor's wife was a real estate agent. She found a bunch of, she was really great at finding like cheap buildings and stuff like that. And, you know, so they, they would, they would provide, they provided me with housing myself and quite a few other people. And, you know, that way they didn't have to provide as much salary, you know, and, and, you know, for 21, 22 year old people that are, you know, wanting to serve God and do good things, it was a great, you know, situation. Yeah. And so I was there for many years and, you know, they, they, I got a lot involved in a lot of stuff. You know, they had, they, they built a couple, you know, they opened a couple of thrift stores and I, so I worked there part time. They had a Christian school. I taught at the school. I ended up doing a lot of carpentry and things like that. So, you know, that's what I do now. But like they, they did stuff like that you would expect for a church of like 2000 people, but much smaller. And, you know, the, the, the, the, you know, the thing is what I want to say is like, well, so eventually worked there a long time. Worked there a long time. My wife started working there. We met, we were friends for a long time, got married. And then we got the opportunity when the youth group kind of started expanding, we split it into a senior high, junior high. So we got to take over my wife and I, the junior high youth group. And for me, that was like a really big deal, you know, like not just because I felt like it was a real confirmation of my calling, you know, that I was, you know, whereas before I was getting paid to do things, you know, actual jobs, and then volunteering a lot of my time to do ministry things like now I was, you know, it wasn't a lot of money, but symbolically to get paid for doing the ministry. And, and, you know, that was very meaningful to me. And, and, you know, so I've, I really appreciated that a lot. And, you know, you know, I'm going to say it was, it was a great thing. I learned a lot from the experience, but, you know, over time, it just became, you know, the, the pace that everything was going at. And really, you know, I guess some of the dynamics of like a family run church, you know, I began to feel very alienated from some of the people that I was working with and, and, you know, there wasn't a lot of rest opportunities. There wasn't a lot of, you know, provision for people's own spiritual growth. And, you know, I didn't have a mentor, you know, I didn't have a mentor, you know, and I didn't have, you know, a group that I could just be a part of anything. You know, even if we, if we ended up going to an adult small group of some time, somehow we would end up becoming the leaders at some point, you know? And, you know, it was really, it was really tough, you know, because like the pastor's son, you know, he was one of my best friends, but now he was my boss. He was in charge of the youth ministry. He was in church, in charge of the worship. And, you know, you can't, it's, it's tough in that situation to, to, who do you vent to about your work problems when you're, you know, your work and your church and everything is all jumbled up. Yeah. So the pastor's son had become the pastor of the church that he grew up in. You know, he was the youth, he was the youth, he was in charge of the youth group, so, and so he was in charge of more or less of the high school and as an umbrella over, you know, we were in charge of the junior high, but, you know, we reported to him. Yeah. Um, and, you know, you know, now, now that I can look back and it's like, uh, you know, they, they are amazing people and God gave that family amazing gifts, but they were not easy people to work alongside and, you know, there was many people that came and go as far as staff and, um, and, you know, it's not like they were doing anything for personal gain. Like they, like every single one of them, they're, they were putting in crazy hours and late nights. And, you know, anytime it was Easter or Christmas, it was, you know, you're going to be working past midnight doing this and that. And, and, you know, they weren't game. It's not like they were, you know, driving Lamborghinis or anything like that. Everything that they, they had, they were benefiting what of off of it, they put back into the church, but it just made it, you know, it made it hard, um, to, you know, my, my, my personal relationship with God had very suffered greatly, you know, by the end of our time there and, uh, you know, about a year before we ended up leaving, you know, we kind of, my wife and I prayed about it. And we said, well, I think we should, you know, stay here for another year and see if, you know, things change or, you know, if the situation doesn't change, then, you know, we feel like it's okay for us to go. And kind of the, um, the impetus for the change was that my parents had decided to retire and they were going to move to Texas and that's where I am now. And, uh, you know, that's, you know, we stuck it out there for a while and, and you know, I was, I'm glad to say, you know, there really wasn't any hard feelings before we left, but like it was close, you know? And I mean, um, and, and, you know, and so, you know, kind of reflecting like on the, uh, the, the, the Mars Hill thing and, and, you know, just like, you know, so selective in the people that they interview to talk about these things and these situations, um, you know, like, and really what I realized is, you know, I have, I have some wounds from that experience, you know? And, uh, you know, it took some time. Um, we've been here now in Texas for about three years and it took a little while for those wounds to heal, but, you know, there was a lot of other people who didn't stick it out the same way. And, you know, and they're there, the way that they left was not good. And, you know, as much as, as much as wounds that I, you know, I feel like, you know, I wasn't able to thrive in that circumstance, like it's tough being a pastor. And so I know you must, you know, you've experienced wounds, I'm sure as a pastor, you know? Um, and, you know, so I just, you know, but I don't know where in the Bible it ever says, you know, that working in the church or being part of a church or even as a member is going to be a pain free, you know, experience. Yeah. Certainly wasn't that case for Paul the apostle. Yeah. You know, and so, so, you know, you know, I was looking back and say like, you know, yeah, I have some wounds and stuff, but it's like, I don't want to trade those wounds for like, that's, you know, we, you know, we serve a wounded God. Yeah. You know? Yeah. And like, that's the cost of loving people. And so, you know, and it's like saying, as much as I know, like I was hurt by the experience, like, you know, I know some of some, you know, my, my friend there, he was tough to love because he, he, he had a very hard time being vulnerable with people sometimes, you know, you know, I, you know, I, and so, you know, it was tough for me being like, he can't always be the best friend that I need, but I know what he's going through. I don't want to hurt him. I want to be a good friend for him because, you know, pastors don't get to have a lot of friends, you know? It's very true. In large. And so, you know, that was just kind of my thought, my thinking, you know, like, man, with this, this thing, like, not to say like Mark Driscoll's very complicated character and, and, you know, like the, the episode where he talked about, you know, where he kind of fired that staff member and, you know, that was like, I don't think that was done the right way, but, you know, some of the other stuff, like it just, you know, it kind of makes me feel like the, the world or maybe just Christianity today or whatever, you know, once we're going to be in big trouble if pastors are afraid of ever saying anything that might offend the people in their congregation, because how else are they going to, you know, cause growth? You know, like, like, and I mean, like Mark, Mark Driscoll is an, you know, he was an intense guy and kind of like, you know, over the top, but I mean, you know, like the stuff that, you know, you know, like you kind of said, he was kind of like a proto Jordan Peterson, you know, he was getting it men, men have been missing from church and you know, if he said stuff that was too shocking and too extreme, well, that's on the heels of like, you know, however many decades of pastors being way too timid and talking about sex and things like that. And so, yeah, no, I, I get that same feeling often when I listen to the podcast, I listened to Justin Briarley recently on the unbelievable news feed, released the recording of his interview with Mark Driscoll. And that was a, I found that to be a very interesting interview because on one hand, there were, there were clearly signs of problems with Driscoll in terms of being too quickly defensive, combative. Yeah. Also a lot of the ways that Driscoll said things, I thought that I couldn't imagine saying things better than that. And you're exactly right. If pastors get too afraid of, of, of people being offended, well, then the pastoral ministry loses something. And you know, it's funny because let's say on the other side of the aisle, people like, well, I'm just being prophetic and we're, we're going to have tough conversations and oh, okay. But when all of those things are things I agree with, then they're okay. And when there are things I don't agree with, then suddenly they're out of bounds. So no, that's, that's, you know, you're very right. Are you, are you active in, in church now in Texas? Yeah, I am. So, and when I came here, you know, like I love the church, you know, and, and, and I, and my, you know, my whole thing coming down was more or less, I just like, I want to find a church. I want to get involved. I want to volunteer. I do not want to work there. I want to have a separate employer from my church. Yeah. There's that's, and that's a big point too. You know, as someone who, it is, it is not, it is not ideal, generally speaking, for your spiritual life to work, to have your church be your employer. That is a, that is a very common thing. And things go bad lots of different ways. And, you know, I know it's not uncommon, especially in the assemblies of God to have churches sort of become family businesses and there's danger in that too. Um, that doesn't happen in the Christian reform church as much just because of our ecclesiology, but, um, you're right in that, well, in family businesses, people work crazy long hours, not just family churches, family businesses, because that's, that's sort of the nature of the thing. And, um, and then you've got, I worked for, when I was in college, growing up, I worked for a family business, uh, Kukin lumber in New Jersey, and, you know, Kenny went to school with me at Eastern Christian and the Kukins were all part of the CRC and my father had a connection. And so he actually found me the job. My father would often find me jobs because he was so well connected, but, you know, it was a family business. And so Kenny's uncles and father and, you know, grandfather and great uncles all worked in that business. And there's just dynamics then in the organization because it's a family and it's a business and especially now it's with a church and it's also a ministry. And that stuff gets complicated fast. Yeah. Yeah. So that's what, you know, we moved down here and told my wife, I'm like, I do not want to work for a church and I don't want you to either. Well, that didn't actually work out exactly what I was planning. Um, so we, we found a great church. Um, and, um, the pastor is, he's very humble, you know, he's only a few years older than, than, than we are. Um, but, uh, you know, I, you know, I've never heard a pastor apologize more for his shortcomings, you know, from the, the stage and, you know, I was like, wow, that's, that's kind of, I mean, I think that's a scary thing a lot of time for people in ministry because, you know, even, even in, in, uh, you know, evangelical churches that don't have the formal structure, like, you know, the Orthodox or whatever, you know, you, you do as a pastor become a spiritual authority and your life is looked at as this, you know, more than human thing. Um, and so, you know, so they, they, um, they needed a children's ministry director and my wife was begging me and begging me and like, okay, you can work. And, uh, you know, he sucked me back in. Well, you know, I, and I say they're really, the staff has been very supportive. They've taken really great care of her. She's paid well for the amount of hours that she works. Um, but now she's just, she's kind of now she, she's saying like, I now understand why you said what you did just because she's having the frustration of like, can't get anybody to volunteer. So, you know, we, we haven't actually gotten to sit together in a service in like three months or whatever. Yeah. You know, and I was like, well, I was trying to tell you, but yeah, yeah, yeah. Pretty common. Pretty common. I mean, but you know, I, I, I think she understands, you know, this is sort of like, you know, what, what we're called to or whatever, you know, like, um, so now, you know, I'm free from formal, um, you know, attachments or whatever. And I just kind of, uh, you know, it kind of, let's see, I, I don't know. Okay. It was a couple of years ago. I kind of had this just, you know, coming from the standpoint of where I grew up in the way that my parents kind of raised me in Christianity and in such an open way. And, you know, like when I took that big five thing, like my openness is like all the way up. Uh, so, you know, I'm really not, you know, but like, but in, in, when I answer all those questions, I'm thinking of like, you know, I'm not negotiating that I believe God is real or the Bible is true, but holding onto that, I'm open to anything, you know, as far as ideas and things like that, but like my introversion is all, I'm also totally introverted. Um, Oh, that's interesting. High and openness and introversion. Yeah. So, you know, I'm kind of always battling this thing of like, you know, should I say anything like, and like, you know, I've kind of had the experience of being in meetings and the people that want to talk will talk and then I will be like, what you're saying is really dumb, but then they keep talking for so long that I'm just like, I just want to get out of here and I'm not going to say anything. So, uh, um, you know, so, but I kind of, the question that, you know, kind of led me down kind of, you know, researching all these things and looking into stuff and Jordan Peterson and all this stuff is like, to me, it's as a Christian, like Christianity has the answers, but like, people don't want it, you know, and I'm like, why? And, you know, I guess in a lot of ways people don't in the world at large or whatever society, they don't see the problems that Christianity has the answers to, um, uh, you know, so that's kind of, you know, that's just kind of a thing that, that's, you know, it took me down a rabbit hole and, um, you know, and then when kind of all this COVID stuff hit, you know, and everybody's reaction to everything was like so weird. And then it really became apparent, like how like polarized everything is. And, uh, you know, like people in the church would act one certain weird way and everything on like the news and social media was another weird way. And, you know, there's like no conversation about anything, you know, so, um, I kind of figured, well, you know, I can just start like writing stuff and, you know, I would just get so frustrated listening to the same, like bad two sides of every argument. Uh, and, and then, you know, so I started writing things about a year ago and, and then, then I figured, you know, kind of part, you know, Jordan Peterson talks about, you know, like YouTube is kind of like, it's this new future thing. And like, you know, you don't have to have specific qualifications. Anybody can get up there and say anything. And I thought, you know, you know, is it as an inner, as an introverted person, you know, I reach like, I'm, I kind of, since we had this meeting, I got together, I put two videos out real quick. Yeah. You know, one was just kind of like what I wanted to talk about. And the other one was just to me more or less reading an essay that I had written. Um, and I'm like, you know, there's just this voice saying like, this is stupid. Why am I doing this? Who's going to watch this? I don't know. That same voice. Yeah. I figured out what you should put the, put the link in the, in the chat right now. And I'll make sure I include it in the, if we, if we publish it in the, in the show notes, okay. Well, I don't know if I can figure out how to do that, but I'm doing this on my phone. So, all right. Well, just send me an email, just send me an email. Okay. Yeah. Um, but, um, you know, so yeah, I guess that's more or less, you know, I get really frustrated by listening to people argue the same points over again and, and, uh, not have any creative, you know, new solutions. And, um, you know, it was actually that Jordan Pearson video that just came out where he was talking to those two, uh, theologians or whatever, you know? Yeah. And the one guy was talking about it kind of like, you know, the, how the, the university it's not the university anymore because, you know, the original idea was that you would learn about all these broad subjects and, you know, and all this was founded under the idea of Christendom and science even was, you know, God made a world, so let's figure out how it works. And, and, you know, you would study these different things and then you would see the connections between them. And so for me, like that's what I'm doing all the time, you know? And then like, that's exciting to me. And even like, you know, like, you know, so I'm like, I do carpentry, like you do that all the time and like, I'm always like learning things from like carpentries. It's an interesting, you know, in woodworking, there's like a, there's like a hundred solutions to every problem, you know? Yeah. Uh, and so if, if, if that's the case for woodworking, it's probably the case for a lot of other things too. Yeah. You know? Yeah. But, uh, that's, you know, that not the way the discourse usually goes. Um, you know, and so, you know, that's the thing, you know, everything becomes so specialized and so narrow and, um, you know, I, I think, uh, yeah, I want to explore some of those interesting connections. And so, yeah, that's one of the things I really appreciate about your channel, you know, like, um, you know, I haven't gotten to read the, the dominion book yet, but, you know, like, I think that that was kind of similar in that Francis Schaefer video series and like went through history and showed like, you know, and, and, you know, when Christianity was not afraid of engaging with culture and art and all these things, some great things happen, you know, it's kind of, I don't know, the temptation towards like behavior control kind of makes, you know, which, you know, I guess that's being an open person. I, you know, I don't, that's why I'm like, why that's scary for a lot of people, I guess, you know, like, you don't want to let people just explore whatever, you know, we might come up with some crazy thing. They might not do the right stuff. They might, you know, society's going to run off the rails or whatever. It's kind of already happening. So, you know, so, so, I mean, I think. You know, I would just love to see, you know, some of the good intellectual conversation that's happening here on the fringes of people who are more, more out in the, you know, you know, it's good to some people that are seeing the limitations of this kind of materialistic worldview, and they're like trying to move towards spirituality and Christianity. But I think, you know, there's also this giant, like evangelical world that has a lot of this great stuff, but they've, you know, maybe in the like seeker sensitive movement or, you know, they've, they've downplayed so much of the intellectual richness that is really, is really there in, in Christianity. And, and, you know, you know, I understand like the, the appeal that people are drawn now towards like the Orthodox church and stuff like that. Well, you got the beard for it. Yeah. Well, you know, you know, it's, it's really intriguing, you know, and I've listened to some of those that like Lord of Spirits podcast, there's like really great stuff on there and it's like, wow, this is great, you know, like, but I, you know, I kind of just like, okay, well, let's take that and like bring it over to all of these like 500 million churches that we have in America, you know, but I mean, that's like, I totally am Protestant through and through in the way of like, I just, I don't know, I'm like, I'm like an eternal three year old. I just want to ask why, why, why to everything. And it seems like with the Orthodox church and the Catholic church, the answer is tradition a lot, and then that's where the conversation ends. So, you know, that's, so, I mean, as much as like, I would like to just go there and and enjoy the, you know, the beauty and the, you know, all the, the tradition and all that stuff, I kind of just be like, well, we kind of have to move forward. I think, you know, we need to, we need to engage the questions that, you know, the world at large is struggling with more. So, but true. That's part of why I, I, that's, it's interesting the difference, the differences between, you know, the Orthodox and the Catholics and then the Protestants. And of course there's huge range within Protestants. I mean, the Protestant church is so diverse. And, and, you know, you, you very, I mean, you very well articulated sort of the, the neo evangelical vision and Francis Schaeffer in many ways, you know, especially at his time, sort of put his finger on it. The interesting thing about Schaeffer was he, he sort of became a darling of the, sort of the moral majority rise of a certain kind, a certain segment of evangelicalism, but he never really was that either though. And that kind of, you know, then Frankie, you know, Frank Schaeffer, that story turned out, you know, Frank Schaeffer is now Orthodox, but kind of a, he's a, he's not like a lot of the Orthodox you find in the Peugeot world. He's sort of a progressive, he's a progressive evangelical who goes to Orthodox churches. It's a really interesting video out there on YouTube of a conversation he did with Brian McLaren and McLaren is of course, one of the sort of the, when, when the emergent movement split into reformed and progressive evangelicals, you know, McLaren is right there on the progressive side. So it's a, it's a, it's a complicated, it's a complicated world out there. It really is. And, well, I'm curious about, are you going to a non-denominational church or you're going to another A of G? Where, where's your church journey sort of led you now? Um, well, so, you know, this is kind of interesting thing, like, and yeah, it's not, no, I mean, so the, my dad's church was a congregational, congregational church, and he came out of a, the church that, you know, he came up in after college where I was like a Plymouth brethren, but then it had like charismatic Catholics that had started going there and some like charismatic Lutherans. And so it's all like a hodgepodge of stuff. And local churches can be very much that way. They got this, they got this label on them, but is that what you're going to find inside? You never know. And, you know, and so, and really like, I'm, you know, I'm pretty much a Calvinist at heart. Um, but like most of it, you know, and the, the assemblies of God doesn't really have a specific like stance on that, but most of the ones I went to are pretty Armenian. Yeah. Um, so, you know, the whole time I was kind of like, well, I don't know if that's really, you know, you know, so that's like my whole time in church, you know, there was certain points of the theology that I was like, I don't know about that, you know, and, and honestly, I kind of, you know, I guess in being high in openness, I'm, you know, I'm sort of like, I'm 85% this way, but I see that there's an argument here, so maybe I could be wrong. I don't know. Yeah. So the church that we are at now, I guess they were planted out of a church that made, I guess it was probably like Baptist originally, but it's basically become non-denominational and they actually just left the, they were, it was part of like a missionary church USA, I think, and then they just left that denomination. So currently they're not affiliated with anybody, you know, but I mean, that's it. What? Probably about 200 people. It's a little hard to say. Okay. So not real big post COVID. No, no. And that was like, yeah. So we, so we moved to San Antonio and I was like, oh my gosh, how are we going to pick a church? This is going to be horrible. And you know, when we went to a couple and, and, you know, like we went to one and they were like doing this whole like at the movies thing. And I'm like, this is silly. And like, you know, How do you and your wife do with this, with the, with the church shopping? Well, so we really, this, we only ended up like, like trying like three churches. So we went to the, we went to one that she liked, but I was like, nah, this reminds me too much of our previous church. Um, and then we went to the, you know, mega church with a lot of flash and not a lot of substance and not even like friendly people or whatever. So that was kind of disappointing. Um, and then she had like met somebody at Target who said, I don't go to church because I have to work on Sundays. But when I used to go to church, I went to this one and she told her about it. And we just watched like, you know, after going to the bad church, we watched the sermon online and we're like, wow, this is a lot better. So we went to this, you know, small church and, uh, you know, um, I've asked her to have a conversation with us. Like, you know, he sent us an email a few days later. He remembered everything about us and, you know, uh, he, you know, even him and his wife invited us out for coffee and, and, uh, you know, so it was like, yeah, this is the right place for us. You know, it was just, it was just, you know, cause I don't like picking things. So, uh, you know, it was, it was very providential in the way that it happened that we didn't, you know, cause that, that was my, you know, going to a big city with lots of options and, you know, tons of churches, uh, it really didn't take us too long to find the right place. And, yeah, but, you know, I mean, cause, but, uh, you know, I don't like picking things, but, you know, I'm just the person that, you know, I'm like, we're going to go to this one where we commit all the way, you know, plant our roots, get involved, you know, which is like, I don't know, like, why doesn't everybody just do that? Everything would be perfect. If everybody just, everybody's like you. No, that's unusual. There are, there are those people and they do come and on the church side of things, sometimes it's really awesome when those people come because it's like, Oh boy, this makes, this makes, this makes the pastor's job a lot easier. Sometimes they're not great because they, they, they come and say, okay, we're here, we're going to commit. And it's like, okay. But then within, oh, within a few weeks, they hit a snag and it's like, Oh, they were going to come and commit. And now you stupid church, you're not, you're not who we thought you were. They never phrase it that way. It's usually you're doing something wrong. Why don't you stop? Then, then the question is, okay. Are they going to dig in and try and change everyone in the church? And churches are complex things because they're so full of people and people respond and react to things. And that's, that's, that's a live, it's a live situation. Always is. Yeah. Yeah. Actually, I was trying to remember. Yeah. So it was actually funny before we even went to there on a Sunday morning, my wife and so my wife's an extreme extrovert just so, you know, as opposites attract. But, but, uh, before, before we even went on a Sunday morning, she said, I'm signing up for this men's Bible study. And I'm like, I have to go there by myself. Like, so I hadn't even gone to the church yet and went to the Bible study. And it was only about five guys. So I was like, okay, this is so bad. And you know, that was, so that was nice to be able to like meet some people. And, you know, I've been going to that group faithfully ever since. And you're an extreme introvert and you want to have a YouTube channel. Well, yeah, because I listened to nine hours of other people talking all the day and, you know, it makes me, I have strong opinions about things. I just, you know, I don't. So, I mean, in that sense, I'm like, well, you know, if I, if I just put videos out there, I don't have to actually deal with the people, you know, some truth to that until they start writing back. Well, how many subscribers do you want? I don't know. I mean, I, I mean, I mean, honestly, it's kind of, you know, before I kind of stumbled onto your, your channel, you know, I was just, you know, seeing whatever the, you know, the algorithm gives you, it's mostly big channels. So it's kind of hard to, you know, it's, it's, it's kind of, uh, interesting to see that there's this whole other world of small subscriber base. Yeah. Yeah. Small channels. There's kind of like small churches in some ways. Yeah. So, I mean, I don't know, I don't know how many subscribers I want or whatever. I mean, I don't know what would come of this. I don't know if it'll lead, you know, to other opportunities or, you know, I don't, you know, as much as I enjoy my current work situation, like, you know, I'm not opposed to, I don't know, sometimes working as much as, you know, I've had bad, you know, a little bit of bad experience and what, it wasn't that bad. It's just, you know, the work of the ministry is meaningful. And, you know, you know, when God puts a call on your life, it's a little hard to ignore that. So, you know, this is kind of like in a way, my inroad towards, uh, maybe doing something that leads to something else. I don't know, but it'll be interesting to see what happens. Yeah. You never know. Well, you got, you got about, we got about five more minutes. So is there anything you wanted to get to that we haven't talked about? I don't know. I mean, I just feel like I've shared a lot about myself, but yeah. Yeah. I, it'll be interesting to see what happens to your YouTube. YouTube is such a strange thing. Um, you know, and I, about the same time, it's so interesting. I would have been doing it for a few years because some channels that started about the same time I did, they just took off and they're, you know, all the way, they're up into six figure sub territory. And, um, and, and sometimes I looked at those channels and I'm like, I, I do know why they took off, but it's like, I've got no interest in a channel like that. And then there are other channels that they started about the same time I did. And they just went nowhere. And then some people started something and they sort of abandoned it and all that, all that stuff is fine. It's just, it's weird. You know, it's not unlike church. It's this weird live experiment in human beings, but then with YouTube, you add onto it, this, this algorithm and this machine and, you know, this is, this is freaky stuff we're playing with out here in the world and it, and it impacts people's lives. Um, so I don't know. I don't know where this whole thing is going, but I'm, you know, I've got my little space in it, I suppose. And that brought us here. Well, yeah, I mean, I, yeah, I just, I don't know. Yeah. I don't know what will come of it, but I, you know, I, it's a little bit of, you know, me trying to be obedient to what I feel like God's trying to tell me to do. And then it's exactly what you should do. Yeah. And I'm just in the, the sticking with it thing is probably going to be the, the biggest challenge, uh, you know, so hopefully I get a little bit, at least a little bit of, uh, positive feedback and that, that would be encouraging. But, um, I always, I always tell people. So when I started blogging, so I started playing around with the internet, probably in around 2000 in a more serious way, websites and blogs and stuff. And in 2007, I sort of settled into WordPress for my leading church.com site, which is just sort of my file cabinet. But very early on, I sort of established a rule for myself, which was do. Basically do what feels meaningful enough to me so that I'll do it, whether or not anybody else ever reads or pays any attention to it. And that's been a good rule because. It, you know, what I do on my channel. Now, would I still be doing this if I had, I started with 15 subscribers because the Freddie and Paul show, but would I still be doing it if I had. Two or 3000 subscribers instead of, or two or 300 subscribers. I probably would, you know, sort of like some of the other channels that have grown up around me, like the meaning code, that channel burns channel. I mean, burn doesn't have a huge number of subscribers, but you know, burn certainly finds what he's doing with YouTube for filling. So I, I do think that what I'm doing is, is fairly independent on the followership. The amount of followership I have though, has been nice because it affords kind of what we're doing right now. And that's, I find that, I find that a lot of fun because I'm rather nosy. And so I'm very interested in people's lives and, and the turns of it and, you know, like the stuff you've shared. So it's, it's cool. Well, I appreciate what you're doing and it's good, you know, pretty much every day there's a good chunk of my morning. I know what I'll be, have something to listen to. So, you know, I appreciate that. Well, thank you, Michael. I will send you this video and you can share it with your wife and say, okay, should we let, should we let Paul post this or not? And then you can let me know. Okay. Okay. All right. Thanks, Michael. Take care. Bye bye.